BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Banking supervision and corporate governance in the European architecture Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the closing seminar “Banking supervision and internal audit as contributors to sound corporate governance and financial stability”, Moscow, 30 March 2011. *      *      * Introduction Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a great pleasure to speak to you on this occasion here in Moscow. The Cooperation Programme that ends today has been very successful in two important fields for central banks: banking supervision and internal audit. Looking back at this venture, we can see that three unusual, eventful years have passed since 1 April 2008. The macroeconomic, financial, and also political environments in the euro area and around the globe have been in a state of flux, and sometimes in turmoil. Likewise we all have been moved and saddened by natural disasters and human error, by acts of war and acts of terror.  At the same time, these three years have also seen remarkably positive events. The Central Bank of the Russian Federation celebrated its 150th anniversary last year. It steered its way successfully through the financial crisis. The Bank of Russia became a member of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and of the Financial Stability Board. The European Central Bank, meanwhile, marked the tenth anniversary of the euro. It became an EU institution as a result of the Treaty of Lisbon in 2009. And the EU Commission here in Russia has also had a change of status: it is now the EU Delegation to the Russian Federation and is part of the European External Action Service. As I just said, banking supervision and internal audit have been the focus of work here these past three years. A three-way partnership was formed, consisting of the EU Delegation, the Bank of Russia and the Eurosystem. The Eurosystem acted through the ECB and eight national central banks: the Deutsche Bundesbank, Banque de France, Banca d’Italia, Banco de España, De Nederlandsche Bank, Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Bank of Greece and Suomen Pankki/Finlands Bank.  Central bank cooperation in challenging times calls for resolute action The coming years are likely to be just as challenging as recent years. Central banks will be required to act as anchors of monetary and financial stability in a rapidly changing world.  The Eurosystem central banks are cooperating in banking supervision, financial stability, internal audit and in many other fields. In addition to the Programme here in Russia, a Eurosystem programme on Basel II is under way involving the Central Bank of Egypt. A crisis response package covering banking supervision and financial crisis management is being conducted with south-eastern European countries. And technical assistance is being given to a number of would-be EU members.  Europe strengthens its institutional framework for financial stability Generally, Europe has responded to the challenges of the past few years in a structured and thoughtful way. The creation of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) broadens the scope of cooperation and institutional awareness in respect of macroprudential oversight. The ECB is the supporting institution and provides, inter alia, analytical and statistical inputs to the ESRB structures. The Risk Board enables European regulators and supervisors to 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches complement the microprudential perspective with a systematic monitoring and assessment of potential dangers to the stability of the system as a whole. The discipline of macroprudential supervision combines the information and assessments obtained via microprudential supervision with macroeconomic and monetary insights. We expect macroprudential measures, such as countercyclical provisioning, to mitigate systemic risks. We also expect the findings of macroprudential oversight to feed into the microprudential work that alerts supervisors and the wider world to macroeconomic risks. Besides setting up the ESRB, on 1 January this year, three European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) came into being: the European Banking Authority, the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority and the European Securities and Markets Authority. We expect that these new institutions will sustainably enhance microprudential supervision in Europe. Currently, the EU and euro area financial system continue to face several important risks. The main source of concern is the interplay between fiscal imbalances, downside risks to economic growth and bank funding vulnerabilities. Although this interplay is limited to a small number of euro area countries, with a relatively small share of total EU and euro area GDP, potential contagion to other EU or euro area countries is not insignificant. In this respect, let me state how surprised I am to see how quickly some of the lessons of the crisis are being forgotten. One of the lessons is the need to assess risk in a systemic way, not only at the micro level. There can be no systemic assessment without taking contagion into account, across instruments, across markets and across countries. The sub-prime crisis or the collapse of Lehman have clearly shown how devastating contagion can be! It is thus all the more surprising to see how in the current environment some policy makers, academics or editorialists totally ignore the systemic dimension of financial markets in their proposals for very specific issues like for instance bank debt. Thinking that a specific category of assets  – such as senior bank bonds – can be treated in a specific way without immediately affecting all other assets, or that certain banks can be treated in a way that does not impact the whole system, not only within a country but also cross border is a testimony of short memory. The same applies for sovereign debt instruments. The risks related to the re-emergence of global imbalances and any disorderly unwinding are also considerable. Moreover, the catastrophe in Japan and tensions in the Middle East show us that risks of various sorts (natural, geopolitical, etc…) are never far away.  In addition, a new round of stress tests is being carried out between March and June this year, with the final set of results to be published in June. There have been many comments and discussions about these stress tests, often without sufficient information. There is no doubt that the success of these tests depends on their full understanding on the parts of market participants. It is thus essential that supervisory authorities coordinate closely within the EBA their communication strategy. It’s no time for cacophony, nor for national authorities to engage in a beauty contest.  Compared to the previous round, the underlying scenarios are considerably more adverse, in particular in terms of overall decline in GDP which encompasses the sum of all the parameter changes (interest rates, haircuts, probability of default, …). The probability of the scenario is, over a two year horizon, much lower, especially for 2011 where it is 1%, instead of 7% last year. Moreover, national supervisors and banks will have less discretion in conducting the tests. This time the EBA will be giving direct guidance regarding the definition and projections of pre-provision operating profits, including the increased cost of funding. The thresholds in the stress tests will be set at levels which are substantially higher than the minimum solvency requirements. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Banking regulation is becoming stricter In a broader sense, Europe has been actively contributing to stronger prudential supervision, notably banking supervision. At both global and national levels, there has been a marked tightening of banking and prudential rules. Work on corporate governance and internal audit has progressed too.  In light of the financial crisis experienced in advanced economies, it could fairly be asked whether the rules are to be blamed or the way in which they were applied. The answer to this question is pertinent also for this cooperation Programme.  In fact, it was decided that work foreseen in the Programme concerning the implementation of the Basel II framework should continue. Basel II focuses on risk-based supervision. It requires banks to operate a structured risk management. The internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) required by pillar 2 is a model for systematic strategic planning for any financial enterprise. Financial firms must have an understanding of their risk and capital situation. They are required to have a continual review of their risks, capital and business environment. I think that they will flourish only if they embrace in their corporate processes and culture the continual learning paradigm. This focus on the systematic management of a financial institution has been repeatedly stressed in both parts of the Cooperation Programme. Rightly so: the soundness of a financial firm depends on its own managers’ capability to understand, measure and master the risks, and to grasp the business opportunities on the basis of a good control of the downside risks. That capability constitutes its first line of defence. Supervision can only be the second line of defence. Internal audit is an essential part of corporate governance The internal audit part of the Cooperation Programme has focused on risk-based audit and IT audit. The audit function is oriented towards the organisation’s objectives. Internal audit delivers independent views and advice on the governance of the organisation. A comprehensive and systematic view of the risks posed to the objectives and the organisation as a whole guide the auditors in the planning of their work as well as in the follow-up to their recommendations. As IT is nowadays an intrinsic part of the infrastructure as well as a critical business tool, the Programme’s focus on the particular challenges of the IT audit was certainly appropriate. Overall, the Programme emphasised risk orientation rather than compliance checks, an approach that is indispensable today. Only an audit function that understands the dynamics of the changing environment and the impact of these changes on the organisation’s objectives can provide the necessary reassurance to the organisation’s top management. The Programme has contributed to such a risk orientation – which has meant a considerable cultural change for the audit function.  I think that risk-based audits need two key ingredients for success: firstly, chief auditors must enjoy the full trust and backing of the organisation’s top management, even when they convey unpleasant or unwelcome messages. And secondly, the auditors can only do their job properly if they are empowered to act autonomously.  Central bank cooperation – a long-term investment that will bear fruit I have sought today to shed some light on the importance of various tools for the soundness of our financial systems: banking supervision, internal audit, micro and macroprudential supervision as well as audit and corporate governance. The “investment” that this Programme has made in banking supervision, as society’s “systemic financial risk management”, and in internal audit, as an element to help an organisation achieve its objectives, is fully in line with this approach. I am confident that the investment will bear fruit in the years to come.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Finally, let me thank all those involved in this project – the EU Delegation, the Bank of Russia and also the colleagues from the eight national central banks and the ECB. It’s the close cooperation in these uncertain times which has made this remarkable project so successful. I sense that, although we are concluding this particular venture, the challenges of the future and the very positive experience of this Programme will certainly justify new partnerships in the future. I sense that there is no shortage of interest and enthusiasm to join forces again.  Many thanks to all those who contributed.  And thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Simon M Potter: Improving survey measures of inflation expectations Speech by Mr Simon M Potter, Executive Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Forecasters Club of New York, New York City, 30 March 2011. Wilbert van der Klaauw, Giorgio Topa, Robert Rich, Olivier Armantier, Basit Zafar and Joseph Tracy. The results from the New York Fed–American Life Panel Survey I will discuss today reflect data collected through mid-March 2011. Papers containing more detail on the research I have summarized today can be found on the New York Fed website. *      *      * Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to be here today to talk with you about some of the New York Fed’s ongoing research on the measurement of household inflation expectations. The views expressed are mine and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. That said, I want to acknowledge my colleagues in the Research Group who have pushed our research on inflation expectations forward. Expectations, and in particular inflation expectations, play a key role in the conduct of modern monetary policy. Expectations drive people’s behavior by influencing a wide range of economic decisions such as saving, investment, purchases of durable goods and wage negotiations. These decisions in turn affect real economic activity and actual inflation.  As a result, inflation expectations represent an important link in the monetary transmission mechanism – especially through the term structure of interest rates – and greatly influence the central bank’s ability to achieve price stability. It is crucial for a central bank to monitor inflation expectations, making sure that they remain well anchored and consistent with policy objectives. Since the economy is constantly buffeted by unanticipated shocks, short-term inflation expectations should reflect the effects of these shocks. For example, if energy prices increase suddenly due to a supply disruption, short-term inflation expectations should move up. This is completely consistent with medium-term price stability, if at the same time, forward inflation expectations – that is, expectations of inflation for after the supply disruption ends – do not move. This stability of longer-term inflation expectations in the face of movements in short-term inflation expectations is the hallmark of sound, effective and credible monetary policy. In standard macroeconomic models it is trivial to measure inflation expectations: under the rational expectations assumption, any economic agent in the model could produce the unique inflation expectation for any horizon. In the real world, central banks must rely on various indirect approaches to measure inflation expectations: market-based measures, surveys of professionals such as economists and market participants, and surveys of households. All three types of measures have advantages and drawbacks. It is therefore important for a central bank to use a variety of measures that complement one another. Before turning to the focus of this talk – the measurement of household inflation expectations – I want to provide a quick summary of market-based and professional surveys. The difference in yields between nominal and real government debt can be used to derive a measure of market inflation expectations for the price index used to protect the holders of real government debt from inflation. In the United States, that price index is the consumer price index (CPI). Thus, if the nominal 10-year yield is 3.5 percent and the real 10-year yield is 1 percent, one crude measure of average CPI inflation expected over the next 10 years would be 2.5 percent. Further, if the nominal 5-year yield is 3 percent and the real 5-year yield is 0.2 percent, then a crude measure of average CPI inflation expected over the next 5 years would be 2.8 percent and a crude estimate of the 5- to 10-year forward average CPI inflation would be 2.2 percent. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches I say crude because such calculations ignore any difference in liquidity between and within the two types of debt, any compensation investors require for the uncertainty of the real value of nominal coupon securities and a variety of other issues, such as the fact that Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) are indexed to the CPI with a time varying lag. There are numerous ways to measure inflation expectations that take into account liquidity differences. For example, Chart 1 shows estimates of the 5- to 10-year forward inflation compensation constructed by Barclays, the research staff of the Federal Reserve Board, the New York Fed Markets Group and inflation swaps. The differences are produced by differing assumptions on the liquidity of various securities and the use of an estimated yield curve to produce the Board research staff estimates. No attempt is made to remove the compensation for inflation risk in these measures, thus these are estimates of compensation for expected and unexpected inflation. There are clearly different short-term fluctuations in the various estimates, but they all show a similar pattern – with the exception of the height of the financial crisis, they have been contained within a range of just below 2.5 percent to just above 3 percent. CPI inflation has averaged historically about 0.3 to 0.5 percentage points above the inflation rate for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), the price index for which the Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents provide forecasts four times per year. Estimates of the amount of compensation investors require for inflation uncertainty at this forward horizon vary from close to 0 percent to more than 1 percent. Yield curve model-based estimates can provide a decomposition of the whole forward structure of inflation expectations. As shown in Chart 2 for the Board research staff measure of inflation compensation, the effect of the recent surge in energy prices is centered on short-term inflation compensation with slightly negative movement in forward inflation compensation from 2013 onward. Of course, the recent surge in energy prices has also increased both short-term inflation and uncertainty around future inflation. Thus, the increase in short-term inflation compensation reflects both factors. There are numerous surveys of economists and market participants that give additional information on inflation expectations. Many of you in this room are respondents to these surveys. As with the market-based measures, the surveys produce responses for a specific price index, usually the CPI and the CPI excluding food and energy. The Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) also asks numerous questions about the PCE deflator. Compared with market-based measures, the surveys have the advantages of not being affected by varying market liquidity and not requiring any adjustment for inflation risk compensation. Further, the SPF asks a number of questions about short-run inflation uncertainty. These forecasts from professionals about core inflation and long-run average inflation provide additional insight into the stability of forward inflation expectations. Since many of the shocks that move around total inflation at high frequencies are removed from core inflation, forecasts of core inflation in the short to medium term provide an additional check on the anchoring of inflation expectations. Recently, with the large increase in economic slack produced by the Great Recession, there has been considerable debate on the relative strengths of slack to generate a decline in inflation versus the power of anchored inflation expectations to restrain this decline. Chart 3 shows some detail on recent behavior of the forecasts for core PCE inflation from the SPF and dispersion in long-run CPI inflation forecasts. The first panel shows the average of point forecasts since 2007 for the current year and year-ahead core PCE inflation rate. As one would expect, the current year forecast is more variable, and for the most part the year-ahead forecast remains above the current year forecast after the financial crisis, consistent with the pull of anchored inflation expectations. However, both sets of forecasts are still below what some have called, based on the Summary of Economic Projections, the mandate consistent range of Federal Open Market Committee participants. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 The second panel of Chart 3 shows a measure of uncertainty for these forecasts. Here we can see that uncertainty increased as the financial crisis took hold but has returned to 2007 levels recently. The third panel shows that disagreement across forecasters also increased with the financial crisis and has not returned to pre-crisis levels. Much of this disagreement appears to be related to differing views on the strength of standard Phillips curve dynamics versus other approaches to inflation dynamics. The final panel shows the disagreement in 10-year average CPI forecasts over the last 20 years. As you are aware, one of the great successes of the Federal Reserve in the 1980s and 1990s was a reduction in long-run inflation expectations. Indeed, since 1998, the median forecast from this SPF question has stayed within a very narrow range. However, the amount of disagreement around this median has increased recently. Much of this increase is related to lower forecasts for the 10-year average. During the past decade many central banks have begun to explore ways to improve through surveys their measurement and understanding of the public’s inflation expectations. At the New York Fed in November last year we had a conference where many different aspects of this research were discussed. In addition to initiating new surveys and gradually moving from traditionally qualitative to more quantitative questions and measures, research is being conducted to analyze the quality and information content of survey-based measures of consumer inflation expectations. In late 2006 at the New York Fed we initiated a major research project to examine a number of issues: First, what is the best way to measure the public’s inflation expectations in terms of inflation concepts and forecast horizon? Second, how do households form and update their expectations of future inflation: to what extent are they based on past inflation experiences and what information sources do they rely on? Third, do people act on their expectations and if so, how? My remarks today will mainly focus on the first set of issues, but I will conclude with some preliminary research on the other two. Despite the importance of inflation expectations for forecasting future inflation and economic activity and as a key link in the monetary transmission mechanism, surprisingly little is known to directly answer these questions. This was partly because back in 2006 when we started out, macroeconomists had enjoyed around 20 years of success with models where these questions were answered in a simple and unambiguous manner. As we have learned painfully from the financial crisis, the success of these models was much more due to luck than deep insight. Our relative ignorance was also partly because economists do not receive detailed training in the design of survey questions. One of the issues that sparked our initial interest was the wording of questions. We found most questions on inflation expectations did not directly ask about inflation but instead asked about prices. For example, the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Survey (the Michigan Survey from now on) asks about the change in “prices in general” or the Bank of England/GfK NOP survey asks about the expected “change in prices in shops generally.” Not being experts in survey design, we decided that we needed a wide collaboration to understand the implications of asking about prices in general and whether it was possible to ask directly about the rate of inflation. We formed a cross-disciplinary team among Federal Reserve research staff, academic economists, and psychologists at Carnegie Mellon University who specialize in behavioral decision-making, as well as risk perception and communication. The initial part of the project was structured in three stages. The first two stages – preliminary inquiries conducted through phone and Internet surveys – gauged how individuals interpreted the Michigan Survey questions and how they would respond to alternative questions about future inflation. The Internet survey also “piloted” questions on wage expectations and inflation uncertainty to expand the information currently elicited by the Michigan Survey. These preliminary inquiries guided the final formulation of the questions for the third stage – the actual implementation of 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches an alternative experimental Internet survey of inflation expectations using a sample panel of households drawn from previous respondents to the Michigan survey. Reliable measurement requires that respondents agree with one another – and with economic modelers – on what the survey questions mean. For the questions asked in professional surveys, there is little room for differing interpretations of the inflation concept since forecasts for a specific price index are requested. For questions asked of households, specific price indexes are not used so respondents vary in their interpretation of the inflation concept. Thus, their responses may display disagreement not about expectations but the concept of inflation being used. Indeed, one feature that the Michigan Survey’s question about “prices in general” shares with other surveys is a high dispersion of responses around the median. This evidence of disagreement is in part related to observable characteristics of respondents such as age, gender, education and income. However, the differences in responses across demographic groups far exceed the variations in inflation experienced by the groups. When we probed survey respondents about their understanding of changes to “prices in general” (the Michigan Survey question), we found that a significant fraction believed we were inquiring about the prices they themselves recently paid – often prices that had increased or decreased markedly, such as those for food or gasoline. This tendency to think more about prominent price changes in one’s own experience is less common among respondents with higher financial literacy. By contrast, when we asked about expectations for the “rate of inflation,” respondents tended to think less about a few salient price changes specific to their own experiences and more about price changes across a broader set of items or about changes in the cost of living – a result that aligns more with economists’ definition of inflation as a sustained increase in the overall price level. Asking about the rate of inflation directly therefore produces answers more consistent with the concept of forward inflation expectations of interest to central banks. Chart 4 plots the time series of median responses from our experimental survey to a “prices in general” question and a rate of inflation question. One can see that the median expectation for the rate of inflation question is less variable. We also find that the dispersion of responses is significantly larger with the “prices in general” question. Further, in our initial investigations we had established evidence that many respondents would prefer to give a range rather than a point estimate and that most households were able to answer questions about their uncertainty over future inflation. We had also found our measure of individual forecast uncertainty to be positively correlated with the width of any range of responses given to the standard point forecast questions. Thus, we added questions eliciting from our panel their subjective uncertainty about future inflation. I will show you an example of such a question in a minute. As emphasized above, anchoring forward inflation expectations is crucial for monetary policy. In the Michigan survey, information on forward inflation expectations is generated by a question asking about “the change in prices in general over the next 5 to 10 years.” Our initial exploratory work confirmed that many households were confused by this wording but that there was overwhelming evidence that long-term average expectations were being reported. Considering the rather elaborate structure of the Michigan questions shown in Chart 5, it also appears that small changes in the various challenges could lower the median response by a significant margin. Further, asking about the rate of inflation directly produced answers more consistent with the concept of forward inflation expectations of interest to central banks. Rather than replicating the Michigan long-term inflation expectation question replacing “prices in general” with the “rate of inflation” we decided to work with a medium-term explicit horizon and use only a probabilistic version of the question. So for example, in the most recent fielding of our survey, the panel was asked: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 In your view, what would you say is the percent chance that the following things may happen to the rate of inflation/deflation over the one-year period between February 2013 and February 2014? Chart 6 gives you the question in full. We have been fielding the forward inflation expectation question since spring 2008, and Chart 7 contains some time-series information from the responses. We use established statistical techniques to estimate continuous probability distributions from each individual set of responses. We then find the median of the medians of the individual distributions to represent the average forward expectation and the upper and lower quartiles of the individual medians to measure disagreement across respondents. For our measure of uncertainty we report the median of the individual inter-quartile ranges. As a complement to attempting to improve the measurement of household forward inflation expectations, we have also been investigating expectations about wage growth. Because firms and workers may negotiate changes in wages to be in line with their expected rate of inflation, data on wage expectations are an additional information source for analyzing inflation dynamics and the interaction between wage and price determination. Furthermore, discrepancies between expected changes in wages and expected inflation may affect households’ financial decisions. Despite the obvious importance of wage expectations, information on wage expectations is particularly scarce. In formulating a question on wage expectations we needed to pose a hypothetical situation to gain information of direct relevance to inflation. It is easiest to illustrate this by giving you the format and exact wording of the question: We first asked individuals who reported to be working for pay how many jobs they had. We then informed them that in some subsequent questions we would ask about their MAIN job, which we defined to be the job at which they usually work the most hours. We then ask: “Suppose that, 12 months from now, you actually are working in the exact same [MAIN] job at the same place you currently work, and working the exact same number of hours. Twelve months from now, do you expect your earnings on this job, before taxes and deductions, to have gone up, or gone down, or stayed where they are now?” For those who said gone up or gone down we then asked: “By about what percent do you expect that your hourly earnings on this job, before taxes and other deductions, will have gone [UP/DOWN], 12 months from now, if you actually are working in the exact same job at the same place you currently work, and working the exact same number of hours?” As in the rest of our work we also elicited uncertainty around this wage expectation. Chart 8 shows a time series of the median response and inter-quartile range to the point prediction question along with the average uncertainty as defined above. Given the nature of this question, the inter-quartile range is best interpreted as dispersion rather than disagreement. The results around the height of the financial crisis are striking: the median response fell from just under 3 percent to just above 0 percent as many more respondents opted for the “stayed where they are now” option. Moreover, these low median expectations of wage growth appear unaffected by the recovery in economic activity. The dispersion of responses around the median is relatively high, although lower than before the crisis. The individual uncertainty around wage growth is lower than around inflation but interestingly does show some increases coincident with accelerations in economic activity during the recovery which we don’t find in individual inflation uncertainty. Turning to the second set of general questions I started with, knowing how consumers form expectations and revise them in response to new information is relevant for many aspects of monetary policy. As noted previously, the large cross-sectional variation in inflation forecasts 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches across survey respondents is inconsistent with the traditional rational expectations framework in which all agents are assumed to share the same information set and expectations. This has led to alternative models in which this heterogeneity is explained by a reliance of agents on different models for forecasting, the use of different information sets and different capabilities for processing information. While in a full-information, rational-expectations world there is no role for constant central bank communication, such a role becomes crucial in a world with learning. Since in our survey we have utilized a panel design, we will have the ability to make progress in understanding how expectations are formed and revised over time. Initial analysis suggests that the differences in individual forecasts are persistent and probably related to different forecast models and reference information and not just different experiences. We have also found that a respondent expressing higher-than-average uncertainty in the previous survey is more likely to change their point forecast in the current survey. A better understanding of the factors affecting individual inflation expectations will also help evaluate and predict the impact and effectiveness of central bank policy decisions and communication strategy. Specifically, it will improve the central bank’s capacity to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of various communication tools and strategies designed to keep inflation expectations well anchored. The ability to do so is especially important at times such as the current one, in which central banks have been expanding their toolkits and conducting traditional as well as non-traditional monetary policy. The third and final broad question that would benefit from additional research is whether and how people act on their expectations. The theoretical link between inflation expectations and realized inflation and consumer decisions occurs through several channels. In addition to affecting future wages and prices through influencing the outcomes of nominal wage contract negotiations and through price-setting behavior of firms, there is the crucial link of real interest rates (nominal rates less expected inflation) with intertemporal consumption and investment decisions. In addition, households that fear high inflation are expected to reduce the amount of money they hold and keep more of their wealth in real assets such as land or gold, which are considered better hedges against inflation. Inflation also raises the effective tax rate on income earned from investing and saving. As a result, people may invest less and save less. However, at present there is little direct empirical evidence of the strength and nature of these theoretical links. These are important questions, and a variety of approaches can be brought to bear to answer them. Surveys, field experiments and experiments in the lab can all be very useful to further our understanding of these issues, which lie at the heart of the mandate of any central bank. Of course many economists are perhaps appropriately sceptical about whether the results from many experiments can be generalized. Some recent results from our survey might reassure some of these economists. Working with the Rand Corporation, which runs the Internet survey for our inflation questions, we designed an experiment involving nominal future payoffs to assess whether the responding households would behave in ways consistent with their reported inflation expectations. The results confirmed that on average households used a real interest rate based on their reported inflation expectation in choosing between the nominal future payoffs. Thank you for listening to me today. I would be happy to take some questions on our research on inflation expectations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7    
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9    
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 Reference  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Malcolm Edey: The Reserve Bank’s strategic review of payments innovation Speech by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the Cards and Payments Australasia 2011, Sydney, 29 March 2011. *      *      * I thank Darren Flood for his assistance in preparing this speech. Thanks very much for the opportunity to speak here today.  This is a conference that is all about innovation in the payments system. I know that the businesses represented here would all have their own approaches to innovation, and some of those will have been on display in the various presentations.  But we also have a common interest in ensuring that the system as a whole can develop as efficiently and cost effectively as possible. I’ve been asked to talk today about the Reserve Bank’s role in that.  As you know, the RBA launched a strategic review of payments innovation in July last year.  In talking about the review, the first thing I want to stress is that we see this as very much a co-operative project. When we announced the review, the first thing we did was to call for an initial round of consultations, both with industry and with any other interested parties that wanted to contribute. We’ve had a good response to that. We have had discussions (sometimes multiple discussions) with most of the main market players; we have talked to people working in particular fields of payments innovation; and we have had some discussions with end-users of the payments system.  Based on what we learn from that, we’ll be putting together a more detailed document for release around mid year, which will then be the basis for a more formal round of consultation in the second half of the year. We hope to have a final report ready by around year-end.  I start with that description of the process because I want to emphasise that this is very much something that we’re doing with the involvement of the interested parties. It’s not just a top-down exercise.  The process still has some way to go, and I’m not going to pre-empt any conclusions today. But I want to use my time to report on what we’ve found so far, how we’re approaching the task, and the issues we’re likely to be focusing on from here.1  Economic case for co-ordination in the industry The first question that might be asked is: why do we need a strategic review in this area, and why now?  I have to say that there’s no particular trigger for having it now, but we do believe it’s a good general principle that these matters should be kept under periodic review. The RBA, through its Payments System Board, has a mandate to promote payments system efficiency. A good deal of our work in that area has focused on the efficiency of price signals. The Bank has taken the view that, where price signals are distorted for some reason, there is a case for using its regulatory powers to correct them.                                                   1  To clarify the scope of the exercise, this review is about low-value payments (in other words, retail and relatively small business-to-business payments). It's not about the high-value wholesale payments system, which is subject to its own regular assessment process. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches But efficiency also covers operational aspects of the system, including things like the cost, speed and reliability of payment services and, the subject of today’s talk, its capacity to innovate.  When we think about innovation in a network setting like this one, it’s useful to distinguish between two types: proprietary innovations, where the benefits are localised to the business that’s doing the innovating (and to the customers of that business); and system-wide innovations, where the benefit accrues to users of the system as a whole.  It’s reasonable to expect that service providers will do a good job with the first kind of innovation. In fact we see examples of that kind of development all the time. For example, we are currently seeing financial institutions exploring new ways to use mobile devices for payment purposes, including for making person-to-person payments using the existing infrastructure. Similarly a major bank is promoting the ability of its systems to update customer account information in real time.  But it’s in the second type of innovation that there is the more serious potential for inefficiency, or for under-investment. That might happen through a lack of co-ordination among industry participants, or through a lack of incentive for individual providers to participate in system-wide improvements. We’re not starting with the presumption that that’s the case – only that it could be.  As a regulator, we recognise that our approach to these questions has to be quite different from the way we approach other cases for regulatory involvement. The RBA has significant powers, as you know, to designate payments systems and to set standards. But we’re well aware that you can’t regulate innovation into being. That’s not the intention. As far as possible we’ll be aiming to work with industry, looking at whether there are areas where more co-ordination is needed, and assisting with that where we usefully can.  Objectives of an efficient payments system In taking on a project like this, it’s useful to start off with some idea of the characteristics we’re looking to promote in an efficient payments system. Here are some of the main ones:  Timeliness Not all payments are time-critical, but users of the system should at least have options available that give recipients timely access to their funds and allow timely confirmation to both parties. Accessibility It’s desirable that everyone who needs to make and receive payments should have ready access to the payments system. Ease of use It goes without saying that systems that are easier to use are preferable to those that are more cumbersome. But this is not only an issue of convenience. Systems that require manual entry of account and transaction details are prone to errors that can be  costly to correct and can discourage use. That is one reason why payment cards are so popular – because most of the need for manual entry is removed. The need to know a recipient’s account details is another challenge for many payment systems. One of our oldest payment methods – the cheque – deals with that by only requiring the recipient’s name, with the recipient doing the rest. The challenge for electronic payment systems is to replicate or improve upon that sort of convenience.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Ease of integration with other processes Payments are rarely made in complete isolation. Typically they are made as part of a process that requires reconciliation and recording of information by the parties involved. It’s desirable that payment systems should be able to integrate efficiently with these processes. A key example here is the capacity of payment systems to carry additional reconciliation information with the payment.  Safety and reliability End users of a payment system need to have confidence that the system will be available when needed and that payments will reach the intended recipient at the time promised. They also need to be confident that the system is secure, so that using it will not expose them to future losses as a result of information being fraudulently obtained. Some of these problems can be addressed by system participants guaranteeing payments, but good system design is a more fundamental solution.  Low and transparent costs Some would say that this has been a preoccupation of the RBA over the past decade. If two systems perform exactly the same function, we should of course prefer the cheaper one. But the reality is more complicated than that. Each system typically has different attributes from every other system, and so end users need to make choices as to which one most cost-effectively meets their needs. That means that costs need to be transparent, so that those choices can be well-informed.  These, then, are some of the qualities that we might regard as desirable in an efficient payments system. You can probably think of a few more. But having given a list like that, we also need to recognise that there are trade-offs. Investment in innovation comes at a cost, borne initially by industry but ultimately by the customer. So in conducting the review, we’ll need to be talking with providers and users of payment services about both the costs and benefits they see in different approaches.  Payments use study One important source of information about that from the end-user perspective will be the Reserve Bank’s latest Payments Use Study. This was a study of around 1,200 households conducted in October/November last year, updating an earlier study from 2007. Participants were asked to keep a diary of their payments over a one-week period and were also asked about their attitudes to newer payment methods not covered in the diary, like contactless or mobile payments.2  We expect to publish a detailed analysis of the findings later in the year, but I can give you a few preliminary results today that throw some useful light on the innovation review.  Results from the diary data suggest two main conclusions on payment patterns.  1. First, the broad patterns of payments behaviour observed in the 2007 study still hold.  a. Cash remains the most widely used payment instrument in Australia and the dominant instrument for low-value payments.                                                   2  The study was conducted by Roy Morgan Research on behalf of the RBA, and is largely a repeat of the payments diary study undertaken as part of the 2007/08 review of the card payments reforms. It asked around 1,200 study participants in late October and early November 2010 to carry a payments diary with them for a week and record details of all their payments and cash withdrawals. Details recorded included: the payment method used; the size of the transaction; the merchant category and the payment channel (for example, in person, internet, phone, or mail). 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches b. Cards are the dominant payment method for mid-value payments (between $50 and $500), with the use of credit cards growing relative to debit cards as the transaction value increases.  c. BPAY and internet banking are used frequently for bill payments and high-value transactions.  2. Second, payment patterns have nonetheless evolved to some degree in the three years since the initial study. In particular:  a. Use of cash has declined somewhat. This is especially noticeable in cash’s share of the value of what we would call traditional payment methods – down from around 40 per cent to 30 per cent of the value of those payments;  b. Debit cards appear to have been substituted for cash, with scheme debit and EFTPOS transactions both gaining share.  Those are the broad results on the pattern of actual payments made. A questionnaire conducted at the end of the diary study also gives some additional information as to how people think about different payment methods. Here are just a few samples.  First, on the use of cheques: fewer than 40 per cent of consumers reported making a payment by cheque in the past year. Of those 40 per cent, this graph shows the main reason that they chose to use a cheque (Graph 1).  Graph 1  The most common reason was that people felt that they had no alternative for the type of payment they were making. That is significant, given that one of the issues being considered both by the industry and the current review is the scope for phasing out cheque use.  Next, in order to understand the attributes that people value for point of sale payments, we asked people what factors influence their choice of payment method at the checkout.  Perhaps not surprisingly, the most important factor was what they happen to be carrying with them at the time. Beyond that, the main factor cited in determining how people pay is the speed of processing the transaction, followed by the ability to use their own funds and the ease of managing finances (Graph 2). The importance of speed is significant because it helps explain why people continue to use cash for small value transactions, and it also indicates that the current push towards contactless cards might be quite important for many consumers.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Graph 2  Given the increasing importance of internet payments over recent years, we also spent some time exploring consumers’ use of, and attitudes towards, different types of online payments.  First of all, we found what seems to be quite high adoption of online payments. Around 90 per cent of respondents had access to the internet, either at home or at work. Of those, about 80 per cent reported having made an online purchase and almost 60 per cent reported an online transfer of funds to a family member or friend. A surprisingly high 60 per cent of people with internet access said they pay most of their bills online.  We also tried to find out what things prevent people from making even greater use of online payments (Graph 3). The graph we have here shows the answers for online bill payments, but we also collected responses for online purchases and transfers.  Graph 3  
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches First of all, to explain the large bar at the bottom: we were asking people what would make them happier to use online bill payments, but what we found was that more than a quarter of respondents were already satisfied and didn’t think they could be improved. Beyond that, by far the biggest factor preventing people from making more use of online bill payments is the risk of fraud.  This was even more marked for online purchases, where around half of respondents identified risk of fraud as a factor discouraging greater use. In fact, the level of satisfaction is lower for online purchases overall than for online bill payments and transfers. Probably this reflects a lower degree of comfort with online purchases using methods like credit cards and PayPal, compared to making bill payments using BPAY and internet banking transfers.  Adoption of the other two new waves of payments technology – contactless payments and mobile payments – is much lower than online payments. Only around 3 per cent of survey respondents had made a contactless payment in the last month. Less than 10 per cent of respondents had ever made mobile payments. Where they had, the main purpose was for phone-related purchases such as ringtones or games (Graph 4). Most of the other mobile payments made were effectively internet payments made using a smartphone.  Graph 4  In short, the survey doesn’t seem to point to any major dissatisfaction with payments services in Australia, but it sheds some light on why payment-use patterns are as they are, and some possible areas of improvement that can be looked at further. We’ll be publishing a fuller analysis of these results later in the year.  Results of the initial consultations As I said earlier, we’ve had significant interest shown by a wide range of industry and other players in response to our initial request for comments. A number of interested parties have provided us with written submissions, and many more have made themselves available for informal discussions with RBA staff. I expect we’ll receive a more substantial body of submissions during the second round of consultation in the second half of the year.  The consultations to date have highlighted a number of quite specific issues that are going to be worth considering as part of the Strategic Review. I’ll briefly go through a cross section of those, but this is by no means exhaustive. I also note that many of these issues are not new, and are already being thought about by the industry.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 Transmission of data with payments Successful integration of payments systems into other processes requires that sufficient information travel with the payment to allow proper reconciliation. A business owner making payment to a supplier might wish to convey information, not just on the invoice number, but (for example) on which items on that invoice are being paid and why. An employer making a payment to a super fund needs to be able to provide information on the relevant employee accounts, the amounts of each payment and even the type of payment. Even an individual sending money to a friend or relative might simply want to attach a personal message to that payment. At the moment, the choices are largely either:   to limit the additional information to the 18 characters permitted by the direct entry system;   to separate the payment from the information and put in place a process to bring them back together at a later stage;   or to pay by cheque attached to the information source.  The question for the review will be whether this is likely to represent a significant shortcoming in our payments system in the years ahead? And if it is, what is the best means of addressing it and how should that be achieved?  Timeliness and ease of addressing payments There are times when we really need payments to be made quickly. The classic example is government emergency payments. Most government payments to individuals can be made perfectly adequately by the direct entry system. But in an emergency, the availability of funds the next day might not be sufficient. In recent times many such payments have been made using the RTGS system, even though this is a long way away from that system’s intended use. Even then, the speed can vary significantly depending on the systems of the recipient bank.  A related issue is the ease of addressing payments to individuals. As I said before, writing someone’s name on a cheque is relatively straightforward, but directing an electronic payment can be much more difficult. For most people this currently involves entering BSB and account number details into an internet banking package. This of course means having to obtain those details from the recipient (who mightn’t even remember them) and then keying in all the details correctly. This probably does not meet the “ease of use” test.  Overseas experience might give us some guide on this issue. For example we know that the United States is putting a lot of emphasis on pre-paid cards for government payments, although this no doubt in part reflects the country’s high number of unbanked welfare recipients. On the other side of the Atlantic, the UK’s Faster Payments system provides a closely watched example of improving the timeliness of payments.  Of course the Strategic Review is intended to be forward looking. So we should be asking, not just about the demand for these sorts of improvements, but also the extent to which likely developments could meet that demand over the next few years. These questions might also lead to a focus on the constraints that the major banks’ own internal systems place on their capacity to provide faster payments.  The decline of cheques The number of cheques written in Australia has been declining by an average of 9 per cent per year over the past decade. Over time, this is adding to unit costs. The result is that cheques, which were already an expensive form of payment, are becoming increasingly so. Nonetheless, our consultations have reinforced the fact that cheque use remains entrenched in certain areas because it meets a number of specific needs. I have already mentioned 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches several of these areas, including the ease with which cheques can be addressed to others and accompanied by additional information. They are also very suitable in face-to-face exchanges and for providing an element of financial control.  Any decision to move away from cheques (and I’m not pre-judging the issue) will be dependent on the industry’s capacity to develop suitable and equally convenient electronic alternatives. I’m aware that the industry is separately looking at this, but it seems appropriate that the Payments System Board should also be considering how the decline in cheques is addressed from a public interest perspective.  In addition to these issues, there are a number of other things that we expect will come into consideration, whether as stand-alone topics or interwoven with other discussions. These include:   Mobile payments. There is already a lot of interest and activity in this area. The Board’s main interest will be in determining whether there are impediments to the development of mobile payments, for example in relation to standards.   Standards themselves cut across many areas of payments, including messaging, device and security standards. Their design and application can have significant implications for efficiency and for innovation. The increasingly global nature of commerce suggests that adoption of internationally compatible standards will be very important for maintaining a world class payments system.   Electronic purse systems – that is, general purpose, prepaid, and typically contactless cards like Oyster in London and Octopus in Hong Kong. Where these have been successful, there tends to be significant interdependency with electronic transport ticketing systems, which have been slow to develop here. The question once again is whether there is a significant impediment to development of these systems in Australia, given the already high use of payment cards.   Security. Our survey results suggest that concerns about fraud are impeding the take-up of online payments. This may also become an issue for mobile payments. A question for the Strategic Review is whether there is a need for increased co-ordination and co-operation on fraud issues.  Finally it’s worth saying that, more important than any of these individual issues is the overarching environment for innovation. I made the distinction at the start between proprietary and system-wide innovations. Our focus in this review is very much on the second one of those. This is the area that needs the most careful attention from a public-interest perspective, because it requires a degree of co-operation amongst industry competitors that might not otherwise happen efficiently. It also requires that the interests of end-users and non-incumbents be taken into account.  The next stage of the review will be seeking views on those issues, whether there are better ways to address them and whether there are new areas where a co-operative approach is needed. An inevitable component of that is what role the Reserve Bank should play, given that it has often stepped in, in one way or another, when a solely industry-based approach has not proved feasible.  Conclusion What I’ve outlined today is a big agenda, and I expect it will keep us very busy in the time ahead.  As I said at the start, this review is very much a co-operative effort. I and my staff appreciate the assistance we’ve had already, both from industry and from payment users. And we look forward to continuing to work with you to promote best-practice innovation in the Australian payments system.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Duvvuri Subbarao: Frontier issues on the global agenda – emerging economy perspective Commemorative oration by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 60th anniversary celebrations of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, Colombo, 29 March, 2011. *      *      * First of all, my thanks to the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) and to Governor Cabraal for inviting me to deliver this commemorative oration as part of CBSL’s Diamond Jubilee celebrations. I gather that a number of distinguished people have given orations as part of this anniversary series. I am indeed honoured to add my name to that very select list. My compliments to the management and staff of CBSL on this happy and historic occasion. As institutions, central banks go back several centuries. The first central bank, the Riksbank in Sweden, was established in 1668, nearly 350 years ago. The Bank of England came shortly thereafter in 1694. By the turn of the century in 1900, there were only 18 central banks. Today, there are around 180 central banks, a tenfold increase in the last one hundred years. In relative terms, both the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) are young institutions. RBI was established in 1935, and we celebrated our Platinum Jubilee last year. Apart from relative youth, there are several other similarities between our two institutions. Both of us have a wider mandate than is typical of central banks. In addition to maintaining price stability and macroeconomic stability, we both have responsibilities for currency management, debt management and external sector management. More importantly, we also have an obligation to calibrate our policies to promote the socio-economic development of our peoples. And in the wake of the crisis, we face the common challenge of managing our policies, particularly preserving financial stability, in the face of globalization. India and Sri Lanka are not just geographic neighbours; we have deep social, cultural and economic links that go back several centuries. And as we navigate an increasingly complex world, we face a number of similar opportunities and challenges. We are both fast growing emerging economies; we aspire to raise our growth rates to double digits, and want to efficiently translate that rapid growth into poverty reduction. We also have to manage our “inclusive growth” strategies in the face of globalization. Experience shows that globalization offers incredible opportunities but also poses immense challenges. If the years before the global financial crisis – the period of the so called “Great Moderation” – demonstrated the benefits of globalization, the devastating toll of the crisis showed its costs. As emerging market economies (EMEs), we cannot withdraw from globalization. That is neither feasible nor advisable. We have to confront globalization head on, but manage it in such a way that we exploit the opportunities and mitigate its costs. Surely, we have our concerns about the forces of globalization and how they might impact us. Many of these issues are on the global agenda that the G-20 is deliberating upon. G-20 I attended a meeting of the G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors in Paris in mid-February 2011. Apart from the specific issues on the agenda, what impresses me about the G-20 forum is its group dynamics driven by two underlying convictions. First, that global problems cannot be solved without global cooperation and that uncoordinated responses will lead to worse outcomes for everyone; and second, that solutions to global problems are sustainable only if they reflect also the EME perspective. I thought the way I can best add 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches value to this series of orations is to focus my remarks on the EME perspective on issues on the global agenda. Emerging market economies in the global context Fifty years from now, when historians look for the defining features of the first decade of the 21st century, they will probably mark the rise of world-wide terrorism, the deepening of the internet culture and the devastating global financial crisis. Whether the emergence of EMEs as a group will rank pari passu with those others will depend on what EMEs achieved in the last decade, but importantly also on how they consolidate those gains in this decade and beyond. Before I go on to specific issues, let me make a brief comment on EMEs in the global context. The shift in the global balance of power in favour of EMEs is by now a familiar story. Some broad trends will show what a remarkable shift this has been. Setting GDP at 100 in the base year of 2000, the following chart shows the aggregate growth in the decade 2000-10 (Chart 1)1. Against the aggregate growth of 17 per cent of advanced economies, emerging market and developing countries (EMDCs) grew by 82 per cent and BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India, China) by a whopping 127 per cent. When we look at shares in global GDP, the growing dynamism of EMEs becomes even more persuasive. The share of advanced economies in the global GDP dropped from 80 per cent in 2000 to 67 per cent in 2010 with a mirror increase in the share of EMDCs (Chart 2). Quite expectedly the share of BRICs increased more impressively from 8 per cent to 17 per cent2.                                                     1  Disaggregated numbers are in Annex Table - 1. 2  Disaggregated numbers are at Annex Table - 2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Chart 2: Share of Global GDP (at current US$ prices) (Percentage)  By all accounts, the world has recovered from the financial meltdown and the follow on recession much sooner than we had feared at the depth of the crisis. The recovery is all the more remarkable because global income, trade and industrial production fell more sharply in the first twelve months of this crisis than they did in the first twelve months of the Great Depression. In its latest World Economic Outlook (WEO – January 2011), the IMF estimated global growth for 2010 of 5.0 per cent; this marks a surprising upward revision from its earlier projection of 4.8 per cent made in October 2010. EMEs, contributing nearly half of this growth, have clearly been the engine of this recovery. EMEs have also been the motive force behind the estimated expansion of world trade at 12 per cent in 2010, an impressive reversal from shrinkage of 11 per cent in 2009. Two FAQs This post-crisis scenario, marked by the faster recovery of EMEs, throws up two frequently asked questions relating to EMEs in the global context. The first is whether EMEs will be able to sustain global growth at near pre-crisis levels even if advanced economies continue to languish. People who put this question, I believe, are doing so as a rhetoric – to encourage analytical thinking rather than to solicit an affirmative answer. Sure, multiple growth poles are a safety-net for the whole world, but to expect EMEs, by themselves, to lift global growth to former levels will be unrealistic. Note that EMDCs account for less than half of world GDP even when measured at PPP valuations, and only about a third of the world trade in goods and services. The second question about EMEs in the global context relates to decoupling. The decoupling hypothesis held that even if advanced economies went into a downturn, EMEs would not be affected because of their improved macroeconomic management, robust external reserves and resilient financial sectors. The crisis failed to validate the decoupling hypothesis as all EMEs were affected, admittedly to different extents. What the crisis, in fact, reinforced is that the economic prospects of advanced economies and EMEs are interlinked through trade, finance and confidence channels. Even as the decoupling hypothesis gained intellectual credence in the pre-crisis years, it was never very persuasive in the face of globalization. In fact, recent research within IMF shows that the detrended aggregate output growth of EMEs has strong association with the aggregate output growth of advanced economies, and that this “association” has in fact 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches increased over time, evidencing not only that the coupling is strong but that it is getting stronger. Sure, in recent years EMEs have been less affected by recessions in advanced economies owing to improved policy framework, more effective macroeconomic management and growing intra-EME trade. But over an entire cycle, the economic prospects of EMEs remain firmly coupled with those of advanced economies. In an increasingly globalizing world, advanced economies and EMEs are dependent on each other, and going forward, both have big challenges in terms of sustaining growth, containing inflation and reducing unemployment. By far the biggest challenge for EMEs will be to convert high growth into poverty reduction. Against that backdrop, let me proceed to look at some of the issues on the global agenda from the EME perspective. Global rebalancing The first issue I want to address from the EME perspective is global imbalances. No crisis as complex as the one we have gone through has a simple or a single cause. We now have a fairly good idea of the multiple causes of the crisis and almost everyone is agreed that one of the root causes of the crisis is the build up of global imbalances. In as much as global imbalances – no matter whether they were caused by a “consumption binge” in advanced economies or a “savings glut” in EMEs – were the root cause of the crisis, reducing imbalances is a necessary condition for restoring global financial stability. The post-crisis debate on global imbalances has three interrelated facets. The first is the role of exchange rates in global rebalancing. The second relates to capital flows into EMEs raising the familiar challenge of managing the impossible trinity. And the third facet is the framework for the adjustment process. Let me turn to these one by one. Role of exchange rates First, on the role of exchange rates – a prime lever for redressal of external imbalances. Global rebalancing will require deficit economies to save more and consume less. They need to depend for growth more on external demand which calls for a real depreciation of their currencies. The surplus economies will need to mirror these efforts – save less and spend more, and shift from external to domestic demand. They need to let their currencies appreciate. The question boils down to what can surplus countries do domestically to increase consumption and what can deficit countries do domestically to increase savings. The problem we have is that while the adjustment by deficit and surplus economies has to be symmetric, the incentives they face are asymmetric. Managing currency tensions will require a shared understanding on keeping exchange rates aligned to economic fundamentals, and an agreement that currency interventions should be resorted to not as an instrument of trade policy but only to manage disruptions to macroeconomic stability. Capital flows That takes me to the second facet of global imbalances – return of lumpy and volatile capital flows. Since capital flows have become such an emotive topic around the world in recent months, it is important perhaps to recall a few realities. First, that EMEs do need capital flows to augment their investible resources, but such flows should meet two criteria: they should be stable and be roughly equal to the economy’s absorptive capacity. The second reality that we must remember is that capital flows are triggered by both pull and push factors. The pull factors are the promising growth prospects of EMEs, their declining trend rates of inflation, capital account liberalization and improved governance. The push factors are the easy monetary policies of advanced economies which create the capital that flows into the EMEs. What this says is that international capital flows comprise a structural component and a cyclical component. It is the cyclical component that typically disrupts the macroeconomic stability of EMEs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 That said, the multi-speed recovery around the world and the consequent differential exit from accommodative monetary policy have triggered speculative capital flows into EMEs. The most high profile problem thrown up by capital flows, in excess of a country’s absorptive capacity, is currency appreciation which erodes export competitiveness. Intervention in the forex market to prevent appreciation entails costs. If the resultant liquidity is left unsterilized, it fuels inflationary pressures. If the resultant liquidity is sterilized, it puts upward pressure on interest rates which, apart from hurting competitiveness, also encourages further flows. Currency appreciation is not the only problem arising from the ultra loose monetary policy of advanced economies. Speculative flows on the lookout for quick returns can potentially lead to asset price build up. The assurance of advanced economies to keep interest rates “exceptionally low” for “an extended period” has also possibly triggered financialization of commodities leading to a paradoxical situation of hardening of commodity prices even as advanced economies continue to face demand recession. EMEs have been hit by hardened commodity prices through inflationary pressures, and in the case of net commodity importers, also through wider current account deficits. EMEs have dealt with the problem of excess flows in diverse ways depending on their macroeconomic situation. This has broadly taken one of several forms: controlling capital at entry, taxing it on entry or intervention in the forex market. Such measures would have attracted criticism in the past as they went against the broad economic orthodoxy that market forces should not be resisted. The crisis has changed the terms of that debate. It is now broadly accepted that there could be circumstances in which capital controls can be a legitimate component of the policy response to surges in capital flows. Managing capital flows should not be treated as an exclusive problem of EMEs. In as much as lumpy and volatile flows are a spillover from policy choices of advanced economies, the burden of adjustment has to be shared. How this burden has to be measured and shared raises both intellectual and practical policy challenges. Our current theory of external sector management draws from an outdated regime of fixed exchange rates and limited capital flows when the task was largely limited to managing the current account of the balance of payments. What we now need is a theory that reflects the changed situation of flexible exchange rates and large and volatile capital flows. The intellectual challenge is to build such a theory that encompasses both current and capital accounts and one that gives a better understanding of what type of capital controls work and in what situations. What is the practical challenge? The practical challenge is that once we have such a theory, we need to reach a shared understanding on two specific aspects: first, to what extent are advanced economies responsible for the cross border spillover impact of their domestic policies, and second, what is the framework of rules that should govern currency interventions in the face of volatile capital flows. G-20 framework for global growth The third facet under global imbalances is happily not actually a problem but an approach to a solution. At the Pittsburgh Summit in 2009, the G-20 committed itself to a new “framework of strong, sustainable and balanced growth” as also on a “Mutual Assessment Process” (MAP) to determine the degree to which G-20 macro policy actions are “collectively consistent” when examined together. The framework and its assessment should ensure that individual actions of countries add up to a coherent path forward.  The framework essentially consists of identifying a few indicators and the guidelines against which these indicators for each of the countries will be assessed. At the Paris meeting of the G-20 in mid-February, there was an agreement on the broad indicators that will aid us to focus, through an integrated two-step process, on those persistently large imbalances which require policy action. It was also agreed to decide on the guidelines for assessing the indicators by the next meeting of the G-20 scheduled for April 2011.  
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches The G-20 Mutual Assessment Process is a potentially promising mechanism to facilitate timely identification of disruptive imbalances and to ensure that preventive and corrective action is taken in time. Needless to say, global cooperation is vital for the success of MAP.  Global reserve currency The global crisis has revived the familiar concerns about the robustness of the international monetary system, and in particular about the global reserve currency and the provision of liquidity in times of stress. The system we now have is that the US dollar is the world’s reserve currency by virtue of the dominant size of the US economy, its share in global trade and the preponderant use of dollar in foreign trade and foreign exchange transactions. And as Barry Eichengreen tells us in his latest book on the story of the dollar3 , the reserve currency status depends also on a host of intangible factors such as strategic and military relationships, laws, institutions and incumbency.  In line with the Triffin paradox, the US has met the obligation of an issuer of reserve currency by running fiscal and external deficits while enjoying the “exorbitant privilege” of not having to make the necessary adjustment to bridge the deficits. With no pressure to reduce the deficit, a dominant economy can potentially create imbalances at the global level as indeed happened in the build up to the crisis. An argument can be made that even in the context of a single reserve currency, global imbalances are not inevitable. The US could not have run persistent deficits had not the EMEs provided the demand side impetus by accumulating reserve assets either for trade advantage or as a measure of self-insurance against external shocks.  The problem with the world having only a single reserve currency came to the fore during the crisis as many countries faced dollar liquidity problems as a consequence of swift deleveraging by foreign creditors and foreign investors. Paradoxically, even as the US economy was in a downturn, the dollar strengthened as a result of flight to safety. Based on the experience of the crisis, several reform proposals have been put forward to address the problems arising from a single reserve currency. One is to have a menu of alternative reserve currencies. But this cannot happen by fiat. To be a serious contender as an alternative, a currency has to fulfill some exacting criteria. It has to be fully convertible and its exchange rate should be determined by market fundamentals; it should acquire a significant share in world trade; the currency issuing country should have liquid, open and large financial markets and also the policy credibility to inspire the confidence of potential investors. In short, the exorbitant privilege of a reserve currency comes with an exorbitant responsibility.  A second solution to a single reserve currency is to develop the SDR as a reserve currency. This does not seem to be a feasible option. For the SDR to be an effective reserve currency, it has to fulfil several conditions: the SDR has to be accepted as a liability of the IMF, has to be automatically acceptable as a medium of payment in cross-border transactions, be freely tradeable and its price has to be determined by forces of demand and supply. A third suggested solution aims at reducing the need for self-insurance and thereby the dependence on a reserve currency by supporting a multilateral option of a prearranged line of credit that can be easily and quickly accessed. Such a multilateral option is necessary as a complement to self-insurance but it cannot be a substitute; some measure of self-insurance will continue to be the first line of defence. None of the above solutions fully addresses the problems arising from a single global reserve currency. What this underscores is that at the global level we need to explore these and                                                  3  Exorbitant Privilege: The Rise and Fall of the Dollar and the Future of the International Monetary System by Barry Eichengreen. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 other options for protecting ourselves from the vulnerabilities that we confront as a consequence of a single reserve currency.  Protectionism In the post-crisis world, there may not actually be “deglobalization” but the earlier orthodoxy that globalization is an unmixed blessing is being increasingly challenged. The rationale behind globalization was, and hopefully is, that even as advanced countries may see some low end jobs being outsourced, they will still benefit from globalization because for every low end job gone, another high end job – that is more skill intensive, more productive – will be created. If this does not happen rapidly enough or visibly enough, protectionist pressures will arise, and rapidly become vociferous and politically compelling.  Recent international developments mark an “ironic reversal” in the fears about globalization. Previously, it was the EMEs which feared that integration into the world economy would lead to welfare loss at home. Those fears have now given way to apprehensions in advanced economies that globalization means losing jobs to cheap labour abroad. There is concern in some quarters that even as open protectionism has been resisted relatively well during the current crisis, opaque protectionism has been on the rise. Opaque protectionism takes the form of resorting to measures such as anti-dumping actions, safeguards, preferential treatment of domestic firms in bailout packages and discriminatory procurement practices. Experience shows that countries resort to restrictive trade practices in areas not covered by multilateral rules or by exploiting the lack of specificity in certain rules. To strengthen multilateral trade discipline, the need for a quick conclusion of the Doha Round can hardly be overemphasized. In a world with growing worries about the debt creating stimulus packages, a Doha Round agreement should be welcomed as a non-debt creating stimulus to the global economy.  The most familiar form of protectionism is trade protectionism operationalized through tariffs and controls. There can be other forms of protectionism as well. Martin Wolf talks about what he calls “macroeconomic protectionism” which is an attempt by a country to shift inadequate aggregate demand on to its own output4 The efforts of several countries around the world in recent times to resist currency appreciation is a manifestation of macroeconomic protectionism.  Another form of protectionism is “financial protectionism”. What is financial protectionism? It is a situation where countries impose controls increasingly not on capital inflows but on capital outflows. In a recent op-ed piece in the Financial Times5 , Richard Dobbs and Michael Spence argue that “the 30-year era of progressively cheaper capital is nearing an end. The global economy will soon have to cope with too little capital, not too much.” Their thesis is that even as investment needs of EMEs, especially in infrastructure will grow, global savings will not rise in step because of several factors: ageing populations who will spend rather than save, increased expenditure on adapting to climate change and large economies like China rebalancing towards consumption rather than saving. This will make capital scarcer and raise long term interest rates for corporates and consumers. The question is, will the savings constraint be so large as to push countries into restricting capital outflows as a defence against rising interest rates at home? If yes, we will have to brace for financial protectionism in the years ahead.                                                  4  Financial Reform: An Emerging Market Perspective by Martin Wolf, at the Korea-FSB Conference on Financial Sector Reform, Republic of Korea, September 2–3, 2010. 5  “The Era of Cheap Capital Comes To a Close” by Richard Dobbs and Michael Spence, Financial Times, February 1, 2011. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches The short point is that in the years ahead, the pressures for protectionism will mount and protectionism will also take new forms. Global welfare will be maximized when collectively we resist short-term pressures and put our long-term interest ahead of narrow short-term advantage. Financial sector reforms Received wisdom today is that financial deregulation shares the honours with global imbalances as being the twin villains of the recent crisis. It should not be surprising therefore that vigorous reforms in the financial sector are under way. The Basel III package finalized by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) has since been endorsed by the G-20 at its Seoul Summit last November. Broadly, these reforms will require banks to hold more and better quality capital and to carry more liquid assets, limit their leverage and will mandate them to build up capital buffers in good times that can be drawn down in periods of stress.  Another crisis driven initiative has been to expand the erstwhile Financial Stability Forum into a Financial Stability Board (FSB) by giving representation to EMEs. The FSB has been working on a number of initiatives including managing the moral hazard associated with systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) through more stringent regulatory and supervisory norms, principles to guide compensation of bank managements, a single set of accounting standards and regulation of OTC derivatives, credit rating agencies and hedge funds. There are also several areas where substantial work needs to be done including in improving resolution regimes for cross-border banks and systemically important non-bank financial companies, addressing the procyclicality of the financial system, and macro-prudential surveillance. We also need an approach for extending the prudential norms on the lines of Basel III to the shadow financial system which lay at the heart of the recent financial crisis. The financial sector reform agenda is driven by the need to prevent the type of excesses in the financial sectors of the advanced economies that led to the crisis. Even so, EMEs too will have to fall in line and implement these reforms. Some of these reforms entailing higher capital and capital buffers will make the financial sector safer, but they come at a cost and pose implementation challenges. Let me expand on this a little. Both the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and the IIF have come out with some preliminary estimate of the macroeconomic impact of the Basel III package. The Basel Committee too is carrying out an extensive impact assessment study. EMEs will need to supplement that with their own self-assessments to more accurately determine the impact of the new norms on their financial and monetary systems. In all likelihood, EMEs will see the cost of credit going up at a time of growing credit demand arising from strong growth, structural transformation of the economy and financial deepening. The challenge for EMEs will be to balance the tension between implementing Basel III and keeping the cost of credit at an affordable level. In terms of capital, banks in EMEs typically have higher capital ratios, and can be expected to comfortably meet the higher Basel III capital requirements. However, going forward, as credit expands and bank balance sheets grow, banks will find it necessary to raise further capital to conform to the Basel III requirement. Basel III also poses non-cost challenges. For example, operation of countercyclical buffers will need judgements to be made on the trajectory of the business cycle and on the identification of the inflexion point. Wrong judgements can entail huge costs in terms of foregone growth.  Many of these reforms on the anvil, including some elements of the Basel III package, allow for national differentiation. Should EMEs, keeping in view their national circumstances, decide to deviate from any global standard or norm, the challenge for them will be to communicate the rationale so that the market does not interpret the deviation as regulatory looseness. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 Realizing that the reform measures designed for the financial systems of advanced economies will have different implications for EMEs, and that the challenges facing the EMEs may be entirely different from those facing the advanced economies, it was decided in the Seoul Summit of the G20 to work towards making the financial regulatory reforms better reflect the perspective of EMEs. The FSB, the IMF and the World Bank have been tasked with working on this agenda and report before the next Summit. Conclusion Let me now summarize. In my remarks today, I tried to give you an EME perspective on some of the issues on the global agenda. I started off by giving the big picture – the tectonic shift of global economic power towards emerging economies. EMEs, however, have not completely decoupled from the advanced economies; their economic prospects remain linked to the prospects of advanced economies. Even as multiple growth poles are a better safety-net for the world, we will be collectively better off if all segments of the world grow at a sustainable pace. I then went on to the issue of global rebalancing which needs to address three inter-related issues: exchange rate flexibility, capital controls and an agreement on a framework for strong, sustainable and balanced growth. A prime source of vulnerabilities at the global level is the single reserve currency and I emphasized the need for global cooperation in finding a viable solution. An important issue on the global agenda is protectionism and I talked about why protectionist pressures may arise again and what new forms protectionism might take in the years ahead. Finally, I gave a brief status of the reforms in the financial sector and emphasized the need for further work to study the implication of these reforms for EMEs. The common thread running through all the issues that I raised is the need for global cooperation in solving our most pressing problems of today. The crisis has taught us that no country can be an island and that economic and financial disruptions anywhere can cause ripples, if not waves, everywhere. The crisis also taught us that given the deepening integration of countries into the global economic and financial system, uncoordinated responses will lead to worse outcomes for everyone. The global problems we are facing today are complex and not amenable to easy solutions. Many of them require significant and often painful adjustments at the national level, and in a world divided by nation-states, there is no natural constituency for the global economy. At the same time, the global crisis has shown that the global economy as an entity is more important than ever. The global crisis has taken a devastating toll on global growth and welfare. In their painstakingly researched book, “This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly”, Kenneth Rogoff and Carmen Reinhart show how over eight hundred years, all financial crises can be traced to the same fundamental causes as if we learnt nothing from one crisis to the next. Each time, experts have chimed that “this time is different” claiming that the old rules do not apply and the new situation is dissimilar to the previous one. It will be too costly for the world not to heed this lesson. We should cooperate not only to firmly exit from the crisis, but also to ensure that in resolving this crisis, we do not sow the seeds of the next crisis. Before I finish, I want to compliment CBSL for its significant contribution to the growth and development of Sri Lanka. Over the last 60 years, CBSL has acquired a great reputation for professionalism, integrity and sense of purpose. Moving forward, as central banks of emerging economies, both RBI and CBSL have their tasks cut out for them. We need to learn from the best in the world, but adapt our learning to the demands and culture of maturing emerging economies. We need to be constantly pushing the envelope, be at the frontiers of domain knowledge, oftentimes reinvent it, but all the time remain sensitive to the core concerns of an emerging economy. On behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, I want to wish Governor Cabraal and the management and staff of CBSL all the very best in their endeavour towards growth and development of Sri Lanka. 
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11      
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Øystein Olsen: The economic outlook Address by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to invited foreign embassy representatives, Oslo, 29 March 2011. The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 16 March, Monetary Policy Report 1/11 and previous speeches. Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation.  *      *      * Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, I am happy to continue the tradition of my predecessor by inviting you to Norges Bank to discuss economic developments in Norway.  Economic trends During the past few weeks, the world’s attention has been focused on the sufferings caused by the earthquake in Japan, as well as escalating political unrest in Middle East countries. The economic impact of these events is still uncertain. Apart from these, the economic and financial news of the past year has, on balance, been positive. The global recovery has gained strength, even though uncertainties persist. A common feature of the countries that fared well through the financial crisis was that they had kept their house in order. Norway falls into this group, although our abundant natural resource wealth puts us in a unique and favourable position. Against this backdrop, I would like to comment on our experience with implementing the prevailing frameworks for monetary and fiscal policy.  Today we can look back at ten years of inflation targeting and the fiscal rule. Despite the financial crisis, this has been a golden period for Norway. Economic developments have been influenced by changes in global trade patterns. Asia has replaced Europe as our main trading partner for many goods, and Norway has reaped significant gains from terms-of-trade effects. National income is almost 30 per cent higher in real terms than ten years ago.   
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches While in the 1980s the advanced economies clearly dominated the performance of the global economy, the contribution to global growth of the emerging economies during the last decade, substantially exceeded that of the advanced economies. Moreover, during the global crisis of 2008–2009, growth in emerging economies was sustained, while it fell sharply in the OECD area.  As growth in the advanced economies now remains depressed, emerging economies will continue to dominate the performance of the global economy. This tendency is reflected in developments in the global oil market, where the composition of crude oil consumption has shifted from advanced to emerging market economies.    During the last decade, global demand for oil increased by slightly more than 12 per cent. Over the same period, demand for oil in OECD countries fell by nearly 5 per cent. Commodity-intensive industrialisation and strong per capita income growth in emerging economies are likely to reinforce the upward shift in aggregate commodity demand. The Norwegian macroeconomic framework The changing structure of the global economy helps to explain the economic shift experienced in Norway during the 2000s. Prices for Norwegian exports, such as oil, gas, metals, minerals and fish, rose markedly, while prices for imported goods fell. In the seven years leading up to the financial crisis, the volume of mainland GDP expanded at an average annual rate of 3.4 per cent.  Exactly ten years ago today, Norges Bank was charged with the task of setting the interest rate with a view to keeping inflation low and stable. At the same time, new fiscal policy guidelines, also known as the fiscal rule, were implemented, charting a course for petroleum revenue spending. Norway’s sovereign wealth fund, which is now called the Government Pension Fund Global, was designed to prevent fluctuations in oil prices from feeding through to the mainland economy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  A decade of inflation targeting The inflation target for monetary policy provides a sound anchor for inflation expectations. Over the past decade, CPI inflation has varied to some extent. Underlying inflation has naturally been more stable, but has been both higher and lower than the target. If we look at the ten-year period as a whole, inflation has been 2 per cent, that is to say close to the target.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Still, over the past ten years, the conduct of monetary policy has been tested. During this period, we have gained insight into the functioning of the Norwegian economy under an inflation-targeting regime. Let me touch upon some of these insights.   At the beginning of the decade, we learned that it can be demanding to strike a balance between different monetary policy considerations in a small, open economy. When the key policy rate is raised to restrain a pronounced rise in domestic cost inflation, it can have a strong impact on the krone exchange rate, as observed in 2002–2003. This influences both the real economy and the inflation outlook. Midway through the decade, inflation rapidly declined. China’s entry into world trade and increased imports to Norway from Asia led to a persistent fall in prices for many goods. The combination of low inflation and strong economic growth posed a challenge to the conduct of monetary policy. Interest rates – both at home and abroad – were set at low levels. At the same time, this amplified the cyclical upturn in Norway.  Towards the end of the decade, during the financial crisis, the interest rate was reduced sharply and to record-low levels. The decision to lower interest rates was undoubtedly not a difficult decision to make at the time. A persistently low interest rate, on the other hand, can pose a challenge to financial stability in an economy where there is a strong willingness to borrow and property prices are rising. Despite challenges met over the past decade, inflation has been fairly stable and close to the target, which shows that monetary policy has been effective. Compared with the 1980s, for example, inflation has been considerably lower and growth in the mainland economy has been markedly higher. There has been no conflict between low inflation and high economic growth, as previously claimed by economists.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  The guidelines and the financial crisis The financial crisis in 2008 put our economic policy guidelines to a severe test.  The interest rate cuts that followed from the inflation target led to a reduction in households’ annual interest expenses of around NOK 40 billion, or around 4 per cent of their disposable income. The krone depreciated and acted as a buffer. The burden on leveraged companies was eased and investment projects became profitable in an environment of lower interest rates. Altogether, monetary policy made a substantial contribution to Norway’s resilience to the crisis.   
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Well anchored inflation expectations made monetary policy effective – the reduction in Norges Bank’s key policy rate was perceived as a decline in the real interest rate. Other central banks experienced that there was little scope for reducing the real interest rate to a sufficiently low level.  This downturn contrasts sharply with the downturn in the 1980s when the interest rate had to be maintained at a high level to defend the krone exchange rate. At that time, there was a lack of confidence in both monetary policy and fiscal policy. The costs were substantial. Unemployment increased, in line with that experienced in some European countries today.  When the financial crisis reached Norway in 2008, we were in a much better position. A long period of substantial petroleum revenues – and a clear savings plan – had provided us with considerable leeway. As a result, fiscal policy could also be used effectively during the downturn. The guidelines stipulate that the government budget deficit shall over time be equivalent to 4 per cent of the capital in the Government Pension Fund Global, – more in bad times, less in good times.   A fall in output and employment automatically leads to reduced taxes while unemployment benefits increase. An important aspect of the fiscal rule is that it allows these effects to translate into a weaker budget balance. These automatic stabilisers generated strong impulses through 2009 and 2010, amounting to more than NOK 40 billion for the two years as a whole.  The increase in the Government Pension Fund Global provided, under the fiscal rule, room for a NOK 25 billion increase in spending. The government and the Storting approved additional spending, bringing the overall contribution from fiscal policy to more than NOK 100 billion, equivalent to 5.5 per cent of mainland GDP, over these two years. Few, if any other countries provided such strong fiscal stimulus during the crisis.  The guidelines from 2001 provide a clear long-term framework for monetary policy and fiscal policy. They also provide for cyclical adjustments in economic policy – in part automatically and in part by discretion. In this way, the guidelines reconcile the need for a flexible approach 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 to macroeconomic management with the gains brought by a commitment to more long-term operational objectives.  Lessons from the financial crisis  Even though Norway has fared well through the financial crisis, helped by a sound economic policy framework, some concerns related to financial stability remain. In particular, there is one area in which Norway differs from other countries in a manner we perhaps do not like: Norwegian households are among the most heavily indebted in Europe.    As activity in the Norwegian economy is gathering momentum, pressures are mounting in the housing market. Consumer confidence has improved and house prices have risen in recent months. Housing starts are moving up, although from moderate levels. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches So far, the low interest rate level has not led to a pronounced increase in household borrowing. However, the household debt burden is at a historically high level and is expected to increase further. Rising debt and property prices are mutually reinforcing phenomena. Higher asset prices lead to higher collateral values for loans and increased borrowing opportunities for buyers. This increases the overall risk of the financial system.  While monetary policy and fiscal policy have been anchored within a long-term, operational framework over the past ten years, there has been no coherent regulatory system for financial markets. Requirements are currently imposed on individual banks, but without adequate regard to overall risk in the financial system. The financial crisis highlighted the need to strengthen the current framework. Regulation of the financial sector must secure financial stability, but at the same time protect the public against losses. This is now on the agenda in Norway and in other countries.  I would like to highlight three main aspects of the new regulations that are now underway: First, the financial crisis revealed that banks held insufficient capital, excessive short-term market funding and inadequate liquidity buffers. The new Basel III framework sets out stricter requirements.  Second, the new framework includes macroprudential tools that can be applied when necessary. Banks may be subject to additional capital requirements if credit growth in the wider economy is excessive.  Third, the authorities must acquire tools that enable banks to be wound up in an orderly manner. Owners and creditors – not taxpayers – must bear the losses. The interest rate on banks’ funding will then reflect the risk they take rather than an implicit government subsidy.  The outlook  Despite some concerns regarding financial stability, the Norwegian economy must be characterised as strong. Productivity fell somewhat through the downturn, but has picked up again. Compared to our neighbouring countries, unemployment in Norway is low, around 3 per cent of the labour force. In 2010 the return on our oil fund was close to 10 per cent, and the capital has passed 150 per cent of mainland GDP.   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9   In the twelve months since January 2010, oil prices have risen to over USD 100. This development is primarily demand-driven, fuelled by strong growth in the global economy, and in emerging market economies in particular. More recently, oil prices have increased further as political unrest in North Africa and the Middle East has led to uncertainty regarding future oil supply.    Norwegian manufacturing industries are also benefiting from high commodity prices. Increased profitability for many firms and rising real disposable income may boost the demand for labour. With the prospect of continued high commodity prices and falling import prices, Norway’s terms of trade should hold up in the period ahead.  
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches This, together with a tight labour market, may fuel wage growth. Looking ahead, cost inflation is most likely to edge up. On the other hand, high net immigration may have a dampening impact on wages.   In 2010, the population rose by 62 000, an increase of 1.3 per cent. Low unemployment and a relatively high wage level have made the Norwegian labour market attractive to job seekers of foreign origin.    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 Going forward, continued high labour immigration is expected to result in solid growth in the labour force. At the same time, improved terms of trade will led to higher activity in the Norwegian economy. Capacity utilisation is expected to revert to a normal level in the second half of 2011. In the coming years, output in the mainland economy is expected to increase at an annual rate of 3–4 per cent. A strong krone and low external price impulses will continue to have a dampening impact on inflation, and inflation will remain below target for some time. Further ahead, higher capacity utilisation and profitability in the business sector point to a pickup in wage growth. At the same time, the fall in import prices will slow.  To conclude: Norway has weathered the financial crisis better than most countries, and the economic recovery in Norway is now on a firm footing. Currently, interest rates are low, with the key policy rate at 2 per cent.  In the years ahead, there are prospects for fairly strong growth in the Norwegian economy, driven by solid income growth, rising investment and high population growth.   On balance, the consideration of stabilising inflation, as well as developments in output and employment, imply a gradual increase in the key policy rate towards a more normal level.  Thank you for your attention.    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Subir Gokarn: Financial inclusion – a consumer centric view Speech by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the VIth V Narayanan Memorial Lecture, Kumbakonam, 21 March 2011. *      *      * Inputs from Pallavi Chavan, Bhupal Singh and Muneesh Kapur are gratefully acknowledged. I. Introduction It is a great pleasure for me to be delivering the VIth V. Narayanan Memorial Lecture. I never had the opportunity to meet Mr. Narayanan, but, from what I have heard and read about him, he was clearly a person dedicated to the mission of expanding the reach of and access to banking services in a way which benefitted both the customer and the service provider. As you may know, the financial inclusion agenda has assumed top priority in the Reserve Bank of India’s current scheme of things and the Bank is actively engaging with the financial sector to ensure that the objective of establishing a banking presence in all villages with a population of over 2000 people is achieved. More importantly, it needs to be achieved in a commercially viable way; banks and other service providers must not see it as a mandate whose burden they have to bear in terms of higher costs and lower earnings. As Governor Dr. Subbarao has put it, financial service providers must see inclusion as an opportunity, not an obligation. When I accepted the invitation to deliver this lecture and began thinking about an appropriate topic, the issue of commercially viable financial inclusion came quickly to mind. In effect, this is exactly what would characterize Mr. Narayanan’s career with the City Union Bank and his contribution to not just the institution that he was associated with but to the broader socio-economic environment in which it functioned. Of course, while I have had the opportunity to work in a commercial organization, I have never worked for a commercial bank. It would, therefore, be presumptuous of me to approach the topic from the perspective of a business strategy for banks. However, as we all know, strategies are not designed in a vacuum. A sound understanding of the market environment is a critical input. Who the potential consumers are, what motivates and drives their decisions, what constraints and risks they face and so on are all fundamental questions, the answers to which are the starting points of strategy formulation. In other words, the better the understanding banks and other financial service providers have about the potential consumers of their inclusion-oriented products and services, the more likely their strategies are to succeed in a way that benefits both consumers and producers. This is the issue that I would like to address in this lecture. I will attempt to characterize the potential consumer for financial inclusion products and services, using survey data reported by a number of survey institutions that have been observing the Indian consumer for some time now. Based on these characterizations, I will articulate some key messages emerging for commercially viable financial inclusion. II.  The current status of inclusion: an overview Before I begin looking at consumer characteristics, let me provide a quick overview of the current status of access of consumers to financial services. Admittedly, this is not a complete picture, as it does not cover the role and activities of institutions other than banks. I merely want to emphasize the gap that currently exists, which in turn represents the opportunity that the financial sector has to design and deliver appropriate products and services to a very large number of potential customers.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Slide 1 provides a set of summary statistics relating to the penetration of various categories of financial products. First, the relatively low penetration of bank branches must be highlighted – only 30,000 out of 6,00,000 habitations have a banking presence. As is well understood, the goal of having a physical banking facility in every habitation is unrealistic, which is why the inclusion strategy is largely based on the use of Information and communication technology (ICT) to expand banking access virtually through the mechanism of a Business Correspondent (BC), who carries a handheld device networked to the bank’s systems. This is an enormous technological discontinuity enabled by the spread and efficiency of the mobile telephone network and, clearly, the inclusion strategy must take full advantage of this resource. Even then, we must recognize that there are constraints to the rollout of the BC model, which also needs a certain minimum scale of operation to make it viable. Therefore, the strategy envisages a phased expansion, with larger habitations being targeted first to ensure the viability of as many BCs as possible. In this sense, the phased approach, which first focuses on habitations with populations above 2,000 is based on the acceptance of commercial viability as a key driver of the success of an inclusion strategy. The other statistics on Slide 1 provide some indication of the size of the opportunity. Just because penetration in certain products and services is low does not mean that they represent a natural and automatic opportunity; penetration could be low because there is no demand. It is ultimately a matching of consumer characteristics and the potential demand that is implied by them that allows the service provider to assess the opportunity. However, the statistics presented on the slide do suggest that, apart from savings accounts, which have about 40 per cent penetration, there are several other financial products that might meet existing consumer requirements, such as insurance, which have very low penetration. Similarly, debit cards, which facilitate the use of technology, thereby reducing the dependence of bank customers on physical branches, may help to significantly expand the capacity of the banking network without necessarily setting up more branches. Apart from the aggregate picture, it is also useful to look at the status from the perspective of inequality. Slide 2 and Slide 3 present some data that reveal the differential access that people at different income levels have to the financial system. From Slide 2, it appears that households with an income below Rs. 50,000 (in 2007) find it relatively difficult, or unattractive, to open a bank account. The survey does not reveal whether the relatively low penetration of bank accounts in this income segment is because they can’t open them or they don’t want them. This is an important distinction, because it implies different actions by banks to improve penetration amongst these households. If access is a problem, then simplified procedures and lower thresholds may be sufficient to achieve the objective and, indeed, this is exactly what is being done by means of no-frills accounts. However, if it is because people don’t find adequate value in opening accounts, the challenge of inclusion becomes a little more complicated. Clearly, the mere opening of more and more accounts is not going to achieve the inclusion objective if these accounts are not used as the platform to access a range of financial services that meet the various requirements that the household is trying to satisfy. This raises the issue of product and service design as a critical component of a viable inclusion strategy, which I shall repeatedly come back to during the course of the lecture. Slide 3 looks at the situation with regard to access to loans differentiated by income levels. Here again, the relatively low access of the lowest income group is striking. It is not as though these households do not need credit; if the banks do not meet their requirements, they are clearly accessing other sources. The same question arises here. Are people in this income segment not getting bank credit because they can’t or because they don’t want to? As in the case of accounts, the answer to this question is critical to devising an effective inclusion strategy. It may underscore the need to look for product design solutions to the problem of low penetration. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 III. An exploration of consumer characteristics (a) Employment and earnings differentials Let me now move on to the core of this lecture, i.e., to characterize the potential consumer for products and services emerging from a financial inclusion strategy. Let me begin with the nature of employment in the country, which, to my mind, is a critical attribute to the kinds of financial services which people may want. Slide 4 provides the composition of the domestic workforce in terms of their sources of income. It is most striking that over half the workforce is categorized as being self-employed. Of course, this should not come as a surprise, as the majority of services we consume on a day-to-day basis are provided by people who logically fall into this category. Another significant proportion falls into the category of casual labour. Only a relatively small minority is placed in the category of regular wage or salary earners, of which a relatively large proportion is undoubtedly associated with the public sector. What does this mean in terms of potential demand for financial services? For the self-employed, it clearly means, among other things, the need for a reliable and low-cost source of working capital, which allows them to optimize on their inventories, if they are occupied in trading activities or acquire productivity-enhancing and service-enhancing assets, which have relatively short payback periods. We all have seen how, first, pagers and, then, cheap mobile telephony completely changed the economics of self-employed service providers. This, of course, happened at an aggregate level, but as we look deeper into the business models of different self-employment categories, I am sure we will discover sector-specific opportunities to make similar productivity improvements. Discovering such opportunities and converting them into a viable lending model is something that the financial sector may benefit from, both in terms of furthering the inclusion agenda and expanding their revenue and profitability bases.  The data presented in Slide 5 and Slide 6 provide a somewhat different perspective on the potential consumer base. In Slide 5, we see the relative incomes of workers in different kinds of occupations. This differentiation is important because it reflects a number of underlying relationships between educational status, employment opportunities and earning potential. The ultimate goal of development policy, of which financial inclusion is a critical component, is to raise the incomes of as many households as possible in a sustainable way. There is, of course, no iron law which says that incomes earned by all occupations must be equal. Differentials that emerge from qualifications, skills, productivity and value added are all legitimate in a market economy, in which financial incentives drive resource allocations across alternative activities. However, from the policy perspective, we must also be conscious of barriers and bottlenecks, which impede the productivity and, consequently, the earning potential from different activities. As Slide 5 indicates, in rural areas, people with some professional qualifications and those in regular jobs, such as in the administrative sector, earn more than people who are lower down on the skills ladder and those who are self employed. One response to this could be to employ as many people as possible in the former areas. In a sense, this was attempted a few decades ago. It generated benefits, but also imposed costs; in any case, as a strategy, it is inconsistent with the current emphasis on fiscal discipline and the efficient deployment of resources across the economy. The focus must, therefore, be on finding ways in which the earning potential of the other occupational categories can be raised. Access to appropriate financial products and services is surely one of these, even possibly the most important one. Of course, it may not be the only requirement – the silver bullet, so to speak – and it is important for the success of an inclusion strategy to identify the other, complementary requirements.  One observation that I can make from my recent exposure to and interaction with rural Self-Help Groups and other livelihood mechanisms is that they face significant challenges in finding and accessing the right kinds of markets for their products, which results in relatively 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches low realizations for their products, thus constraining their earnings potential. To my mind, the general validity of this proposition and its implications for building appropriate complementary inputs into the financial inclusion strategy need to be explored further. Slide 6 presents the same data for urban workers. The pattern is essentially similar to the rural one and much the same set of conclusions can be drawn about the distinction between legitimate sources of earnings differentials on the one hand and those caused by barriers and bottlenecks on the other. The reason I brought the urban picture separately into the presentation is to emphasize the fact that the financial landscape in urban areas is completely different from that in the rural areas. If, indeed, lack of access to financial services is a significant reason for the persistence of earnings differentials in urban areas, then it suggests that a relatively well-penetrated environment is also not delivering inclusion to its potential. If this is the case, then we must be cautious in linking the mere presence of financial service providers with the achievement of financial inclusion. The strategy must go beyond organizational presence to the design of appropriate products and services, a point that has been made earlier in the lecture but can be re-emphasized. (b) Expenditure patterns Let me now turn to an analysis of how consumers, many of whom can be considered the target segment for financial inclusion, spend their money. Slide 7 presents a picture of households’ routine expenditures, the largest segment of which is, understandably, food. The proportion of income spent on food clearly goes down as income goes up, but at the aggregate level, the proportion is significant. But, this is not an issue I want to dwell on here. Let me move on to Slide 8, which displays what have been described as “unusual” expenditures by households, which essentially means that these expenditures are generally incurred, but not on a regular or predictable basis. The pattern suggests that the most significant unusual expenditure by far is on ceremonies. This is followed by medical expenses. The two categories together account for almost 80 per cent of unusual expenditures across all households. Slide 9 is even more revealing. It suggests that, among lower income households, the proportion of unusual expenditures spent on these two activities is even more significant. We have all heard of people whose household budgets are severely stretched, even broken, by expenditure on ceremonies and healthcare. We can perhaps be somewhat dismissive about the first, arguing that this is purely discretionary and the household can work within its resource limitations. But then, who are we to judge the household’s perceptions of its social obligations? On the issue of medical expenditures, there is no room at all for such discretion; it usually is a matter of life or death. Given the significance of these two categories of expenditure, particularly amongst lower income households but also in others, can we think of financial products that allow households to meet these expenditures without bearing a crushing burden? The health issue clearly lends itself to a low-cost insurance solution and there has been some progress on widening access to health insurance. But, this needs to be matched with an increase in the supply of health care facilities, not to mention the promotion of low-cost treatments, which can be accommodated by a mass insurance programme. This is another example of the need to visualize complementary inputs, which amplify the benefits of financial inclusion. The need to develop a financial buffer for expenditures related to ceremonies, though more complicated than health insurance, also appears to lend itself to product design. As a lifelong employee of the organized sector, I have had the benefit of being a member of one provident fund scheme or the other. One important feature of all the schemes I have been part of is that they allow me to withdraw a substantial portion of my accumulated funds for expenditures connected with my daughter’s marriage (though, not my son’s, as I recall). This is, in essence, a systematic investment plan for, among other things, ceremonial expenditures. Products of this nature are already available in the market; the question is, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 essentially, one of threshold contributions and whether they can be lowered to provide access to large numbers of households, even while giving them a reasonable rate of return so there is sufficient accumulation.  (c) Savings and investment: choices and motivations Let us now take a look at the way in which households deploy their resources and what motivates their savings decisions. This should provide a basis for both addressing specific needs, essentially an extension of the discussion in the previous section, and also getting a sense of the limitations on the options households have to deploy their savings.  Slide 10 presents a very striking picture. Across all households, the primary channels for deploying financial savings are bank deposits and “kept at home”, which presumably includes cash, gold and jewellery. The latter is not surprising, given the earlier data point on the penetration of savings accounts. What may be surprising, though, is the significance of the proportion kept at home; more so, the finding that urban households actually hold a higher proportion of their savings in this form. Of course, this may reflect a greater ability to afford gold and jewellery, but the pattern raises a fundamental question. Why do these households prefer to keep their savings in a form that does not optimize on the risk-return trade-off?  Putting all (or most) of your eggs in one basket, which is essentially the message from Slide 10, may be an appropriate strategy under some conditions; the complete absence of investment options, for example. But, clearly, at the aggregate level, options are not absent; the Indian financial system offers an increasing variety of alternatives with finely differentiated risk-return profiles, allowing individual households significant opportunities to match their savings patterns with their anticipated requirements. In all probability, these opportunities are also subject to some threshold requirements, which means that households below a certain income and savings level cannot as yet access them. From the inclusion perspective, the challenge is clearly to lower this threshold in a way that does not compromise the commercial viability of the service provider. Slide 11 presents a picture of the motivations that people say drive their savings behaviour. The question obviously allows people to acknowledge as many of the listed items as they want and the responses reported indicate the percentage of households who marked a particular motivation. Although the data reported does not distinguish between households by income, the height of some of the bars clearly suggests that these motivations cut across income groups. Let us focus on the four most frequently occurring responses. Of these four, we have already spent a fair amount of time on ceremonies. The other three are, as might have been quite reasonably expected, are old age, children’s education and emergencies. Once again, at the risk of repetition, I want to emphasize the point that, for all these requirements, the Indian financial system currently offers a variety of products and services, but threshold requirements apply, which means that many lower income households whose motivations are the same as those of more affluent ones cannot access the same products and services. One could argue that there are no products and services which can meet these requirements with commercial viability. But this is a proposition that needs to be explored and, hopefully, proved wrong. The essential business-related point I would like to make with reference to savings decisions and motivations is that they must be seen in a dynamic context. In an economy that is growing rapidly, households are also equally rapidly evolving in terms of their consumption and savings choices and motivations. As many successful marketers have demonstrated, a life-cycle approach to the consumer is an extremely effective long-term strategy. A significant proportion of low-income households today will achieve middle income status in a few years. Their choices then will partly be dictated by their experience with service providers during their transition. Service providers who get customers in first, even at relatively low levels of activity, provided that they take a forward view of the relationship, can realistically look at 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches benefitting from the increasing affluence and greater and more complex financial needs of those very customers.  (d) Borrowing motivations Let me now turn to the last of the consumer characteristics that I have on my list. Slide 12 presents data on the reasons why people borrow money. Considering all loans taken by the households surveyed, over 50 per cent of rural households and about 45 per cent of urban households report that they borrowed money to deal with financial and medical emergencies. Business purposes were also significant, but not dominant. Of course, since lending money to enable people to deal with such situations is not the conventional activity of banking or most other formal financial service providers, it is unlikely that this requirement would be met by this category of lenders. The data in Slide 12 validate this conjecture; significantly, the proportion of households who borrowed for these purposes from institutional sources was far less than those who borrowed from non-institutional sources. In fact, what may come as a surprise is how many households actually borrowed from institutional sources for the purpose of dealing with emergencies! This suggests to me that the capacity to meet these requirements exists. Again, it comes back to the question of whether the right kinds of products exist to expand the coverage to households that are currently excluded from access to credit.  IV. Key messages I have tried to introduce into the discussion a number of attributes of consumer behaviour and motivations, which I believe are important inputs into a devising a strategy for commercially viable financial inclusion. These related broadly to the (i) the sources of livelihood of the potential consumer segment for financial inclusion (ii) how they spend their money, particularly on non-regular items (iii) their choices and motivations with respect to saving and (iv) their motivations for borrowing and their ability to access institutional sources of finance for their basic requirements. In discussing each of these sets of issues, I spent some time drawing implications for business strategies by financial service providers. In this section, I will briefly highlight, at the risk of some repetition, what I consider to be the key messages of the lecture. The first message emerges from the preliminary discussion on the current scenario on financial inclusion, both at the aggregate level and across income categories. The data suggest that even savings accounts, the most basic financial service, has low penetration amongst the lowest income households. I want to emphasize that we are not talking about Below Poverty Line households only; Rs. 50,000 per year in 2007, while perhaps not quite middle class, was certainly quite far above the official poverty line. The same concerns about lack of penetration amongst the lowest income group for loans also arise. To reiterate the question that arises from these data patterns: is this because people can’t access banks or other service providers or because they don’t see value in doing so? This question needs to be addressed if an effective inclusion strategy is to be developed.  The second message is that the process of financial inclusion is going to be incomplete and inadequate if it is measured only in terms of new accounts being opened and operated. From the employment and earnings patterns, there emerged a sense that better access to various kinds of financial services would help to increase the livelihood potential of a number of occupational categories, which in turn would help reduce the income differentials between these and more regular, salaried jobs. The fact that a huge proportion of the Indian workforce is either self-employed or in the casual labour segment suggests the need for products that will make access to credit easier to the former, while offering opportunities for risk mitigation and consumption smoothing to the latter. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 The third message emerges from the analysis of expenditure patterns is the significance of infrequent, but quantitatively significant expenditures like ceremonies and medical costs. Essentially, dealing with these kinds of expenditures requires either low-cost insurance options, supported by a correspondingly low-cost health care system or a low level systematic investment plan, which allows even poor households to create enough of a buffer to deal with these demands as and when they arise. As has already been pointed out, it is not as though such products are not being offered by domestic financial service providers. It is really a matter of extending them to make them accessible to a very large number of lower income households, with a low and possibly uncertain ability to maintain regular contributions.  The fourth message comes strongly from the motivations to both save and borrow, which, as one might reasonably expect, significantly overlap with each other. It is striking that the need to deal with emergencies, both financial and medical, plays such an important role in both sets of motivations. The latter is, as has been said, amenable to a low-cost, mass insurance scheme, with the attendant service provision. However, the former, which is a theme that recurs through the entire discussion on consumer characteristics, certainly suggests that the need for some kind of income and consumption smoothing product is a significant one in an effective financial inclusion agenda. This, of course, raises broader questions about the role of social safety nets, which offer at least some minimum income security and consumption smoothing. How extensive these mechanisms should be, how much security they should offer and for how long and how they should be financed are fundamental policy questions that go beyond the realm of the financial sector. However, to the extent that risk mitigation is a significant financial need, it must receive the attention of any meaningful financial inclusion strategy, in a way which provides practical answers to all these three questions. The fifth and final message is actually the point I began the lecture with. It is the critical importance of the principle of commercial viability. Every aspect of a financial inclusion strategy – whether it is the design of products and services or the delivery mechanism – needs to be viewed in terms of the business opportunity that it offers and not as a deliverable that has been imposed on the service provider. However, it is also important to emphasize that commercial viability need not necessarily be viewed in terms of immediate cost and profitability calculations. Like in many other products, financial services also offer the prospect of a life-cycle model of marketing. Establishing a relationship with first-time consumers of financial products and services offers the opportunity to leverage this relationship into a wider set of financial transactions as at least some of these consumers move steadily up the income ladder. In fact, in a high growth scenario , a high proportion of such households are likely to move quite quickly from very basic financial services to more and more sophisticated ones. In other words, the commercial viability and profitability of a financial inclusion strategy need not be viewed only from the perspective of immediacy. There is a viable investment dimension to it as well. V. Conclusion The basic premise of this lecture was that we need to take fully into account various behavioural and motivational attributes of potential consumers for a financial inclusion strategy to succeed. In this sense, it is no different from any business strategy development exercise. Where it does differ though, is in terms of significance. There is clearly an enormous gap when it comes to access to and delivery of financial services. Closing this gap will contribute to enhanced livelihoods through higher productivity, and an improved ability to deal with occasional, lumpy expenditures as well as cushioning the impact of financial emergencies. This is not a matter of a few hundred or a few thousand consumers, but an issue of hundreds of millions. The social costs and consequences of badly conceived and executed inclusion strategy could be enormous. We need to bring all relevant knowledge and experience into the development of the strategy in order to maximize the possibility of it 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches succeeding. Understanding what the potential consumer needs and why he needs it is one such knowledge input; indeed, I have tried to argue, a critically important one. I would like to end by thanking Sastra University for inviting me to deliver this prestigious lecture, to the management of the City Union Bank for their very generous hospitality during our visit to Thanjavur and Kumbakonam and to all of you for coming here to listen to the lecture.        
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9    
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Mark Carney: The paradigm shifts – global imbalances, policy, and Latin America Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the Inter-American Development Bank, Calgary, 26 March 2011. *      *      * Introduction Globalization is the opportunity and the challenge of our age. It has the potential to lift billions out of poverty, vastly expand economic prospects, and develop a more diverse and resilient global economy. However, globalization also brings stresses, so policy-makers will need both discipline and new frameworks to realise its promise. The financial crisis has accelerated the shift in the world’s economic centre of gravity. Emerging-market economies (EMEs) now account for almost three-quarters of global growth – up from just one-third at the turn of the millennium.  Although this paradigm shift to a multipolar world is fundamentally positive, it is also disruptive. Labour, capital and commodity markets are changing rapidly. The effective global labour supply quadrupled between 1980 and 2005 and may double again by 2050.1 Cross-border capital flows have exploded, growing at a rate almost seven times the peak during the last wave of globalization.2 Commodity markets are in the midst of a supercycle.  Large imbalances are a natural consequence of globalization. These imbalances can be good or bad. Good imbalances are the product of capital moving to where it can be best used, production being reoriented and expanded, and the economic cycle becoming more commodity intensive.  Bad imbalances arise when countries resist or misread the consequences of this shift of activity and demand from advanced to emerging economies.  Indeed, the response to such pressures will influence the resiliency of the globalization process itself. In the run-up to the crisis, poor policy choices reinforced vulnerabilities. Countries frustrated exchange rate adjustment, and the recipients of large capital inflows squandered them. Price stability was achieved, but financial stability was forfeited. The result was unbalanced, unsustainable growth, culminating in economic catastrophe. It is not clear that the commitment to open markets will withstand a repeat of such mistakes. Today, I will concentrate on two current policy challenges for our region that could prove decisive:  1) maintaining price stability in the face of a major commodity shock, and 2) maximizing the return to large, volatile capital flows. In each case, there is a risk that policy-makers downplay longer-term forces when setting short-term policy. As a consequence, destabilizing global imbalances could re-emerge and undermine the globalization process itself.                                                  1  Adjusted for the percentage of the population in the traded-goods sector. See M. Carney, “The Implications of Globalization for the Economy and Public Policy,” speech delivered to the British Columbia Chamber of Commerce and the Business Council of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, 18 February 2008. 2  Cross-border capital flows were roughly 20 per cent of global GDP before the crisis, compared with 3 per cent at the turn of the last century. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Commodities Major commodity exporters, including Canada and much of Latin America, are experiencing a large, positive terms-of-trade shock (see Appendix, Chart 1). Real prices for energy and metals have been well above their long-term averages for more than five years, and real food prices are now at their highest levels in twenty years (Chart 2).3  The question is whether such strength will persist.  From a policy perspective, it matters whether prices are being primarily driven by demand, supply or speculation. In general, supply shocks and speculative overshoots tend to be short lived and can be looked through. Demand shocks are different. While there have been supply disruptions due to geopolitical unrest and natural disasters, and while speculative pressures have reinforced, on occasion, the direction of fundamentally driven price moves, the Bank’s view is that a large, sustained increase in demand is the primary driver of this boom. The breadth and durability of the commodity rally underscores this conclusion.  This surge in demand is the result of rapid growth in the emerging world, particularly in Asia (Chart 3). With convergence still a long way off, the demand for commodities can be expected to remain robust for some time. Based on the experiences of Japan in the 1960s and Korea in the 1980s, emerging Asia’s energy and metals intensities should gain momentum.4  Rapid urbanization underpins this growth. Since 1990, the number of people living in cities in China and India has risen by nearly 500 million, the equivalent of housing the entire population of Canada 15 times over (Chart 4). This process can be expected to continue for decades, since urbanization rates in China and India are currently 30 to 50 percentage points below those in Brazil, Mexico and Canada.  In parallel, a massive new middle class is being formed. The world’s middle class is growing by 70 million people each year and will double to 40 per cent of the global population by the end of this decade.5 The ramifications will be considerable for a wide range of commodities, through higher protein diets, refrigeration and travel. Whether it is cars, airports or meat, consumption and development levels in major emerging markets are currently fractions of those in advanced economies (Table 1). Even though history teaches that all booms are finite, this one could go on for some time.  With the demand story intact, the profile of commodity prices will turn on supply. Time will tell whether new supply will be sufficient, and whether consumption converges at current Western levels or whether price signals and serious attempts at reducing carbon intensity will ultimately force a more sustainable equilibrium. The fundamental issue is that the relationship between U.S. economic activity and commodity prices has changed, and that this is complicating the policy response for exporters and importers alike (Chart 5).                                                  3  In all, 18 of 23 commodities in the Bank of Canada’s commodity index are above their long-term average. 4  Current per capita income is between $5,000–$10,000 per capita for China, Thailand, and Malaysia. Commodity demand should continue to grow rapidly before slowing once income levels reach about  $15,000–$20,000 per capita. See C. Cheung and S. Morin, “The Impact of Emerging Asia on Commodity Prices,” Bank of Canada Working Paper 2007-55. Adding to the potential momentum is the fact that per capita income levels remain below $5,000 in India, Indonesia and the Philippines. 5  McKinsey & Company, “The Great Rebalancing,” June 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Policy implications  All IDB member countries are currently facing some similar challenges, which are best addressed with an eye to these longer-term trends. First, large and persistent changes in relative prices will encourage substantial structural adjustment in all of our economies. In past decades, commodity-price increases were often driven by strong growth in the G-3 economies. More recently, however, higher commodity prices have been generated, in large part, from strong growth in emerging markets, particularly in China (Chart 6). Consequently, commodity importers in our region have had to face the adverse implications of higher commodity prices, without the cushion of a demand boost from stronger growth in G-3 economies. Similarly, there is greater pressure on the manufacturing sectors of commodity exporters coming from the strength in their exchange rates, again in the absence of traditional demand from the G-3. Adjustment is inevitable – and it will be substantial. In general, such changes should not be frustrated, but rather facilitated by policies that enhance economic flexibility.  Second, all countries need to maintain price stability in an environment where G-3 monetary policy cannot be expected to lead the global cycle. As I will discuss in a moment, a key mistake would be to let fears of capital inflows and exchange rate pressures dominate the imperative of domestic price stability.  It is paramount that monetary policy everywhere acts to ensure that inflation expectations remain in line with medium-term policy objectives. Everything else being equal, higher commodity prices usually necessitate higher policy interest rates. The degree of the policy response depends on many factors, including the reasons behind the price increases, the expected persistence of the shock, and whether a country is a net exporter. Policy-makers also need to weigh the importance of commodities in the consumption basket (Chart 7), the historic experience with price pass-through, and how well anchored are inflation expectations.  It bears consideration that the terms-of-trade shock could be even more disruptive. Most of us have become heavily reliant on manufactured goods and components from China (Table 2). For example, in Canada, partly as a consequence of Chinese trade, goods price inflation has run about 1 per cent for the past decade. However, with commodity prices rising sharply in China, second-round effects on manufactured goods pricing are possible, due to rising wages and input costs and, potentially, exchange rate appreciation. Finally, it has to be considered that the process of globalization, with its large-scale displacement, may actually reduce potential growth in advanced economies during the adjustment phase.6  Canada has learned through long experience that the role of the exchange rate is crucial. For commodity exporters, improvements in the terms of trade tend to put upward pressure on the exchange rate. When such movements in the nominal exchange rate are limited, wages and a range of other prices respond. This is a more disruptive form of adjustment that can have profound implications for employment, financial stability and competitiveness – the very objectives exchange rate management seeks to protect.  Recent experience suggests that many emerging economies are taking the real adjustment through higher domestic inflation (Chart 8), in part because of concerns over capital inflows. To the extent that the nominal exchange rate responds, it helps offset the expansionary effect of the increase in investment, and gives price signals to the production sector for labour and capital to shift to the areas of higher return.                                                  6  L. Bini Smaghi, “The Challenges of Surveillance and Coordination,” speech delivered at the International Symposium of the Banque de France, Paris, 4 March 2011. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Capital flows will move to hasten that adjustment, which leads to the second policy challenge.  Capital flows  Capital can be expected to flow, on a net basis, from advanced economies towards higher expected risk-adjusted returns in emerging-market economies. Such was the case during the last wave of globalization at the turn of the twentieth century when Canada, then an emerging economy, ran current account deficits averaging 7 per cent of GDP over three decades. The scale of the potential reallocation today is significant. Investors from advanced economies are substantially overweight their home markets: advanced economies represent half of current global GDP, but their equity market capitalization is nearly three-quarters of the global capital market.7 A reallocation of 5 per cent of advanced economy portfolios to emerging markets translates into a potential flow of $2 trillion or $400 billion to Latin America.8 This is eight times current annual flows to Latin America.9  Paradoxically, despite these secular forces, emerging markets are currently net capital exporters (Chart 9). In effect, there is a large recycling of capital: private capital flows from advanced to emerging economies are being more than offset by official outflows.10 Central banks now hold more than 40 per cent of U.S. Treasuries, which delays adjustment at home and abroad by muting price signals in both locations. Two dynamics are particularly important. First, the expansion of gross capital flows has dwarfed that of net flows. For example, since the 1990s the increase in gross flows into and out of the United States has expanded three times more rapidly than the increase in net flows.11 Emerging economies are having difficulties absorbing large private flows, while advanced economies have often misallocated the surge in yield-insensitive gross claims. In both cases, the scale of movements and the impact of any reversal have important ramifications for financial stability. Second, in the face of stimulative G-3 monetary policy and limited nominal exchange rate appreciation by China, many emerging markets are trying to forestall capital inflows and delay necessary monetary tightening. This in turn is feeding domestic demand, which drives commodity prices up further and leads to more generalized overheating. Third-best policies, including capital controls under the trendy guise of macroprudential policy, are being pursued. Arguably, Latin America is the region most affected by these pressures and, therefore, it has the greatest interest in durable solutions.                                                  7  Advanced economies represent half of current global GDP on a purchasing-power-parity basis. Advanced equity market capitalization should be somewhat overweight in its GDP representation, given the large exposure of global companies to emerging-market growth. 8  These calculations assume that emerging-market investors hold only a fraction of existing market capitalization in advanced economies. 9  The conundrum for EMEs is that the more they reform, the more they encourage these inflows. 10  Supplemented by EME private diversification flows. 11  J. Caruana, “Capital Flows to the Emerging Market Economies: A Perspective on Policy Challenges,” speech delivered at the SEACEN Governors’ Conference, Colombo, Sri Lanka, 24–26 February 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 G-20 initiatives Two related G-20 initiatives can help spring this trap: the Mutual Assessment Process (MAP) and the reform of the international monetary system. The MAP process stresses countries’ shared responsibility to ensure that their policies are consistent domestically and globally. This process will establish indicative guidelines and benchmarks to identify instances of external imbalances. Then, using these guidelines, G-20 members will undertake a mutual assessment of their monetary, exchange rate, fiscal, financial and structural policies.  The immediate focus is to identify short-term policy measures to address global imbalances. These will likely include:   financial sector repair and reform;  timely fiscal consolidation;  structural reforms to enhance growth; and  more market-determined exchange rates over time. Transition to a new international monetary system  The G-20’s second imperative is the refounding of the international monetary system, which has degenerated into an increasingly dysfunctional hybrid of fixed and floating regimes.  There are two options for redress. The first is to enforce the current rules of the game – as codified in the articles of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Trade Organization (WTO). While this is possible, enforcing behaviour through trade sanction is obviously extremely divisive and runs the risk of reversing the globalization process itself. A more constructive approach – favoured by Canada – is to renew the rules of the game so that country actions are both predictable and mutually consistent. Given the scale of transition under way, in our view, it makes sense to agree to the long-term objective and then implement short-term measures consistent with a transition to it.  Our long-term objective should be a well-functioning international monetary system that delivers sufficient nominal stability in exchange rates and domestic prices, with timely adjustment to shocks and structural change. All countries should accept their responsibilities for promoting an open, flexible and resilient system. This responsibility includes recognizing the spillovers between economies and financial systems and working to mitigate them. Fundamentally, it means adopting coherent macro policies and allowing real exchange rates to adjust to achieve external balance over time. Indeed, in a multipolar world of global capital and trade, all systemically important countries and common economic areas should move towards flexible market-based exchange rates.  These objectives will not be realised overnight. However, informal commitments to improve the functioning of the current system could be implemented to guide current policy while maintaining momentum towards the longer-term vision. Short-term measures  First, as Bob Zoellick has suggested, major advanced economies should reaffirm the G-7 norm for flexible exchange rates without intervention, unless special circumstances warrant 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches and the action is agreed.12 The reality is that unilateral intervention seldom is effective without surrendering monetary sovereignty and control over domestic prices. By reaffirming this principle, advanced economies could set the stage for a broader accord among all systemically important economies. Last week’s concerted intervention by the G-7 provides an example of these principles in action. The circumstances were clearly exceptional: movements in the yen had become disorderly, volatility was excessive, and there were potential adverse implications for economic and financial stability. To address these problems and in response to a request of the Japanese authorities, the G-7 acted in concert in foreign exchange markets for the first time since 2000. Second, the Bank believes there could be value in agreeing to an informal code of conduct for capital flows as a precursor to renewing the more formal Articles of Agreement of the IMF.13 Certain guidelines – in the form of a notional checklist or decision tree – could prove useful to maximize the cost-benefit of capital controls, from both national and global perspectives.  Capital controls may be appropriate in certain circumstances. Sudden capital inflows raise legitimate concerns about currency overvaluation, overheating and, conversely, the consequences of sudden stops. This is especially true for countries with less-developed capital markets and weak institutional infrastructures, where the capacities to absorb and benefit from large inflows are limited. However, we should all recognise that short-term expediency could take precedence, and eventually turn back the clock on an open, flexible system. This risk grows more tangible as emerging economies become more systemically important. A Code of Conduct for Capital Flows could include the following four elements to guide countries during the transition to the long-term system: 1. A clear objective to promote a sustainable and effective flow of private capital between economies in order to facilitate economic growth and prosperity through the efficient allocation of resources, specialization in production, and diversification of risk. 2. A decision framework that recognizes that capital controls should not be the first option. They are a complement to, not a substitute for, macro and macroprudential policies. Consideration should always be given to adjusting monetary, exchange rate and fiscal policy, consistent with budgetary and inflation conditions.  3. Principles to guide the design of measures:  a) Temporary. Time-limiting measures recognize that capital controls create distortions, adverse market reactions and negative externalities, as well as the reality that, over time, controls are often evaded. This principle is also consistent with the positive longer-term fundamentals that are driving capital flows to emerging market economies. b) Targeted. Measures should address specific vulnerabilities, such as Korea’s restrictions on foreign exchange derivative contracts.                                                  12  R. Zoellick, “A Monetary Regime for a Multipolar World,” Financial Times, 17 February 2011. 13  Specifically, Articles IV and VIII should be clarified with respect to country responsibilities for exchange rate adjustment. The Fund’s role in the surveillance of the capital account and members’ obligations in the surveillance process could also be better specified and resourced. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 c) Transparent. An example is Chile’s pre-announced buildup of foreign exchange reserves. Measures should be consistent with the principles and should be peer reviewed.  4. Recognition of the responsibilities of capital-exporting countries to monitor the risks run by host institutions with respect to currency mismatches, maturity transformation and leverage. The Financial Stability Board’s current initiatives for both the formal and shadow banking sectors are central in these regards. Conclusion  The shift to a multipolar economy is having a profound impact on capital flows and a broad range of relative prices, including commodities.  Imbalances are the result of advanced and emerging economies not recognising this new paradigm. Some countries are postponing monetary tightening in the hope that old relationships reassert. Others are resisting capital inflows by misreading the secular for the cyclical. All appear to be underestimating the scale of what is happening.  Therein lies the risk of another crisis. Avoiding it requires leadership, purpose and legitimacy.  The G-20 is well suited to building global economic co-operation, as the response to the crisis demonstrated. Resolving global imbalances is a much more complicated challenge. Countries will need to draw on a sense of common analysis and shared destiny to strike what Mervyn King has termed a “Grand Bargain” across a host of policies.  The G-20 cannot, however, relaunch the global monetary system by itself. The G-20 can create momentum: it can take important interim steps; but ultimately, to be legitimate, a new system will require the concurrence of all IMF member countries. Thus, the perspectives of member countries of the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) on the appropriate code of conduct for capital flows and on financial reforms are essential. The stakes are very high. The current dynamics of commodity prices and capital flows create major risks to financial stability and sustainable growth across our region. When large economies with undervalued exchange rates keep their currencies from appreciating, others feel pressured to follow. Over time, macro policy becomes contorted: exchange rates more inflexible, monetary policy more hesitant, and economic controls more prevalent. The collective impact of this behaviour risks inflation and asset bubbles in emerging economies and, over time, subpar global growth.  Neither outcome is in the global interest. Neither is consistent with IDB principles.  IDB countries can help lead a co-operative approach by their example and influence. The transformation of Latin America during the past decade has been nothing short of remarkable. Greater reliance on policy frameworks, enhanced economic flexibility and decisive action have fed superior macroeconomic outcomes and economic resilience. During coming challenges, others would do well to draw on the lessons so evident in this room of the virtues of openness and sound domestic policies. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches Appendix  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9    
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11   
12 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Peter Pang: Policies adopted by authorities in different jurisdictions with respect to international reserves Welcoming remarks by Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the International Monetary Fund Independent Evaluation Office (IEO)/Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research (HKIMR) Workshop, Hong Kong, 24 March 2011. *      *      * It is a pleasure to welcome all of you to this event co-hosted by the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research (HKIMR) and the Independent Evaluation Office of the IMF. The HKIMR, as some of you already know, is a subsidiary of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. Its objectives are to promote research on longer-term and wider policy issues of relevance to the monetary and financial development of Hong Kong and the Asia region; and to foster cooperation and cross-fertilisation of research efforts between academics, international financial institutions and the HKMA research activities.  For this reason we are particularly pleased to co-sponsor this workshop which deals with the important topic of policies adopted by authorities in different jurisdictions with respect to international reserves and with the advice the IMF gives in this regard in its consultations with policy authorities.  The accumulation of international reserves has become one of the issues at the center of debates about the functioning of the current international monetary system as well as about reforms of this system. One lesson that authorities in this part of the world drew from the financial crisis in the late 1990s was that strong policy fundamentals are not always enough to guard against the vagaries of international capital flows. A sizable cushion of international reserves is important as a buffer to guard against sudden changes in market sentiments that can lead to capital outflows and pressures on the currency.  Starting shortly after the Asian financial crisis reserves were thus accumulated in the region to build up such buffers. But holding large amounts of reserves is of course costly as they are typically invested in highly liquid assets with relatively low yields compared with some alternative uses of the funds. It is partly for this reason that authorities in the region have taken steps to create a mechanism for pooling some of their reserves in the form of the Chiang Mai initiative which started in year 2000 and its multilateral extension which was agreed on in 2010. While the size of the pool of reserves under the Chiang Mai agreement is relatively modest compared to the potential needs for some of the larger economies in the region, the importance of the agreement goes far beyond the aggregate amount of reserves involves. It reflects a desire by authorities in the region to foster financial cooperation in the region while at the same time creating arrangements which will help safe-guard financial stability. But the accumulation of reserves in the region in recent years is not only the result of a desire to build buffers against future shocks. It is also the consequence of large capital inflows into Asia in the wake of the financial crisis in the United States and Europe. Loose monetary polices in response to the subdued economic prospects in these regions as well as the strong growth performance in Asia have led to large-scale capital inflows into many economies in Asia. The reversal of such inflows could put domestic monetary and financial stability in jeopardy if they lead to overshooting of interest rates and asset prices. The recent experience of the region at the height of the global financial crisis in 2008 raised the concern that even reserves considered of very high levels in normal times may not be sufficient to cushion the 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches forces of abrupt outflows. This has led to discussions about the need to reform the international monetary system, including the creation of a global financial safety net. While I understand that the evaluation the IEO is undertaking on IMF advice and country perspectives on international reserves will not deal with all the questions related to reform of the international monetary system, I am sure it will provide very useful inputs into this process. I am therefore very pleased that the HKIMR and the IEO has brought together such a distinguished group for this workshop, and I look forward to very interesting and fruitful discussions. With these words of welcome I now turn the floor over to Mr. Moises Schwartz, the Director of the IEO to set the scene for the discussion of the workshop. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Alan Bollard: Where we are going with macro- and microprudential policies in New Zealand Speech by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, with Messrs Bernard Hodgetts and Mike Hannah, at the Basel III Conference, Sydney, 25 March 2011. *      *      * Thanks to Mike Hannah and Bernard Hodgetts for assistance in preparing this speech and to Grant Spencer, Toby Fiennes, Michael Reddell, Yuong Ha and Anella Munro for useful comments. Introduction Following the Global Financial Crisis, there has been general acceptance of the need for central banks and financial regulators to adopt a greater “macro-prudential” orientation to their supervision of financial systems and institutions. While the objectives of prudential policy are usually systemic, the policies have focused on ensuring the balance sheets of individual institutions are robust to shocks. The crisis showed that this micro-prudential approach can sometimes miss important system-wide financial risks. So, policymakers are increasingly focussing on the resilience of the financial system as a whole, and in particular on the capacity for pro-cyclical lending behaviour to amplify the macroeconomic cycle in a destabilising manner. I will return to these concepts and issues later. There is currently considerable interest in macro-prudential instruments – policy tools that might be used to promote a more stable and resilient financial system and help smooth the credit cycle, reducing the risk of boom-and-bust cycles. These tools would take the form of specific prudential requirements placed on the balance sheets of banks or other financial institutions, such as capital requirements that vary over time, or restrictions on lending like loan-to-value caps.  This is not to suggest that micro-prudential policy is unimportant or that existing tools cannot be enhanced. On the contrary, a strong micro-prudential framework is essential for a robust financial system and remains at the heart of our efforts to maintain stability in the financial system. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (the Basel Committee) is now close to completing a major strengthening of the micro-prudential framework, while keeping system-wide stability objectives firmly in mind. Micro-prudential policies/tools The Basel Committee has developed and released new global regulatory standards for bank capital adequacy and liquidity, as endorsed by G20 leaders at their November 2010 summit. While the frameworks are now broadly set, further work is being undertaken on some areas of detail, in particular with regard to the liquidity standards.  In addition, work continues on related international financial reform issues such as measures for systemically important banks, and reviews of international accounting standards, the Basel Committee’s Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision, and the international standards for financial market infrastructures. The Reserve Bank of New Zealand is not compelled to adopt the full package of new global standards. While we are very supportive of strengthening global standards for bank capital adequacy and liquidity, we are likely to adapt aspects of the standards to New Zealand conditions or take a different view on some matters (for instance in relation to the leverage ratio). 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches We are currently in the process of assessing the potential impact of the new Basel 3 standards in the New Zealand context, but are yet to make final decisions about the measures we will adopt. We do not propose to “lead the world”, but just as most jurisdictions are likely to implement Basel 3 ahead of the Basel Committee’s timeline, we would expect to do likewise. We are also likely to continue to implement our new liquidity policy according to our existing timetable (which is some years ahead of the Basel 3 timeline). While our liquidity policy is different in form to Basel 3, the substance is similar, and we do not propose to modify the policy in the near term.  There remains some uncertainty about how our liquidity policy will align with the global standards and with the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority’s liquidity requirements. We will be monitoring international developments and engaging closely with APRA as this process unfolds. With regard to the Basel 3 leverage ratio, it is not risk-based, so it can give a misleading picture of risk, and a single leverage ratio implies that one size fits all banks, which is not credible. However, we will explore practical issues with the ratio prior to making a final decision on this. More generally, the Reserve Bank remains committed to making improvements to its existing prudential policy framework, given the importance for both institutional and wider financial system stability. With our major banks accredited to use their own risk measurement models for Basel 2 capital calculations, we put particular emphasis on ensuring that those capital models are calibrated to plausible economic downturn scenarios, rather than the relatively benign credit loss conditions of the past decade.  Macro-prudential/financial policies/tools Objectives We have always had system stability as our objective for prudential policies, and the institutional focus of those policies has worked well in practice. The conservative and through-the-cycle approach to capital adequacy, including Basel 2 implementation, is an example of how our micro-prudential stance has enabled our financial system to flourish and to be resilient through the recent crisis. We believe this approach and our micro settings are effective in doing the job almost all of the time. However, by its nature, micro-prudential supervision has not always paid sufficient regard to macro-financial interactions. The aim now is to design prudential policies with macro-effects firmly in mind. The challenge for researchers is to identify policy instruments that can actually be used in a real-world setting. This involves careful analysis of what individual tools might or might not be able to achieve, the channels through which they would be expected to work, and the potential costs associated with using them.  The case for these new instruments rests mainly on their scope to build greater financial system resilience to the risks associated with the extremes of the credit cycle. In addition, some tools may have the ability to directly dampen the credit cycle. Some tools are potentially more effective in achieving the first of these objectives than the second. While a range of instruments is being viewed enthusiastically by some commentators, we must be careful about unintended consequences. The case for any particular instrument needs to be informed by a full analysis of its likely effectiveness in a real-world setting, along with the associated costs of deploying it.  It is important here to be clear whether tools would be aimed at building resilience and/or dampening excessive credit growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 We also need to think about policies that address the cross-sectional dimension as well as the time dimension. In other words, the risk exposures and interconnections between institutions at any point in time (the “cross-section” dimension), as well as the tendency for financial institutions, households and businesses to become over-exposed during an upswing, and excessively cautious in the subsequent downturn (the “time dimension”). There are also numerous design issues. Would the instruments be set by rules or discretion? Would they be set once and left alone or varied over the course of the economic cycle? Or would they be deployed only in exceptional circumstances? What governance arrangements are needed?  We need to be very conscious of the costs of using macro-prudential tools when considering whether to use them. Some tools have the potential to damage financial system efficiency. They could also result in disintermediation (that is, promote lending through channels other than those affected by the restrictions) or cause other unintended or undesirable consequences. During the period from the 1960s to the 1980s, New Zealand and other countries used a range of prudential measures to assist in the control of money and credit, some of which look rather similar to the macro-prudential instruments currently under consideration. Some of these tools, including the system of reserve asset ratios that applied to the trading banks in New Zealand, ultimately proved quite ineffective and led to the  re-routing of financial activities outside of the banking system. So history reminds us of the need for caution. Above all, macro-prudential policy should not be viewed as a panacea for macro-economic imbalances. When seeking solutions to these imbalances, we also need to consider the role of the tax system and the broader regulatory environment. Where clear distortions in these areas exist, we need to correct them in lieu of adopting macro-prudential solutions. Tax distortions in the area of investor housing contributed to an overheated housing market in New Zealand during the last cycle, and the Reserve Bank was strongly supportive of tax changes made in this area last year. Potential macro-prudential instruments for New Zealand Over the past year, the Reserve Bank has been assessing a range of macro-prudential instruments that might have a role to play in contributing to broader financial stability in New Zealand.1 As in other countries, credit growth in New Zealand is currently weak, so we have not felt a pressing need to implement such tools. We want the credit process to be able to support economic growth. However, there have certainly been periods in our history where we have experienced unsustainably strong credit growth and asset price cycles, and we have seen the damaging effects of these, both on the economy and the financial system. We will certainly face similar developments in the future, so we want to develop our macro-prudential toolkit now to enhance our ability to deal with them when the time comes. Rapid credit and asset price growth have amplified the general economic cycle and have made monetary policy’s task of controlling inflation more difficult. We have seen the difficulties that can arise when interest rates alone are used. The collateral damage to the net export sector from the high New Zealand dollar exchange rate during the previous economic upswing prompted a search for potential tools to assist monetary policy. Now, in light of the broader and significant social and macroeconomic costs arising from financial system distress in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, there is greater will to consider additional tools.                                                  1  For further discussion on macro-prudential instruments see Ha and Hodgetts (2011). 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches We believe several instruments may be useful from this perspective and could potentially form a useful part of the Bank’s macro-prudential toolkit in the future. The instruments we have been considering include credit-based measures and liquidity and capital buffers.  We have been analysing these policy options in a New Zealand context, undertaking some simulations and other calculations to help establish their likely effectiveness.  Our expectation is that we would use these tools infrequently. In this regard, the Basel Committee has suggested that some countries might only use the counter-cyclical capital buffer once every 10 to 20 years when faced with exceptionally strong credit growth. We think this is a useful perspective. Related to this we would have a preference for standards that can be set and to work through a cycle where possible, that is act as an automatic stabiliser rather than a discretionary stabiliser. This is an important learning from fiscal policy. While our work is ongoing, we would offer the following preliminary conclusions: Credit-based tools A range of credit-based tools has been used by the emerging economies, especially in Asia, for many years. They include a wide range of regulated caps, targets and limits. These tools are receiving increased attention by the advanced economies. Of these tools, we have looked specifically at loan-to-value restrictions. Loan-to-Value restrictions Loan-to-Value restrictions (or LVRs) have been used by a number of countries in response to excessive credit growth and overheated housing markets and, on balance, appear to have met with some success. Such a tool could be particularly useful in circumstances when funding and credit margins move counter-cyclically, and so reduce the effectiveness of liquidity and capital requirements in braking credit growth during a boom. Another advantage would be that an LVR restriction could be imposed and enforced relatively swiftly, given that banks would require longer operational lead times to meet higher liquidity and capital requirements. However, the use of non-price or administrative restrictions is subject to greater long-term enforcement and disintermediation risks. Moreover, we are not aware of any instances where LVR restrictions have been applied to sectors other than housing. Accounting-based tools Expected loss provisioning Expected loss provisioning is a return to the more forward-looking (and less pro-cyclical) standards of the 1990s, where general provisions may be based on the expected loss over the life of a portfolio of loans, rather than current loss experience. The two international accounting boards – the IASB and the FASB – have each published proposed models for expected loss accounting and the two boards have since been working to align these proposals. A return to a system of expected loss provisioning in due course can be expected to play its part in contributing to a less pro-cyclical financial system. Liquidity tools Core Funding Ratio The Core Funding Ratio is a tool that can help promote greater financial system resilience by requiring banks to fund credit using more stable sources than they might choose in the absence of the requirement. This discipline is particularly desirable during periods of rapid credit growth, when recourse to relatively cheap short-term wholesale funding rather than more stable longer term funding is more likely. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 As a tool to actively lean against excessive credit growth, our simulations suggest that the Core Funding Ratio could, in some circumstances, play a useful supplementary stabilising role by requiring banks to always maintain a proportion of core funding which is typically more expensive than shorter-term wholesale funding. Alternatively, the Core Funding Ratio could be used as a counter-cyclical policy tool. Although the Core Funding Ratio could be a less effective anchor on credit growth during a global boom (when funding spreads become compressed), it would still be effective in its primary role of ensuring that banks resort to more stable funding sources. Capital-based tools Countercyclical Capital Buffers A Countercyclical Capital Buffer is a further potential tool for building resilience in the face of excessive credit growth, which could be very beneficial during the subsequent downswing. It has also been suggested that these buffers might help to dampen the credit cycle directly. However, our calculations suggest it would have only a small dampening effect on the upswing of the credit cycle through its effect on the cost of funds (unless one makes extreme assumptions about the size of the counter cyclical buffer or the market cost of capital). Sectoral risk-weight adjustments Sectoral risk weights could be adjusted to boost capital requirements for lending to a particular sector, over and above that calculated under the existing Basel 2 framework. While sectoral capital buffers would offer scope to more closely target those sectors subject to rapid credit growth, we have found in simulations that the use of such buffers is likely to have only a modest effect on the pricing of credit for the affected sectors, unless dramatic adjustments are imposed. In principle, sectoral risk weights, generated by Basel II through-the-cycle risk models, should already reflect the risks of lending to the sector, including the risk of a cyclical downturn. Accordingly, we must, in the first instance, focus carefully on the integrity of the risk models used to support Basel 2, before contemplating additional overlays. In recent years, we have sought improvements to the banks’ Basel II risk models in New Zealand in key areas such as housing and agriculture, when it has become clear that risk assessments have been overly optimistic.  Moral suasion The potency of the tools we have considered as instruments to affect the credit cycle could be enhanced by a “moral suasion” effect, in addition to any direct impact via the cost of funds or credit constraints. This might mean that our simulations and calculations understate the effectiveness of the various tools to influence the credit cycle. The deployment of any tool would send an important signal to financial institutions, investors, rating agencies and the general public about the central bank’s unease about rapid credit growth, and/or the risks accumulating in the financial system. It could thus help to reinforce a change in lending and borrowing behaviour. That said, we are naturally cautious about the strength of the moral suasion effect, particularly in the context of a credit boom (where risk aversion may be low), and if the instruments themselves were not widely considered by institutions to have “bite”. Interplay of macro-financial and monetary objectives The recent focus on macro-prudential instruments has gone hand-in-hand with the debate about the role of monetary policy in leaning against asset price cycles and the accumulation of financial imbalances. We know that easy monetary policy, in the form of low interest rates, can interact with financial decisions by encouraging greater leverage. Whether monetary policy can moderate imbalances or lean against the dynamics of credit booms is a more 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches complex question. Some economists have argued that monetary policy could be used to more actively address these imbalances than in the past. This would essentially see monetary policy take on a more active role in leaning against asset market and credit cycles rather than focussing solely on medium-term inflation.  An alternative view is that macro-prudential policy instruments are the preferred means to deal with these imbalances. This has been the suggestion of Blanchard and others2 who state that the authorities now have potentially many more instruments at their disposal than they used before the crisis. They argue that the policy interest rate is a poor tool to deal with excess leverage, excessive risk taking, or deviations of asset prices from fundamentals.  Whether macro-prudential tools are actually suitable for leaning against the credit cycle and managing various imbalances ultimately rests on an analysis of the individual tools and policy experience over time. Some tools may be useful, while others may well prove to be ineffective.  Our analysis of recent credit cycles suggests that the timing and magnitude of previous credit and asset price cycles fuelled the general business cycle and made the monetary policy task more difficult. These credit cycles also resulted in growing macro imbalances and institutional resilience was weakened due to the heavy reliance on short-term wholesale funding. Though bank capital positions remained adequate throughout the past two decades, there were downside risks, given that sectoral lending looked stretched, particularly for housing and agricultural lending. To the extent that macro-prudential policy may have helped to dampen the credit cycle, there would have been less pressure on monetary policy and on the exchange rate.  While none of the macro-prudential instruments we have considered would be a silver bullet in terms of moderating the credit cycle, we believe some could make a useful contribution. It may be the case that macro-prudential tools could be employed more effectively to influence the credit cycle by adopting a multi-pronged approach where several tools are employed in tandem. For example, faced with evidence of excessive credit growth, counter-cyclical capital requirements could be used alongside increases in the Core Funding Ratio, and this might represent a more even-handed approach than focussing on either one alone. This approach might even be supplemented by a more targeted instrument such as a Loan-to-Value restriction. Using multiple tools in this fashion would also tend to reinforce the signalling effect on lenders and borrowers. Our current policy stance In addition to strengthening banks’ liquidity positions, the new Core Funding Ratio might be expected to discourage periods of very strong credit expansion. In recent years, banks have tended to fund cheaply in the offshore money markets and then use derivatives to synthesise fixed-rate term New Zealand dollar funding at a relatively low cost. The Core Funding Ratio, which is part of the new prudential liquidity policy, will drive banks to either compete for more stable funding from non-financial customers, or borrow in wholesale markets for terms longer than one year. During periods of rapid credit expansion, banks will thus not have the same ability to borrow in the offshore money markets, and will need to put increased emphasis on customer deposits and longer-term funding markets. As a result, lending rates may automatically move higher without the Reserve Bank needing to move the official cash rate to the same extent. Through these channels, the policy has the potential to have a role in assisting monetary policy, although this effect is likely to operate “at the margin”. With short-term wholesale market rates not likely to rise as much, the attractiveness of the New Zealand                                                  2  See Blanchard et al (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 dollar as a destination for “carry trade” investors could also be reduced, which is of benefit to a small open economy such as ours in terms of reducing exchange rate volatility.  Statutory powers and governance3 The prospect of new macro-prudential tools raises important governance issues. These include how decision-making about particular tools can be dovetailed with monetary policy decision-making and how policy changes should be implemented.  In New Zealand, the Reserve Bank has dual responsibilities for price stability and promoting the soundness and efficiency of the financial system through its prudential powers under the Reserve Bank Act. The powers under the Act thus provide us with the scope to adopt additional macro-prudential instruments as long as they are used with the intent of better achieving financial system stability. On the other hand, using macro-prudential tools purely for macroeconomic stabilisation purposes would require changes to current legislative arrangements. We do not believe that such an approach would be sensible.  In most instances we would expect a macro-prudential intervention aimed at moderating macro-financial imbalances to be consistent with the desired monetary policy stance. In the rare event of inconsistency with monetary policy, we would either need to hold back on macro-prudential intervention, or proceed with considerable caution. An example of this might be in a severe downturn where, on financial stability grounds, we might want to keep a capital or liquidity buffer in place for longer than usual, while also wishing to stimulate the economy.  An important issue for consideration is thus how the Reserve Bank might choose to implement macro-prudential policy in the future. The process would begin by establishing that asset market imbalances had become exceptional and unsustainable − as reflected in asset prices and/or excessive credit. Then we would determine whether this was likely to contribute to macro imbalances in the future, which warranted policy action to bolster financial sector resilience and/or moderate the credit cycle. We are continuing to work on developing a set of indicators to help identify the build-up of financial imbalances, but, in practice, there will need to be a degree of judgment in assessing whether a macro-prudential overlay is warranted based on the Bank’s financial stability objective. Next, we would assess whether a macro-prudential overlay would support monetary policy, or at least not work against it.  The nature of the imbalances would then guide the selection of the appropriate tool. Generalised credit growth and broadly-based accumulation of banking system risk would prompt consideration of tools that are broad-brush in effect, such as the Core Funding Ratio, or an aggregate Capital Buffer. Pressures emanating specifically from housing or other sectors could suggest more targeted tools such as Loan-to-Value restrictions or adjustments to risk weights for the implicated sectors. Turning to governance structures, there is no consensus in the literature whether monetary policy and prudential regulation and supervision should be combined in a central bank, or undertaken by separate institutions. A strong case can be made that central banks are best placed to be macro-prudential regulators and that centralising responsibilities within the central bank helps to avoid problems of coordination. Certainly, this appears to be the trend internationally following the crisis. Our own experience is that dealing with these policy overlaps is assisted by having a small “full-service” central bank managing monetary policy and prudential policy across all its dimensions. Nevertheless, the coordination of these functions can still pose challenges and good internal process is important.                                                  3  See Spencer, G (2010) for further discussion of the Reserve Bank’s macro-financial stability role. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches We established a Macro-Financial Committee in 2009 for the internal consideration of macro-financial issues and policies. This complements the Reserve Bank’s Monetary Policy and Financial System Oversight Committees, which consider monetary policy and micro-prudential policies respectively. The Macro-Financial Committee currently reviews indicators of financial stability, oversees production of the Bank’s Financial Stability Reports, and analyses potential new macro-prudential policy tools. If and when new macro-prudential policies are implemented, these will be reviewed and recommended to the Governor by the Macro-Financial Committee. The implications of such recommendations for micro-prudential policy and for monetary policy will be considered by the Governor and potentially referred to the other policy committees. We also regularly consult with the Treasury and Minister of Finance to keep them abreast of prudential policy developments and to glean their views. The Financial Stability Report, which is a legal requirement under our Act, requires us to explain and justify the prudential policies we adopt.  Conclusion Micro-prudential and macro-prudential policies are both important. Good micro-prudential regulation should contribute to financial system stability and we need to remain focused on improving the regulation of individual financial institutions. However, we have learned that this might not be enough to contain system-wide risks. Macro-prudential instruments that focus on system-wide imbalances can also bolster financial system resilience and possibly help to moderate credit cycles. We need to be realistic about what can be achieved. Even if credit cycles can be moderated, they will not be eliminated.  Like other countries, New Zealand has already taken steps to promote a more resilient financial system with our liquidity policy helping to shift the banking system on to a more stable funding base. In terms of using macro-prudential instruments to better manage the credit cycle, there has not been a pressing need for the use of such tools given recent weakness in the credit cycle. However, we do need to keep preparing for how we might deal with credit and asset price booms when they recur in the future. Our work so far on macro-prudential instruments suggests that we should keep our expectations modest, but we have identified several tools that we would contemplate using in the right circumstances.  The world has little practical experience with some of the macro-prudential tools currently under consideration. There will be an important learning period ahead as countries start to use these instruments and develop their implementation frameworks. We can expect our understanding of this broad area to have evolved significantly in five or ten years’ time.  References Blanchard, O, G Dell’Ariccia and P Mauro (2010), “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy”, IMF Staff Position Note 10/03, IMF February. Ha, Y and B Hodgetts (2011), “Macro-prudential instruments for New Zealand: A preliminary assessment”, paper prepared for Reserve Bank workshop on macro-prudential policy, RBNZ, 21 March 2011, available at http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research/workshops/March2011/4280799.html Spencer, G (2010), “The Reserve Bank and Macro-Financial Stability”, Reserve Bank Bulletin, 73(2), June, available at http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research/bulletin/  RBNZ (2010), Financial Stability Report, November, available at  http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/finstab/fsreport/  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Thai monetary policy in the environment of excess global liquidity Speech by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Thailand Focus 2011 – Enhancing Thailand’s Competitiveness over the Next Decades, Bangkok, 28 March 2011. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, It’s an honor to speak before you today at the Thailand Focus conference. Early this morning you heard Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva speak on Thailand’s competitiveness; and later Finance Minister Korn Chatikavanij on fiscal policy. To close the circle, I will speak on monetary policy to complete your view on the investment opportunities and prospects of the Thai economy. As international investors, I believe, you want to have a firm understanding of the country’s policy environment. This is what I will discuss today – the monetary policy options going forward in light of my assessment of the global economy and the Thai economy. The assigned title of my talk today is “Thai Monetary Policy in the Environment of Excess Global Liquidity”. Let me stress that I have a different opinion on the issue of excess global liquidity than most. Global liquidity is currently problematic in the sense that it is fluid, rather than excessive. Let me discuss why. First, let me give you my assessment of the global economy. The global economy has entered a phase of fluid global liquidity amid uneven recovery and shifting risk appetite. This phase is characterized by weak recovery in the advanced economies which prompted loose monetary policy and extraordinary monetary measures such as QE2 in the US that have resulted in artificially low interest rates in the advanced economies. These record-low interest rates encouraged investors to seek out higher return in risky emerging market assets, particularly here in Asia. In addition to the push factor of low interest rates and weak recovery in the US and Euro area, strong economic fundamentals in Asia, as reflected in growth and eventual currency gain, served as a pull factor.  As a result, capital became more “fluid” – constantly in search of yield and therefore very sensitive to news and rumors. Such search for risky yield resulted in capital inflows into EME assets last year, as you all know. These inflows contributed to the large appreciation of the Thai baht last year, and indeed other emerging markets. Here I want to emphasize that the inflows was due to a reallocation in global portfolio, or a change in portfolio choice, if you will. There is a misperception that the additional inflow of “fluid” capital stemmed from excess global liquidity. Global liquidity had not significantly increased. As a simplification, think of global liquidity as an ocean. The amount of water is finite. But unusual weather can stir otherwise calm waters into a storm. Metaphorically speaking, the new global environment of loose monetary policy and uneven recovery had caused large waves of liquidity to travel from the advanced economies to our shores. Capital inflows helped fuel emerging market growth, contributing even more to the uneven global recovery. Looking a bit further ahead, as the recovery solidifies in the advanced economies and inflation risk rises in emerging markets, diminishing growth differentials will diminish, spurring volatility in capital flows. Choppy waters may be ahead.  So I’ve given you my view of the current global environment of fluid, if not excess, liquidity. So if excess liquidity is not the main issue, what is? On top of the list we have oil prices, Japan crisis and geopolitical risk in the Middle East and how these risks interact with global fluid liquidity. Which naturally leads me to the next question – what are the global growth scenarios in such a context? 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches In our central scenario or most likely scenario, we see continued global growth. The US and Euro area shows signs of a firmer recovery, amid monetary and fiscal stimuli. Latest data show strong consumption and production. But structural obstacles do remain; for example, unemployment and real estate market issues in the US and sovereign debt problems in the Euro area. The growth prospects of Asian economies remain robust, underpinned by strong fundamentals. However, inflation risk is rising, and fast. On the tragic Japan crisis, our current view is that its impact on the global economy should prove temporary. History suggests that Japan will quickly rebuild and recover. And the main engines of global growth still remain. The current surge in oil and commodity prices also poses a challenge to global growth, though, we expect the supply shock to have a limited impact due to several reasons: first, increased oil resiliency, second, real oil prices are still lower than its peak in 2008 and third, many emerging markets administer prices to cushion the blow. There is a downside risk that this environment of global liquidity amid uneven recovery and geopolitical risk in the Middle East may threaten global growth and stability. This scenario has a low probability of happening. Nevertheless, we should be mindful of it. In this scenario, oil prices will surge upward again and remain high due to strong demand from emerging markets, partly fueled by global liquidity, and supply constraints arising from adverse weather and widespread and protracted unrest in the Middle East. Global recession may result; or worse, global stagflation. The outcome depends on how US and Euro policy makers will respond. US and European monetary policymakers are therefore between a rock and a hard place of balancing structural risks to growth and new risks to inflation. If US or Euro recovery is still fragile, policymakers may choose to keep interest rates low, prompting stagflation further down the road. The US and Euro policymakers are therefore in a race against time. Their economic stimulus packages must revitalize the economy before the negative side-effects return home to derail the recovery. In such a world, what can the Bank of Thailand do? In my view, also shared with many others’, monetary policy should be poised, pre-emptive and perceptive taking into account the central scenario, let me say more concretely what this means. First, on poise. Last year was the year of transition as the Thai economy moved out of crisis toward recovery. This year is the year of regaining poise as the balance of risks shift to inflation amid a selfsustaining recovery. A self-sustaining recovery means robust and broad-based growth. Indeed, we have seen expansion across consumption, investment, and exports. Economic performance beat expectations throughout last year. For 2011, we project 3–5 percent growth as the economy returns to its long-term average growth. The surge in oil and commodity prices is projected not to weigh on the growth prospects of the Thai economy, due to falling oil intensity and strong and broad-based growth. The oil price spike this time round is also not as severe as previous episodes. On the recent and unfortunate Japan crisis, we believe it will have a limited impact on the Thai economy. As a share of Thai exports, the Japanese market accounts for only about 10 percent. But of course, there is a risk of a protracted nuclear crisis dampening economic activity with adverse implications for global growth.  In such an economy with strong growth prospects, there is less need for policy to accommodate growth going forward but more need to be concerned about inflation. Strong domestic demand and diminishing excess capacity will surely lead to price pressure as producers compete for scarce resources. And as the recovery goes from strength to strength and inflationary pressure rises, so must the monetary policy stance regain its poise – poised at a neutral rate that is neither too accommodating nor too tight. After all, monetary stimulus can only do so much and excessive stimulus can lead to financial imbalances. Let me share my view on the surge in oil and commodity prices and, in particular, how we should respond to this challenge. The brief answer is that monetary policy stance continues to be one of regaining poise with increased vigilance over inflation. The long 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 answer is a bit more complex. The first-round supply-side shock of a rise in oil price should be allowed to pass through into domestic prices. Central banks should take care not to over-react to such price changes as they only reflect the welcome process of market re-balancing demand and supply. However, there is a possibility that a supply shock, especially if it is long-lived, may result in second-round inflation. By second-round inflation, I mean a persistent and general rise in prices. Second-round inflation may materialize if inflation expectations become unanchored and result in a change in price setting behavior fueled by strong domestic demand such that prices rise across the board – something that every central bank must pre-empt by anchoring expectations to short-circuit the vicious cost-price spiral.  So is second-round inflation a risk in our final assessment? The spike in oil and commodity prices adds to already present inflationary pressure. Monetary policy must therefore be pre-emptive, as well as poised. Since last year, domestic demand has been strong. The output gap is projected to close later this year. Capacity utilization has increased and hiring has become more difficult. These indicators point to excess demand that may lead to inflationary pressure. On top of that, a sustained and large supply shock amid strong demand is like adding fuel to the fire. It can unhinge inflation expectations. And price controls can only delay the inevitable price pressure. There is therefore an increase in the risk to second-round inflation which necessitates additional monetary response. A downside risk of high oil prices to global growth, and therefore Thai economic growth, also exists. However, in the central scenario, the balance of risks has clearly shifted to inflation. Our projections point to a significant risk that core inflation may breach the upper end of the band. As such, regaining poise by moving toward the neutral rate will allow us to pre-empt inflation risk. By now, you are probably wondering what the neutral rate is. Let me comment briefly on this mysterious topic. First, on the concept – the monetary policy stance is normal or neutral if aggregate output is at its potential output and the monetary policy is not exerting any pressure on growth and inflation but simply promoting their stability. In practice, however, determining the neutral stance of monetary policy is not an exact science. The potential output alone is never observed with precision, as it depends on our labor force productivity, our competitiveness in the global market, our demographic structure, and the degree of distortions caused by public policies and other market failures, to name a few. Uncertainties about these structural determinants make it difficult to ascertain precisely the output potential, and by implications, the neutral interest rate. Finding the neutral rate would depend on incoming information about both the demand outlook and supply-side factors. That said, I would also add that real neutral rate should be in or close to positive territory. Currently the real interest rate is negative. I have said that this year is the year of regaining poise, but regaining poise in an unbalanced world of fluid global liquidity is not easy. There may be more exchange rate volatility on the back of fluid flows. Hence, the Bank of Thailand has pursued a managed floating exchange rate policy to lessen volatility. Emerging markets in Asia have pursued varying degrees of capital controls. On this point, let me say that my view is that capital control measures are options in our toolkit but they have to be appropriately designed. The trend has shifted from controlling capital towards more friendly pre-emptive prudential regulation to manage flow types rather than barring overall flows. On a related point, there has been talk that the current environment of fluid global liquidity has led to depressed long rates in Asia, thereby complicating the conduct of monetary policy. This is indeed a possibility. However, capital inflows do not significantly weaken the interest rate tool of the Bank of Thailand. The Bank of Thailand focuses on short-term rates in conducting monetary policy as the Thai economy is bank-based and most short and long-term loans have free-floating interest rates. I have discussed how monetary policy should be poised and pre-emptive. Lastly, monetary policy must also be perceptive, or at least strive to be so, of medium and longer-term 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches issues. Let me highlight three issues: beyond normalization, financial imbalances, and global imbalances. On the first issue, what lies beyond normalization? The prospect of further tightening depends on how far the balance of risks will shift to inflation and financial imbalances. A prolonged oil price surge may trigger inflation and tightening in Thailand. The downside risk scenario of high oil prices and global recession or global stagflation may materialize, depending on the complex interplay between uneven global recovery, fluid capital, supply shocks and policymakers’ response. The global environment is constantly changing. New information and developments force us to revise our views. In such a world, being poised is particularly important. For being poised allows for a timely response as long as we are aware that we are performing a balancing act on top of the US/Euro balancing act. On the second issue, financial imbalances may foment under the radar and are difficult to detect. Granted, I have said that monetary policy should be perceptive. But as you all know there are limits to the far-sightedness of economists or central bankers as the global financial crisis so painfully showed. To paraphrase Mark Twain: “it’s not what you know, but what you don’t know that gets you.” Hence it would be wise to prepare for the worse by building resiliency from within. A framework for macroprudential policy is needed. Let me remind you that The Bank of Thailand’s mandate covers both monetary and financial stability. Monetary policy focuses primarily on price stability. Macroprudential policy should focus on financial stability. We therefore see no conflict between joint use of macroprudential and interest rate instruments as they primarily serve different objectives. Prudential measures constitute the first line of defense against financial imbalances by serving as “sand in the wheel”, so as to dampen the financial cycle, weaken procyclicality, and hence reduce the propagation of financial shocks. The interest rate tool, in comparison, is too blunt. However, as the last line of defense, monetary policy can be used to lean against the winds of excessive asset prices. The prudential measure we announced last year – a loan-to-value limit of 90 percent for condominium purchases – is an example. The measure in itself is not particularly binding; it is more significant as a pre-emptive move designed to signal policy resolve in mitigating possible build-up of real estate bubbles. Ongoing financial sector reform will also build financial sector resiliency. Thailand’s financial master plan, now in its second phase, continues, and focuses on liberalization through increased competition, raising efficiency, and strengthening the financial infrastructure. On the third issue, global current account imbalances remain problematic, as they did before the global crisis. As long as structural problems remain in the US and Euro economies and China retains its present economic policies, it is likely global imbalances will persist into the medium term with the risk of a disruptive correction down the road. Such a correction may be particularly painful for small open economies. Firmer policy coordination between large economies is needed to ensure a smooth resolution of global imbalances. Ladies and Gentlemen, I am close to the conclusion of my talk today. I have given you my assessment of the global economy, my thoughts on our policy options going forward, and how monetary policy should be poised, pre-emptive and perceptive. One theme I emphasized today was the global environment of fluid capital and its attendant risks. As a point of departure, let me address how you, as the investor, can thrive in such a world of risk while investing in Thailand. There is no easy answer. Different investment strategies face different risks. Investors themselves are the most qualified for evaluating and managing their own risk exposures given their investment opportunities. However, I can tell you that the Bank of Thailand will take care of the risks to the system, by maintaining price stability in the long-run while mitigating economic cycles in the short-run. Our flexible inflation-targeting framework targets core inflation between 0.5 and 3.0 percent while taking into account economic growth. And in this framework, the exchange rate is a managed-float and plays a supporting role as an adjustor against external shocks, leaving 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 room to the interest rate as the main instrument of price stability. The managed-float is based on three elements: volatility, competitiveness, and fundamentals. Volatility is managed so as to limit disruption to the private sector in the short-run. Competitiveness is maintained by containing excessive currency movement relative to the region. And most importantly, fundamentals must be allowed to determine exchange rate movements in the long-run. But monetary policy alone is not enough to ensure competitiveness in the long-run. For that we must have sound fiscal policy that supports our national infrastructure with prudent debt management; and structural polices that address education, productivity, and institutional frameworks. At this point, I hope we have clearly laid out the policy vision for Thailand that can serve as a basis for your investment decisions, risk management, and, ultimately, your continued partnership in the Thai economy. On that note, let me conclude my talk here, so that you can proceed with the other interesting program that will follow after this. Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Elizabeth A Duke: Changed circumstances – the impact of the financial crisis on the economic condition of workers near retirement and of business owners Remarks by Mrs Elizabeth A Duke, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Virginia Association of Economists Sandridge Lecture, Richmond, Virginia, 24 March 2011. *      *      * It is an honor to be invited to deliver the annual Sandridge lecture to the Virginia Association of Economists. This series has a long history of important discussions, including the now-famous global savings glut speech by then-Governor Ben Bernanke in 2005. I confess to being quite intimidated by this illustrious history, but I hope to heighten interest in my own contribution by offering you something prized by economists everywhere – fresh data. I am going to draw on preliminary data from the Federal Reserve’s Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) to talk about the impact of the financial crisis on the wealth of consumers and small business owners.  As the recent financial crisis unfolded, I kept coming back to two questions that seemed central to understanding the way consumers and small businesses might respond to changes in their own circumstances during the crisis and, importantly, how their attitudes toward spending and investing might change going forward.  The first question had to do with the relationship between household wealth and the saving rate. And as a baby boomer myself, I wondered whether the relationship between wealth and savings might be especially important as the baby boomers faced a change in wealth just as most were planning to retire. So I am going to talk first about how changes in wealth impacted the spending plans and risk tolerance of consumers closest to retirement.  The other question that continually arises is whether the sharp reduction in small business credit was due to changes in the supply of credit, demand for credit, or creditworthiness of potential borrowers. While the SCF data do not offer any definitive answers, they do give some previously unavailable insight into the role of creditworthiness, if we use changes in wealth as proxies for changes in creditworthiness.  I want to apologize in advance. I found that the rich data set offered some occasionally surprising insights into both of these questions, and I was unable to choose between the two topics. The result is a somewhat overpacked discussion. Despite that, I warn you: These results are the tip of a very large iceberg and may spur more questions than answers in your minds.  The survey of consumer finances As some of you may know, the SCF is the premier source of microlevel information on the finances of American families. The survey is normally conducted every three years by selecting a new sample of consumers willing to provide detailed responses to questions about their personal finances. Because aggregate data consistently indicated that the crisis was having severe negative effects on households, the Federal Reserve thought a follow-up survey of 2007 survey participants would offer a unique opportunity to understand the impact of the financial crisis on individual families and the resulting changes in the financial decisions and outlooks of those families. Although we are only beginning to mine the data, I believe the richer understanding of individual circumstances provided by the data set will prove invaluable in its ability to help us understand how consumers are approaching a number of important decisions, such as spending, saving, and wealth accumulation.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches In 2009, we launched a program to conduct follow-up interviews with participants in our 2007 SCF to update their information. As always, consumers’ willingness to share their personal data in the interest of better public policy is a critical requirement for these surveys, and participants’ privacy is strictly guarded. We are extremely grateful for the public-spirited people who dredge through their financial statements, pension accounts, credit card bills, and tax returns to give us the most accurate information possible. And we are particularly grateful to the nearly 90 percent of the participants in the 2007 survey who did so a second time in 2009.  The panel interviews were concluded in early 2010, and Board staff spent most of the rest of the year preparing this complex set of data for analysis. Earlier today, the Federal Reserve published a research paper providing an overview of the data, and further results are expected to follow.1  Changes in household wealth The shocks to household wealth associated with the most recent recession were extraordinary by any measure. According to the Federal Reserve’s flow of funds accounts, household net worth peaked in the second quarter of 2007 and then fell approximately 28 percent during the next two years (figure 1).  The initial shocks to housing and to financial assets wiped out most of the wealth gains realized since the aftermath of the tech crash in 2001. There has been some recovery in wealth since the trough, but since early 2010 it has remained fairly flat.  The personal saving rate, which had been trending downward before the recession, jumped during the crisis as spending retreated (figure 2). Traditional macroeconomic analysis would attribute at least some of the increase in the saving rate and corresponding drag in the recovery of consumer spending to diminished household wealth. That direct effect might be compounded if the wealth decline also affected consumers’ confidence and expectations, which could affect families’ future decisions. For example, workers on the cusp of retirement might need to work longer than they had planned and business owners might be unable or unwilling to leverage their personal assets to fund or expand their businesses. In addition, if attitudes toward risk have shifted, households might make different decisions about spending, or about saving, than they have in the past.  Diversity of wealth outcomes in 2009 The overall pattern of wealth decline, however, masks the stark differences in outcomes for individual families. To put these wealth changes in perspective, it is useful to look at them relative to a measure of the scale of families’ circumstances and, thus, to a possible link with spending. Income is one such possible measure, but it can be quite “noisy” because income may be affected by a variety of transitory factors.  In the SCF, we include a measure of the level of income that families consider their usual income.2 Taking this measure as a scaling device for wealth changes, we see that 43 percent of families saw a wealth decline equal to or more than six months of their usual income                                                  1  Jesse Bricker, Brian Bucks, Arthur Kennickell, Traci Mach, and Kevin Moore (2011), “Surveying the Aftermath of the Storm: Changes in Family Finances from 2007 to 2009,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011–17 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March)  www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2011/201117/201117pap.pdf.  2  For all families, median 2007 normal income was $53,000 (mean of $84,000). Taken over all households, the differences in usual and current income average out to a small amount. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 (figure 3). Almost a third saw a loss greater than an entire year of their usual income (not shown). However, more than a fifth of families saw a gain in wealth that was greater than six months of their usual income.  To put these changes in wealth in perspective, it is useful to consider the level of household wealth relative to normal income before the crisis. In 2007, more than one-quarter of families had total wealth equal to or less than six months of their usual income, so a change of this magnitude would be quite significant for those families (figure 4). In contrast, for nearly one-third of households, their wealth was more than five times their usual income.  At the level of individual families, changes in wealth appear to have been driven primarily by changes in asset valuation, not by changes in ownership (that is, by changes in portfolio composition). Comparisons of patterns of ownership in 2007 and 2009 do show some differences, but the dominant pattern across families is no change in portfolio holdings. Moreover, responses to a question we asked about changes in portfolio composition over the crisis indicate that 54 percent of all families made no change at all in their portfolios over the period covered by the panel SCF. This is perhaps surprising, given the large change in asset values that occurred during the crisis.  Preretirement age group In this dataset, the preretirement group includes families whose household head was between 50 and 61 years old in 2007. This age group traditionally has a particularly strong effect on the overall economy because the preretirement years are typically characterized by peak earnings, peak saving, and peak spending. The baby-boom generation, by virtue of its sheer size, has had an outsized influence on the economy as it has entered every stage in the life cycle, and its magnification of the preretirement effect is no exception. In addition, in 2007, this group held more than one-third of all household net worth. Because wealth is a key driver of household decisions about spending, saving, and investment, we might expect behavioral shifts in response to wealth changes to have significant effects on the performance of the U.S. economy. We will look at changes from 2007 to 2009 in the attitudes of this group and how those changes might vary depending on whether they experienced gains or losses in wealth during the crisis.  I chose the preretirement group to examine because of its significant size and wealth, but also because this seemed like the group most likely to be affected by changes in wealth and to feel the need to change behavior as a result of any such changes. The preretirement group must accumulate assets to sustain itself through retirement, continue working, or rely on their children or the government for support. Given their vast numbers, the adjustments they make can affect the course of the economy. So it is informative to look at how the finances of this group were impacted by the crisis and how they have changed their outlook as a result.  As was the case for families overall, experiences varied widely. The share of families in the 50-to-61 age group that saw a substantial increase in their net worth – more than six months of their usual income – was nearly the same as for families overall (figure 5). But 49 percent of the age group saw a decline of more than six months of their usual income, compared with 42 percent of families overall.  Implications for behavior It would be reasonable to expect households’ plans and attitudes to vary based on the individual wealth outcomes they experienced. But in comparing responses from boomer families that lost wealth to those that gained wealth, we found remarkably similar answers.  In 2009, more than two-thirds of the preretirement group reported that their expected retirement age was at least a year later than what they reported in 2007. The share of 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches families expecting to extend their working life was very similar regardless of their change in wealth. This likely suggests increased uncertainty about the future, no matter what their experience during the financial crisis, as also suggested by other results in the survey.  In terms of asset management, more than half of the preretirement families reported that they plan to make no changes at all in the next few years; this result holds across all wealth-change groups. But among those who do expect to make changes, increased savings was the most commonly reported goal.  Boomer families’ reported willingness to take on financial risk also changed over the panel period. Regardless of the change in their wealth, these families were more likely to report being more unwilling to take financial risk in 2009 than in 2007 (figure 6).  This sense of increased caution is reinforced by the answers to questions the survey posed to families about the amount of money they think they need to cope with emergencies and other unexpected events. The median value of this measure of desired precautionary savings increased substantially from 2007 to 2009 for the preretirement groups that experienced large changes in wealth, regardless of whether the change was a gain or a loss, and was virtually unchanged for others (figure 7). Furthermore, the largest percentage increase was for families that experienced wealth gains.  The large changes in asset prices over the period may have had an effect on the willingness of the families in this age group to consume out of gains to assets or to reduce spending in response to asset losses.3 The survey responses suggest that the large drop in asset prices over the period may have increased boomer families’ sensitivity to future losses more than it affected their sensitivity to future gains. In other words, it made them more cautious.  In the boom years leading up to the crisis, many economists believed that increases in wealth, especially increases in home equity, helped fuel consumer spending. However, fewer than 30 percent of boomer families reported in 2007 that they would be willing to spend out of any increase in asset values. In 2009, that willingness declined for boomer families that experienced losses as well as for boomer families that experienced only small gains. Somewhat counterintuitively, boomer families that experienced significant gains in their net worth from 2007 to 2009 – gains greater than the equivalent of six months of income – also remained largely unwilling to spend out of increases in asset values. In fact, they were among the least willing in 2007 and they remained among the least willing two years later. Thus, boomer families remained cautious, or grew more cautious, about spending out of their asset gains – regardless of whether they experienced significant losses during the crisis (figure 8).  However, the response of spending plans to the prospect of asset losses appears to be stronger than the response to the prospect of asset gains. Every wealth-change group reported being more than twice as likely to decrease spending if asset values declined than they were to increase spending if asset values rose (figure 9). All of this evidence may help explain the sharp drop in consumer spending as household wealth declined and the continued sluggishness of consumer spending even as asset values have recovered. This asymmetry in responses holds over all age groups as well.  The varied change in wealth for preretirement families, taken together with the changes in retirement plans, risk attitudes, and willingness to spend in response to changes in wealth, imply that some of the effects of recent economic turmoil may result in a longer period of economic adjustment than has been the case in past recessions, as fundamental attitudes appear to have shifted.                                                   3  The SCF asks whether families agree or disagree (on a five-point scale) with the following statements: “When the things that I own increase (decrease) in value, I am more (less) likely to spend money.” Note that the “spend less” version of the question was only asked in 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 I think the higher level of caution displayed by all households in the group, regardless of whether the change in their individual circumstances was positive or negative, is especially interesting. This indicates that changes in risk appetite result from observations of changes to the circumstances of others as much as to changes in one’s own circumstances. Responses regarding attitudes toward modifying spending as asset values rise and fall suggest that the relationship between the saving rate and household wealth might be even more persistent than in the past. Such an impact would be further magnified if changes in wealth also impacted borrowing patterns and credit approval.  To look at credit indicators, I decided to focus on business owners in order to examine the impact of changes in wealth on access to business as well as consumer credit.  Business owners The preretirement and business owner groups I have chosen are not mutually exclusive. Indeed, there is quite a bit of overlap. More than 30 percent of small business owners in 2007 were part of the preretirement group, and they tended to be among the wealthier members of that group. In fact, the business owner group held nearly half of all household wealth in 2007.  Small businesses employ roughly half of private-sector workers, they fill critical niches throughout the economy, and they are often seen as sources of innovation. For many, the ability to leverage personal assets is a critical factor in developing their businesses.  Concern over credit availability for small businesses has appropriately been a recurring worry throughout the crisis, but information about the intersection between business performance, personal finances, and credit has been hard to find. While the data are still not definitive, the panel survey allows us to look at supply, demand, and assessment of creditworthiness from the borrowers’ point of view.  Although the SCF is focused on families, not businesses, it does collect substantial information on the closely held businesses families own. The survey clearly shows a high degree of interdependence of personal and business finances for many families with businesses. For example, families make loan guarantees for their businesses using personal assets as collateral, and loans between business owners and their businesses are common in both directions. According to the most recently available data from the Census Bureau’s Survey of Business Owners, 6 in 10 small business owners use personal savings or assets to finance or expand their businesses.  The spread of gains and losses from 2007 to 2009 was sharper for business owners than for the population overall (figure 10). Fifty-seven percent of business owners saw substantial losses in their net worth relative to their usual income, compared with 43 percent of the overall population; but the percentage of business owners who saw large wealth gains relative to their income was also larger than for the overall population.  The industry in which the business operated had a significant impact on whether the business owner gained or lost wealth. Families with businesses primarily engaged in mining or construction – among small businesses in the survey, this was overwhelmingly construction-related businesses – were the most likely to see a substantial decline in net worth (figure 11). In contrast, families with a wholesale or retail business were more likely to see a substantial gain. Those involved in utilities, transportation, and services – in the survey, this was predominantly services – saw the largest gains and the largest losses, but losses exceeded gains for the group.  Only 82 percent of the consumers who reported owning a business in 2007 also reported owning a business in 2009. And some of those who remained business owners may have scaled back their operations while awaiting recovery. We do not have the detail necessary to assess the importance of reduced operations directly, but we have some suggestive 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches evidence. For businesses that were in operation in both 2007 and 2009, we see decreased median and mean business incomes for owners who saw their wealth fall and the reverse for owners whose wealth rose.  Some of the decrease in activity may be driven by a decline in demand for services, but some may come from credit constraints. For a variety of reasons, we cannot look directly at changes in credit availability for business owners and their businesses, but we can look at two indicators for the owners who had a continuing business in 2009.  Some business owners use proceeds from personal loans for business purposes or use personal assets to secure business loans. In other cases, the business itself may apply on its own. If the business is a sole proprietorship, there is no legal distinction between business and personal borrowing, but business owners still may view their personal and business debt separately.  The 2009 SCF panel interview asked participants to report separately whether they had applied for personal and business loans during the two-year period. If they had, it asked whether they had been turned down for a loan. The survey also asked whether they had wanted to borrow for personal or business purposes but had been so convinced they would be turned down that they did not apply.  The data show a substantial level of personal and business applications both for owners whose wealth rose and for those whose wealth fell over the period of the SCF panel. The level of personal applications was slightly higher for those whose wealth increased over the period, and their applications were more likely to have been approved (or they were less likely to have believed they would have been denied) (figure 12).  The pattern of personal loan denial rates is consistent with changes in individual circumstances. The denials could also indicate that business difficulties have a significant influence on the ability of business owners to borrow for personal reasons. Indeed, business owners have much more difficulty documenting their income than do wage-earners. The combination of weaker earnings, lower net worth, and renewed focus on income verification could have made it particularly difficult for business owners who lost wealth to refinance mortgages or purchase homes.  Business owners whose wealth rose were also more likely to have applied for business credit, but the rate of denial and for those who feared denial was nearly the same for business owners who gained wealth as for those who lost wealth (figure 13). In this case, the pattern of denial does not match the variations in individual circumstances. Unfortunately, we don’t have any history for this series so it is impossible to tell how it has changed over time. But the striking similarity in credit approval rates for business loan requests by business owners who gained and those who lost wealth would seem to support anecdotal reports at the time – that business credit was hard to obtain even for good borrowers.  Conclusion The results I have discussed today are among the first details to emerge from our panel study of changes in family finances over the financial crisis. The data show significant heterogeneity in the wealth changes that families experienced during the period of the financial crisis between 2007 and 2009. Any consequent macroeconomic wealth effect depends on the distribution of gains and losses and the propensities of the families that experienced those changes.  Research remains to be done on how all those factors come together, but the data offer at least a suggestion of what may emerge. Among the preretirement age group, those who gained and those who lost wealth during the financial crisis generally appear to act as if they had lost wealth – in that there are signs of delayed retirement and greater desire to save and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 to avoid risk. In addition, there appears to be an asymmetric reaction to wealth shocks that could be a factor in the slow recovery of spending.  Business owners had much wider changes in wealth than those reported for the general population and the changes were related to the conditions of the industries in which the businesses operated. Business owners who had increases in wealth were more likely to apply for personal and business credit. Although business owners who experienced decreases in wealth were more likely to have been denied or to fear denial of personal credit, actual denial rates for business credit were about the same regardless of wealth outcomes. Moreover, the difference in credit approval rates between personal and business applications suggests that differences other than the financial circumstances of the applicant were at work in business credit markets.  It is still too early to determine how consumer spending patterns will ultimately be altered as a result of changes in circumstances wrought by the financial crisis. But as events unfold, the SCF data will be an invaluable resource as we try to understand these new patterns.        
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches        
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9       
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11      
12 BIS central bankers’ speeches       
BIS central bankers’ speeches 13    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Malcolm Edey: Basel III and beyond Speech by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the Basel III Conference 2011, Sydney, 24 March 2011. *      *      * Thanks very much for the opportunity to speak to you today.  At the end of last year, as you know, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision released its new set of prudential standards known collectively as Basel III. It was a major re-think of the existing minimum standards for international banking.  Unlike its two forerunners, this was an agreement in which Australia participated.1 One of the early responses of the international regulatory bodies to the financial crisis was to make their membership structures more representative. In the case of the Basel Committee, the membership was widened in mid 2009 to encompass 27 jurisdictions, a major expansion from the original G10 membership. Australia is represented on the Committee by the Reserve Bank and APRA.  I’ve been asked to speak today about what might lie beyond Basel III. It’s a good question because it recognises that there’s more to financial regulation than just the Basel accord.  I’ll try to address some of that in a moment, but before I do it’s worth recapping why we have a Basel process, why we specifically have a Basel III accord, and what it is intended to achieve.  The origins of the Basel Committee go back to 1974, when regulators from the G10 countries began meeting at the offices of the BIS to share information about their approaches to bank supervision. The original Basel capital accord (what we now call Basel I) was reached in 1988, and it was a relatively simple affair. The main document was a mere 13 pages long2, compared to the many hundreds of pages that later comprised the second and third Basel packages. The centrepiece of Basel I was the minimum capital standard, set at 8 per cent of risk-weighted assets and calculated on a common basis.  One preliminary question we could ask is: why was there a need for that kind of agreement, rather than just having a series of national approaches? Obviously the Australian regulators weren’t parties to formulating Basel I, but I think we can see it as having two interrelated rationales.  First, financial stability can be thought of as an international public good. All countries benefit from the stability of the world financial system as a whole, they all experience some cost when the system is unstable, and so they all have an interest in promoting sound minimum standards. That’s one important rationale for a coordinated approach.  Secondly, there is the rationale of avoiding a competitive lowering of standards. If we think of this in a domestic context, the principle is well understood. In the long run, we might expect market discipline to ensure that banks maintain high standards of balance-sheet quality and risk control. But in the short run, we know that if a bank tries to expand quickly by lowering its standards, it can be highly destabilising for the system. A bank that tries to do that will either gain market share at the expense of more prudently run banks, or else force the other banks to follow suit, thereby lowering standards for all. To some extent, what is true of individual banks can also be true of jurisdictions. And so the Committee took the view that there was a collective interest in agreeing to a set of minimum standards to be applied by all its members.                                                   1  That is, Australia participated officially as a member of the committee. 2  There were an additional 12 pages of annexes. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches As I said, Basel I was a relatively simple affair. Basel II, which was announced in 2004 and became effective in 2008, was a much more complex and nuanced agreement. In essence, it was intended to broaden the scope of risk coverage, and to bring in some flexibility to accommodate differences in banks’ business models and in the sophistication of their risk management. Among other things, Basel II:   introduced the three-pillar structure into the prudential framework, those pillars being the minimum capital standard, supervisory oversight, and disclosure. So the framework was expanded beyond a simple reliance on the minimum capital ratio;   it introduced a framework of capital requirements to cover operational and other risks. In that way it recognised that credit quality wasn’t the only source of risk that needed to be backed by capital;   and it allowed flexibility for sophisticated banks to determine some of their capital requirements using model-based inputs rather than fixed weights.  That said, the central principle of having a minimum capital standard for all internationally active banks remained at the core.  When we talk about the Basel standards, it’s important to keep in mind that these standards were always conceived of as being only a minimum. Individual jurisdictions have always been free to exceed them, and it’s to be expected that a good national regulator would tailor the standards to local conditions and supplement them with effective supervision. In Australia’s case, I think we have been well served by our prudential regulator APRA taking a more conservative and hard-headed approach than required by the international minimum.  Clearly, the Basel I and Basel II standards didn’t prevent the GFC, and neither did the existing web of nationally-based regulations in the major economies.  So what went wrong?  This isn’t the occasion to give a detailed account of what caused the financial crisis. But regulators around the world drew a number of important lessons from it:   banking systems needed more capital, and better quality capital, to withstand losses;   they needed to be made more robust to liquidity risk;   loan underwriting standards needed to be improved;   governance arrangements for banks and financial regulators needed to be improved;3   various forms of conflict of interest needed to be eliminated or better managed. Examples of that included the originate-and-distribute lending model that went seriously off-track in some countries, and the role of rating agencies in advising on structured securities. It also included badly structured remuneration practices in the industry;   and there needed to be more scope for regulatory regimes to act against the build-up of financial excess.  Not all of these are matters for the Basel Committee. There are a number of different international bodies working on these things in their different spheres of influence, including the G-20, the Financial Stability Board and the international insurance and securities                                                  3  I am referring specifically here to the regulatory systems in the United States and Europe, where there was perceived to be a need for greater coordination among regulatory agencies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 regulators. But since this is a conference about Basel III, I’ll focus mainly on the work of the Basel Committee.  Basel III is about applying the lessons learned from the crisis to the way we regulate banks. Its core is a revised set of standards for capital and liquidity.  On capital, the key elements are:   more and better-quality capital required to meet the basic minimum;   a capital conservation buffer that sets rules for managing capital above the minimum;   a time-varying countercyclical buffer, aimed at mitigating the effects of the credit cycle;   and an unweighted capital ratio (or “leverage ratio”) to act as a backstop to all of that.  For the liquidity standard, there are two main elements:   a liquidity coverage ratio, which requires banks to hold enough liquid assets to meet a 30-day stress scenario;   and a net stable funding ratio, which requires banks’ long-term assets to be matched by stable sources of funding.  These were the main elements of the package announced in December last year.  Earlier speakers today will have talked about these things in some detail, and I don’t want to repeat that. Instead I’m going to use the remainder of my time to focus on some areas where work still needs to be done.  The first point to make here is that there is a lot of work coming from the international regulatory bodies that’s still to be completed. By that, I mean work that groups like the Basel Committee have started but not yet finished, and also areas where the Australian regulators have work to do in determining our response to the new international standards.  Let me go through a few of them.  The liquidity standard It’s well understood now that the liquidity coverage ratio, in the form originally proposed in the Basel process, couldn’t have been applied in Australia. Australian governments simply don’t have enough debt outstanding for banks to hold to meet the standard in that form. Incidentally, this is a problem that other countries would love to have. The Australian government’s gross debt to GDP ratio is not much more than 10 per cent, compared with numbers of the order of 80 to 100 per cent projected in the next few years in the United States and the major European economies. There are some other countries in a similar position to ours, but not many. To accommodate cases like these, the Basel standard allows, among other options, an alternative treatment whereby banks can count a committed facility with their central bank towards meeting the requirement.  I think this is now widely understood and accepted as a sensible solution for the Australian case. But there are still a number of details yet to be worked out. APRA has indicated that it will require banks to make all reasonable use of their own ability to maximise liquidity before relying on the RBA facility. And they’ve indicated that they will be consulting with banks as to how compliance with that principle will be monitored. The terms of the RBA liquidity commitments haven’t yet been determined. That includes the fee. What we have made clear is that, to meet the objectives of the international standard, the fee will need to be market based, and it will be designed to leave banks with broadly the same incentives as exist in other jurisdictions where the alternative treatment is not needed.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Since the international LCR requirement doesn’t come into effect until 2015, there’s plenty of time to work through these details and to undertake appropriate consultation. There is even more time for that in the case of the stable funding ratio, where implementation isn’t scheduled until 2018 and the details of the proposed Basel standard are less well developed. So these are both areas where further work will be ongoing.  The counter-cyclical capital buffer The Basel III package provides for an additional layer of capital to be set by national regulators based on the state of the credit cycle. The intention is that regulators would adjust the buffer so as to have a countercyclical influence, raising it in good times, and then releasing it to support lending when credit is tight. To avoid regulatory arbitrage, the standard includes a system of mutual recognition, which would have the effect of ensuring that the capital charge is based on the location where the lending occurs, rather than the home jurisdiction of the lender.  The buffer proposal also specifies a standard quantitative indicator to assist in deciding when to activate it. Glossing over the technical detail, this would be based on the ratio of aggregate credit to GDP. When that ratio is sufficiently above trend, it would be a signal to raise the buffer, and when it’s below trend, to lower it. In that way, it would allow surplus capital to be released to the system when most needed.  I know there has been some scepticism about this kind of rule-based approach, and it’s important to recognise that the Committee’s proposal leaves a lot of scope for flexibility and discretion at the national level.  In my view, that’s going to be very much needed.  Having worked in the monetary policy area for many years, the indicator approach proposed here reminds me of an analytical device known as the Taylor rule. The economist John Taylor, some years ago, made the observation that a well-designed monetary policy would respond systematically to deviations of inflation and output from their normal values. It’s a relationship that can easily be verified in the data. Taylor’s work sparked an army of researchers to try to estimate “optimal” Taylor rules for setting the policy interest rate. It’s all useful analytical work, but it’s not a field that is open to definitive conclusions because the world is simply too complex to be summarised in that way. No-one would think of reducing the actual decision-making process to a mathematical formula, least of all one devised by an international committee.  If that’s true for monetary policy, then it’s much more true for financial stability policy, where the complexities are even greater. There’s nothing in financial stability policy, for example, that corresponds to the core monetary policy objective of a numerical inflation target, or the single instrument of a policy interest rate: financial stability policy has a wide range of instruments at its disposal, and there’s no single summary indicator of aggregate financial risk.  So I think we’ll need to avoid too much focus in this area on the simple formula.  Having said that, I’m not against the idea of the prudential regulator varying the capital requirement in response to changing circumstances4, presumably with some co-ordination with the central bank. But I suggest this is an area where it will take some time for national policy approaches to develop, and it’s one where too much effort at international standardisation isn’t going to be helpful.                                                   4  In fact, the Basel II principles under Pillar II already allow scope for this to occur. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Systemically important banks Another area of ongoing international work is on systemically important financial institutions, known by the acronym SIFIs. This gets at the question of how to regulate institutions that are too big to fail – or, as some would prefer to call it, too important to fail, or too interconnected to fail. The focus on this question really arose from the experience of the United States, the UK and some other European countries during the crisis, when significant public funds were committed to rescuing failing institutions. Understandably, those countries would like to reduce the risk of that happening again.  One obvious line of approach is that, if an institution is considered too important to fail, then it should be made safer and, therefore, less likely to fail. On that front, it is proposed that institutions judged to be systemically important should be subject to an additional layer of required capital. Work on this is currently being done in both the Basel Committee and the FSB.  Another line of attack (and this isn’t mutually exclusive with the first one) is to reduce the prospective impact of failure if it does occur. This leads into proposals for banks to come up with business resolution plans, or so-called “living wills”, which are supposed to ensure the orderly continuity of core functions if a bank fails. It’s very important, of course, that there should be good preparation for stress events, and I know a number of regulators are now pursuing this with their banks. How far it’s possible to push this idea of living wills remains to be seen, but I wouldn’t see it as a panacea. And given the differences in national circumstances, I think this is another area where too much effort at international standardisation isn’t going to be helpful.  When we talk about having an international approach to regulating systemically important institutions, there’s an interesting question as to how that group of institutions should be defined. I am firmly of the view that they should be defined by their global importance, not their relative importance within their own national systems. The purpose of a global SIFI policy (to use a cumbersome expression) is to limit international spillovers, where the failure of a major bank can affect the system as a whole because of its global scale. Individual countries can and do have their own SIFI policies for institutions that are large in domestic terms. APRA for example has a well-articulated framework for calibrating its standards and its intensity of supervision according to the circumstances of each institution.5 But in my view the international efforts on SIFI regulation need to focus firmly on systemic importance at the world level, and that means focusing on the small number of very large players that can have a global impact if they fail.  Is there too much internationalisation?  So far, I’ve spoken about things that are already reasonably well advanced on the international regulatory agenda. One big question that I think hasn’t got the attention it deserves is: Is there too much internationalisation in the banking industry?  When we talk about banks being too interconnected to fail, an important dimension of that is international interconnectedness. It’s reasonable to ask the question: if banks are too interconnected in that sense, should they be made less interconnected? One way that that might be done is through greater use of subsidiary structures by banks that operate across borders.  I don’t want to overstate the case for this because I recognise it’s a complex issue. But I can think of a number of advantages for that kind of model from the point of view of financial                                                  5  See Probability and Impact Rating System (APRA November 2010) and Supervisory Oversight and Response System (APRA November 2010). 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches stability. In particular, all of the key policy tools for managing financial distress are located at the domestic level.6 Liquidity provision to banks is a currency-specific tool, and is the preserve of the national central bank that issues the currency. Bankruptcy laws, resolution powers, bank regulatory regimes, and the fiscal powers that might be needed in a crisis all operate at the domestic level.  The effect of subsidiarisation, at least in principle, would be to ring-fence the national operations of cross-border banks within separate legal entities in the countries where they operate. There’s a good argument that that kind of structure would simplify the management of financial stress events. It might also reduce concerns about cross-border arbitrage of differences in capital regulation.  I am aware that there are also arguments on the other side. In some instances, ring-fencing might not be a realistic option, or host countries might prefer foreign banks to enter as branches in order to benefit from the full support of the parent. Some would argue that concerns about cross-border resolution could be better addressed in other ways.  Another point is that the subsidiary structure is likely to be more expensive to operate. But I’m not sure we should view that on its own as a decisive argument against it. A lot of the post-crisis regulatory changes will add to the cost of financial intermediation, but they are being done anyway to reduce systemic risk. The point is that the costs and benefits need to be carefully weighed.  So there are arguments on both sides. I’m not today seeking to present a firm view, but I think it’s an area that hasn’t been sufficiently debated, and so I simply raise it as one that deserves further attention.7  Supervision and lending standards  I started out by saying that there’s more to financial regulation than just the Basel Committee. There’s also more to financial stability than just having good regulations. The best possible set of regulations won’t, on its own, stop the next crisis, for the simple reason that every crisis is different, people innovate around regulations, and you can’t regulate against foolish behaviour.  I don’t want that to be interpreted as a counsel of despair. Good regulation obviously makes a difference, and the effort to improve our regulatory regimes, and keep them up to date, has to be made. But we also need other things that are hard to convert into rules (and I’m talking about the international scene here): we need bankers and investors who don’t take silly risks, supervisors who are prepared to ask tough questions and step in when they see excess, and good-quality implementation of the rules that we already have. I think, by the way, that Australia has been well served by its prudential regulator on this front. But it would be a shame if, in the international debate, those basics got lost in all the focus on re-writing the rules.8                                                   6  This leaves aside the special case of Europe, where the supranational entity operates in some respects as a single jurisdiction. 7  For a more detailed discussion, see Fiechter et al: Subsidiaries or Branches: Does One Size Fit All? IMF Staff Discussion Note 11/04, 7 March 2011. 8  International regulatory bodies are clearly aware of the issue. See for example Intensity and Effectiveness of SIFI Supervision (FSB 2 November 2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 End-piece I want to conclude, if I may, by saying a few words about the current situation. As you know, the Reserve Bank released its half-yearly Financial Stability Review earlier today.  As usual, we’ve given an account of the various uncertainties that exist around the global financial system. The tragic events in Japan are a new element in that picture, as is the instability in North Africa and the Middle East. It’s going to take some time before the implications of all that can be assessed.  But, acknowledging the uncertainties, the world financial system over the past half year has generally been improving. Australian banks are in good shape, and they came through the crisis profitable and well capitalised. They have strengthened their liquidity positions and their use of deposit funding. Australian businesses have reduced their gearing. Households have raised their saving rates.  When we think about what the post-crisis environment might look like, it seems unlikely that we’ll be going back to the days of consistent double-digit growth in credit that we saw in the pre-crisis years. That growth was driven in part by factors that can’t be repeated – the deregulation of the financial system in the 1980s, and the transition to low inflation in the 1990s. In the post-crisis environment, borrowers and investors are more cautious than they were, both at home and abroad. That’s likely to mean less demand for leverage and less growth in private balance sheets, even when the economy itself is growing strongly. If those trends continue, I think it will be good for financial stability, but it will also mean that our lending institutions have to get used to lower rates of expansion than were typical in the pre-crisis years.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Jean-Pierre Danthine: Swiss monetary policy in the public eye Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the Money Market Event, Zurich, 24 March 2011. *      *      * I would like to thank Marlene Amstad and Gero Jung for their valuable support in drafting this speech. I also want to thank Rita Kobel Rohr for helpful comments. Introduction: the Great Recession vs the Great Depression The Great Recession is behind us. In the case of Switzerland, we may wonder if the term is justified. With a fall in output of 3.2% from the top of the cycle in 2008 to the trough in 2009, the recession was the most severe since the mid-1970s.1 However, measured on a quarterly basis, consumption, which is a more meaningful indicator of economic well-being, barely fell. In Switzerland, the Great Recession was a (relatively severe) recession.  What was it, that transformed what many feared could have been a new Great Depression into the Great Recession? As historical data show, the downturn in global industrial output in the first ten to twelve months of the two crises was similar (Chart 1). Economic historians will be occupied with this question for a long time. Let me venture to say that the policy reactions of fiscal and monetary authorities will occupy a central position in the historians’ final answer. Charts 2 and 3 provide some illustrations of the difference in policy responses between 1929 and 2008. The much stronger monetary policy reaction, a greater willingness to run fiscal deficits and incomparably larger amounts of support to the financial sector are the distinctive features of the present crisis. Monetary and fiscal policy were both restrictive in the Great Depression. The opposite is the case in the Great Recession; both have been and continue to be very expansive. Stabilisation packages to help the banking sector have been very large, while they were non-existent in the early thirties. It will be hard to argue that these policy responses have not played a crucial role in avoiding a repetition of the Great Depression. Of course, expansive fiscal policies, support measures to the financial sector and unconventional monetary policies do not come for free. This can be seen in the increase in public debt levels registered in many countries and in the size of, and the corresponding risks present in, many central banks’ balance sheets. What in turn are the reasons why, in Switzerland, the Great Recession took the form of a “relatively severe recession”? A number of factors, some of which were already hinted at in my Money Market speech last year, were surely at play: the sound condition of the Swiss economy when it entered into the crisis, the demand impulse provided by immigration, the absence of a real estate bubble, strong private savings ahead of the crisis, and, last but certainly not least, a very expansionary monetary policy response completed with a determined and calibrated support to one of our big banks. Today, I will focus on one of the most discussed elements of the monetary policy response, our interventions in the foreign exchange market. Before doing so, I would like to stress a key element of the Swiss financial market structure that has shown particular resilience and has helped to provide appropriate financial conditions throughout the crisis in the Swiss economy: the Swiss franc repo market. The good performance of this market is closely related to another element of the SNB’s policy that has drawn public attention, and even criticism – our collateral policy.                                                  1  During the recession of 1974–1976, real output in Switzerland fell by more than 10%. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches I. An important feature of the Swiss money market: the SNB’s collateral policy A plausible and popular diagnosis for the recent financial crisis is that it started with a bank run. In contrast to a “traditional” bank run, such as those that occurred during the 1930s,2 the run in the current crisis took the form of a large and sudden increase in collateral haircuts in the US repo market.3 If one plausibly estimates the size of the US repo market at $10 trillion at the eve of the crisis, a 20% increase in haircuts led to a withdrawal of funds from the banking sector equivalent to $2 trillion.4 Chart 4 provides an estimate of the increase in haircuts in the US market while Chart 5 displays the drop in overnight repo volume between March and December 2008.5 This run on the repo market had obvious implications for the ability of the banking sector to lend. The consequent dearth of liquidity in US dollars was felt throughout the world, in particular in Europe. It was the main reason for the swap agreements initiated by the Federal Reserve and a number of international central banks, including the SNB. The aim was to substitute central bank liquidity provision for the failing money market in US dollars, and was directed, particularly, at international market participants. In contrast to this account of the early phase of the financial crisis in the US, Chart 6 reports the evolution of the exchanged volumes in the Swiss secured and unsecured money markets. The contrast between the last two charts could not be more striking: in Switzerland, the secured interbank market progressively took over from the collapsing unsecured market to achieve record volumes of activity in the week following the Lehman Brothers collapse. Clearly this market showed its resilience and fulfilled its function, which no doubt helped prevent a credit crunch materialising in Switzerland. Note that later developments (starting in late autumn 2008) were strongly marked by the abundant liquidity situation created by the SNB swap agreements with other central banks and later by the interventions in foreign exchange markets. As a result, demand for short-term liquidity by market participants disappeared. Preliminary evidence strongly suggests that a key factor in the relative performance of the Swiss and US repo markets lies in the quality of the collateral backing repo transactions.6 In the US, as emphasised in a BIS study, repo markets had doubled in size since 2002, with gross amounts outstanding at year-end 2007 of roughly USD 10 trillion.7 These markets ended up financing up to one-half the total assets of the major investment banks. This growth in volume was based on a widely broadened collateral basket, including corporate bonds, bonds issued by agencies, mortgage-backed securities and other lower-rated collateral. In March 2008, following the Bear Stearns rescue, confidence waned and market participants immediately ceased accepting any collateral other than Treasury and agency securities. In Switzerland by contrast, the collateral accepted in 99.8% of the transactions in the secured interbank market corresponds to the definition of the SNB collateral basket, that is, to the collateral accepted by the SNB in its own repo operations. The SNB’s collateral policy is based on a transparent, essentially rule-based approach. This means that when securities are excluded from the list of acceptable securities                                                  2  See Diamond and Dybvig (1983). “Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity”, Journal of Political Economy 1983, vol. 91, no. 3, pp. 401–19. 3  Typically, the total amount of the deposit will be some amount less than the value of the underlying asset, with the difference called a “haircut”. For more details, see Gorton and Metrick (2009) “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo”, NBER Working Paper Series (NBER Working Paper No. 15223), August 2009. 4  This could be a reasonable approximation. See Gorton (2009): “Slapped in the Face by the Invisible Hand: Banking and the Panic of 2007”, Prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s 2009 Financial Markets Conference, May 2009; and Gorton and Metrick (2009). 5  Chart 4 illustrates the average repo haircut on structured debt. This is a good indication for an overall “haircut index”, as shown by Gorton and Metrick (2009). 6  Another important difference is that the Swiss repo market is conducted on a highly efficient automated and centralised platform while US repo transactions are traded over the counter. 7  Hördahl and King (2008). However, these numbers are estimates given that almost all of the repo transactions are conducted over the counter. See also IMF (2010), Global Financial Stability Report, October 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 there is no new information but only the application of the existing and published criteria. Compared to many other central banks, the definition of eligible collateral is unusually open in the sense that the SNB is rare among central banks in accepting securities denominated in foreign currencies and not only in its home currency, the Swiss franc. The quid-pro-quo of this multi-currency policy is that securities eligible for SNB repo transactions must satisfy stringent quality requirements: these requirements concern their credit ratings and liquidity properties. This policy is coherent – open but strict! – and it has substantial advantages. First, no initial margin or haircut is applied during standardised repo transactions, making the system more capital efficient.8 Second, it allows a broad range of financial institutions to participate, including many international banks. Third, it creates incentives for banks to hold high-quality, liquid assets in their balance sheets. Finally, as already suggested, this highly credible collateral policy has resulted in SNB eligible collateral becoming the standard for the secured interbank money market in Swiss francs. This, in turn, has made an essential contribution to creating a robust secured interbank market and thereby keeping interbank credit lines open at all times during the crisis. II. The SNB’s interventions in foreign exchange markets Let me now move on to my second main point, the interventions in foreign exchange markets carried out by the SNB during 2009 and 2010. The SNB acted on foreign exchange markets in this period for one reason and one reason only: the zero interest rate lower bound had been reached and the economic situation unequivocally called for looser, not tighter, monetary conditions. The goal was to maintain price stability, which meant, in these circumstances, avoiding deflation. One should always have in mind that there are no clear recipes for avoiding a deflationary trend in such a situation. The most famous illustration of this statement is the US experience in the late 1920s and early 1930s. At the time the US policymakers underestimated the consequences of a bout of deflation and failed to take aggressive action. The consumer price index (and the GDP deflator) declined by 24% from August 1929 to March 1933, after having been virtually flat from 1921 to 1929. This decline was accompanied by a fall in real GDP of almost 30 percent.9 A more recent example is Japan’s “lost decade”. There the situation was not underestimated to the same degree. However, public actions culminating in a doubling of Japanese public debt proved to be insufficient to avoid a protracted deflationary episode. Let me review the history of our interventions in more detail. At the beginning of 2009, the severe downturn in the global economy had translated into a very serious threat of deflation in Switzerland. For example, the inflation forecasts produced by the IMF showed inflation in Switzerland to be in negative territory for two years in a row. Price stability was evidently not assured. The substantial increase in the value of the Swiss franc since the beginning of financial crisis represented an inappropriate tightening of monetary conditions. Yet, it was imperative that monetary conditions be kept as loose as possible, a fortiori to avoid a further monetary tightening. Given that the interest rate was effectively at a zero level, the SNB decided to prevent any appreciation in the Swiss franc with respect to the euro from March 2009 on. The SNB achieved this goal by repeatedly intervening in the foreign exchange market during the course of 2009. This policy was maintained until the monetary policy assessment (MPA) of December 2009.  By the end of 2009, the economic situation was showing some signs of improvement and the threat of deflation was estimated to have diminished. As a consequence, the SNB decided that a certain appreciation in the Swiss franc could be allowed without price stability being compromised. At the December MPA, the SNB therefore announced that it would act                                                  8  There are, however, twice daily margin calls in case of variations in the collateral market value. 9  Source: IMF (2003), “Deflation: Determinants, Risks, and Policy Options”, April 2003. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches decisively in the event of an excessive appreciation of the Swiss franc. This policy was maintained throughout the first half of 2010. In spring 2010, the news on the state of the Swiss economy turned increasingly positive although the forecast remained fraught with major uncertainties. It was not clear, for instance, that partial unemployment (short-time work) could be reabsorbed without a significant additional increase in the rate of unemployment. The recovery appeared to be on the way but was presumed to remain very fragile. At the same time, the sovereign debt crisis in Europe was causing major tensions in financial markets. In general, markets were commonly afraid that the euro could face long term structural problems, the flight to safe investments was universal and the pressures on the Swiss franc were substantial. The SNB considered that, at that time, the Swiss economy was unlikely to have gained enough strength to be able to withstand a further violent appreciation of the franc. Such a development would have placed the Swiss economy under such severe strains that the threat of a deflationary trend would have again come to the fore. The SNB was not prepared to take this risk; it resisted an excessive appreciation of the franc and in so doing was led to acquire large quantities of foreign exchange. As is now well known, the EU authorities came up with a “shock and awe” package10 that, after some hesitations, market participants accepted as providing some reassurance, although not a complete and final solution to the European periphery debt problem. By the end of May, the pressures on the franc started to subside. Taking stock of these developments and of the visible strengthening of the recovery of the Swiss and global economies, the SNB considered in its June monetary assessment that the threat of deflation had largely disappeared. A further appreciation of the Swiss franc was no longer such a threat to price stability and the economy as it had been previously. In the second half of the year the SNB thus refrained from carrying out further interventions on the foreign exchange market. One can summarise this historical episode as follows. From March 2009 to the end of the year the SNB decided, in view of providing the most appropriate monetary conditions to an economy in recession, and given that traditional monetary policy had hit the zero lower bound, that it would prevent any appreciation of the Swiss franc against the euro. It maintained this policy stance until the MPA of December 2009. As Chart 7 shows, the nominal export weighted value of the Swiss franc which had appreciated by more than 10% since August 2007 was halted. In fact, over the March to December 2009 period, the Swiss franc depreciated by a little over 2% with respect to the euro and by less than 1% on an export-weighted basis. In December 2009, the SNB updated its view of the economy and decided that some appreciation of the franc would be tolerable but that an excessive appreciation needed to be prevented. It maintained this policy until June 2010. Over the course of this period, while the franc gained almost 8% with respect to the euro it lost about 10% against the dollar. Chart 7 shows that the export-weighted value of the franc increased by approximately 2.5% during this period. After June 2010, the SNB refrained from intervening. Until the end of the year the franc gained around 10% on the euro, 15% on the dollar and more than 10% on an export-weighted basis.  What can we conclude from this? We can certainly not conclude that the SNB was not able to hold on its policy, or was “defeated by the markets”. On the contrary, the SNB did what it had announced it would do and thus provided the Swiss economy with monetary conditions that have contributed to a reasonably swift recovery from the crisis and an early return to pre-crisis GDP levels, while, importantly, assuring price stability. Chart 8 shows the evolution of the Swiss GDP in comparison with a few other industrialized countries. The downturn has                                                  10  See press release by the Council of the European Union’s Extraordinary Council meeting, Economic and Financial Affairs, Brussels, 9/10 May 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 been less severe in Switzerland and Swiss output has been the first to reach its pre-crisis level. Overall, GDP rose by 2.6% in 2010, after having fallen by 1.9% in 2009. Chart 9 shows the evolution of inflation together with our most recent conditional forecast. The inflation rate recovered to 0.7% in 2010 after hitting a low of –0.5% in 2009. Why are the SNB interventions often perceived as unsuccessful? For outside observers studying the performance of the Swiss economy going in and out of the crisis and looking at Charts 8 and 9, this must be a puzzle. All the more so when they realise that this performance was not the result of an amply expansionary fiscal policy; on the contrary, the Swiss policy mix, a very expansionary monetary policy combined with a more contained fiscal policy, was appropriate given the circumstances. With the crisis originating almost entirely in foreign markets and hitting the export sector very strongly, a large domestic fiscal stimulus would have missed the target. The results of this appropriate policy mix, which placed the burden of the response to the crisis on the shoulders of the SNB, can be seen in the remarkable accounts of the Swiss general government: public surpluses in both 2009 and 2010 (+0.8% and +0.2% relative to GDP, respectively) and a reduction of the debt level to less than 40% of GDP.11 One reason for the misperception is probably the view, propagated by the academic literature on the subject, that central bank interventions in foreign exchange markets are geared to achieving an exchange rate target and that they are generally unsuccessful at doing so. As has been repeatedly emphasised, this was not the objective for the SNB in 2009–2010.12 The SNB’s objective was to provide appropriate monetary conditions to the Swiss economy. A given exchange rate level in that context may be maintained for a limited time period, but it is subject to review as macroeconomic conditions evolve. And as the SNB’s experience in 2009 demonstrates (illustrated in Chart 7), influencing the exchange rate level temporarily is feasible and makes sense at the zero lower bound when the traditional monetary policy instrument is exhausted. III. Conclusion: how to judge whether interventions were successful? All actions by the SNB have to be considered in the light of its mandate. The primary goal is to ensure price stability, while taking due account of the overall economic situation. In this way monetary policy contributes to creating an environment that fosters prosperity and economic growth. To achieve its goal, the SNB strives to provide the most appropriate monetary conditions, not to achieve an exchange rate target. The primary indicator of the success of interventions is the inflation chart. Conversely, the more significant gauge of the potential cost of interventions is not found in the central bank’s balance sheet. Our foreign exchange interventions will be revealed to have been costly if they result in serious inflationary pressures two to three years from now. As the subsequent speaker, Dewet Moser, will explain in further detail, since June 2010 the SNB has been setting up and using instruments that allow us to adapt the conduct of monetary policy to the new excess liquidity situation. We are convinced that these instruments, reverse repos and SNB Bills of various maturities, which are now fully operational, constitute an efficient toolset for the times to come. They place the SNB in a sound position to steer the Libor rate at the level required to maintain price stability.                                                  11  The Swiss Confederation also had public surpluses both in 2009 and 2010 (+0.5% and +0.4% relative to GDP, respectively) and a debt level of around 20% relative to GDP. 12  See, for example, Hildebrand, Philipp (2010) “Monetary policy challenges: Swiss exports in a globalised world”, Brussels, November 2010. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches        
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7   
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9   
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches      
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Axel A Weber: Enhancing stability – current issues in financial regulation Keynote speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank,  at the Frankfurt Finance Summit, “Financial market regulation, supervision and the role  of the central banks: uniform regulation and subsidiary supervision”, Frankfurt am Main,  23 March 2011. *      *      * 1. Introduction Ladies and gentlemen First, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to speak here today. We are now in the fourth year of a crisis that originated in the US housing market but eventually spread throughout the financial system. It led to a worldwide slump in economic activity and, in 2010, sparked a serious sovereign debt crisis in some euro-area member countries. This course of events demonstrated the global character of the financial system – crises are no longer a purely national issue – and therefore underscored the need for an internationally coordinated reform of regulatory and supervisory frameworks. Let me very briefly discuss the issue of globalising regulation and supervision from a European perspective. 2. Reforming the regulatory framework The regulatory reform has three main building blocks: first, Basel III as an enhanced regulatory framework for banks. Second, new rules for systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) and, third, adequate regulation of the shadow banking sector. The G20 endorsed Basel III in November 2010. As regards the other two areas, intensive discussions are ongoing, and results should emerge later this year. At a general level, there is no doubt that an internationally harmonised approach is necessary in all three areas. Given the global nature of the financial system, a fragmented approach would invite regulatory arbitrage and thus provoke the renewed build-up of systemic risk in less regulated jurisdictions. Nonetheless, uniform international principles have to be adapted to heterogeneous national structures. Specific national legislation typically takes better account of national particularities, for example in terms of market structure or modes of refinancing. The challenge is therefore to strike the right balance between ensuring a level international playing field and avoiding a one-size-fits-all approach that places an unnecessarily onerous, or even harmful, burden of adjustment on national financial systems. Whether this would be the case in the EU if the Basel III framework is implemented through the instrument of a regulation rather than a directive is currently a hotly debated issue. For the European Commission, it would definitely be easier to enforce common standards through a regulation, but this approach would leave only very limited leeway for member states to accommodate country-level differences or to deal with any unintended consequences that emerge after the rules have come into effect. 3. Reforming the supervisory framework The reform of supervisory structures involves a similar trade-off, though it is tilted somewhat more in favour of national particularities; national supervisors naturally have a more intimate knowledge of local financial institutions than supranational supervisors. Nevertheless, it is clear from the experiences of the crisis that financial supervision requires a higher degree of international cooperation: firstly because international banks operate and are supervised in different jurisdictions; and secondly because of potential systemic risks, which are predominantly a cross-border phenomenon. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches To facilitate the supervision of international banks, the European System of Financial Supervisors (ESFS) has been set up. Part of this system is the European Banking Authority (EBA), which is responsible for supervising the banking sector. To allow for adequate subsidiarity, the EBA follows a members-based approach where national supervisors are members of boards and working groups. With regard to systemic risk, establishing international cooperation is particularly important. To strengthen the macroprudential approach which supplements the traditional microprudential approach, the focus of supervision has to be broadened from the level of the individual bank to the systemic level. This can and will be achieved by various means. Institutionally, an important element is the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), which has been created as part of the ESFS. Its task is to detect systemic risks early on and to issue individual member states with warnings and recommendations. Nevertheless, as the ESRB has no powers to enforce its recommendations, it remains the responsibility of national governments to ensure that recommendations are followed. 4. The role of central banks Now, as a last point, let me say a few words on the role of central banks in this new regulatory and supervisory framework. Naturally, central banks have a strong interest in financial stability, as only a stable financial system allows monetary policy measures to be implemented efficiently. At the same time, central banks have great expertise in all matters concerning the financial system. Consequently, they already play, and should continue to play, a prominent role in safeguarding financial stability at the microprudential as well as at the macroprudential level. At the microprudential level, central banks in many countries are involved in the supervision of individual banks. In addition, they naturally analyse developments at the macroprudential level extensively and consequently play a major role in the ESRB. However, wherever central banks are involved in financial supervision, it is imperative that this does not compromise their independence and their primary objective, which is to maintain price stability. 5. Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen There is no doubt that the regulatory and supervisory framework has to reflect the global nature of the financial system. Nonetheless, heterogeneous national structures make it imperative to maintain a certain degree of flexibility when reforming regulation and supervision. To strike the balance between uniformity and subsidiarity is certainly a formidable challenge but I am confident that we will eventually succeed and create a more stable and more resilient financial system. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Growth, sustainability and inclusiveness – Thailand’s key success factors Dinner talk by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Japanese Chamber of Commerce (JCC), Bangkok, 23 March 2011. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, Let me begin by extending my deepest condolence to the Japanese business community in Thailand on the immense losses caused by the unprecedented earthquake and tsunami in Japan. Despite the tragic incidents, I am confident that the strength and determination of Japanese people, together with supports from all around the world, will enable Japan to recover swiftly. For today, I would like to thank the Japanese Chamber of Commerce for inviting me to share with the distinguished audience my assessment of the Thai economy. I also look forward to hearing your views and concerns regarding the economic prospects. Needless to say that Japan and Thailand have a long history of close economic relationship, with Japan being the top foreign investor in Thailand. As such, Thailand has become a production hub for several Japanese industries, including vehicles, electronics and electrical appliances. I therefore hope that our discussion today will help align understanding and further strengthen the partnership between our two economies. For my presentation this evening, I would like to offer my assessment of the economy based on what I see as the three most important attributes that determine the economic progress for Thailand – the “key success factors”, if you will. First is that growth must be sustainable. We don’t want three years of boom followed by three years of bust. Second, the country’s potential growth rate should be high enough to continuously raise the people’s general standard of living. And, third, growth should maximize inclusiveness. By this I refer to maximizing the exposure of everyone to economic development, both in terms of participation in the development process and in the sharing of its benefits. This would lessen the problem of inequality, and foster social harmony. That said, I wish to underscore that, even though growth is the most visible factor, growth alone is not sufficient but sustainability and inclusiveness are also crucial to ensure long-term economic success. Looking at economic strengths and weaknesses in the context of these three success factors should provide for a better understanding of the role of central bank and policymakers in advancing the economic development agenda for Thailand. Indeed, these success factors entail three corresponding fundamental responsibilities for policymakers. The first responsibility is to ensure continued macroeconomic stability, which is a prerequisite for economic sustainability, by gearing our economy towards operating at the potential level. Second is to raise the people’s standard of living by expanding the potential growth rate of the economy. Third, to maximize inclusiveness, we have to ensure the equal exposure to economic opportunities for all. Ladies and Gentlemen, Let me start with the first success factor, namely economic sustainability, which I consider to be Thailand’s most important strength. After the 1997 crisis, Thailand has no longer experienced the current account deficit problem. Inflation averaged 2.6 percent over the past decade, or about half of the 5.1 percent average rate during the 1990s prior to the 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Asian Crisis1. Meanwhile, our unemployment rate has been low at around 1 percent. The banking sector, severely affected by the 1997 crisis, has been safe and sound, minimally affected by the global financial crisis ten years later as a result of strengthened risk management and governance. Despite ongoing net capital inflows into Thailand, there appears no sign of asset price bubble while the degrees of leverage in the corporate and household sector are still low. Overall, I believe that the Thai economic stability has strengthened continuously. This achievement has been attributable to sound fiscal and monetary policy, together with appropriate and market-friendly regulations, aimed at keeping the economy operating close to its potential.  Suffice it to say that the Bank of Thailand has fulfilled our responsibility to help achieve the economic stability. Under the inflation-targeting framework, the policy interest rate is the main instrument used to influence saving and spending in the economy so that demand matches potential supply. This economic balance has, in turn, produced a low and stable inflation environment necessary for the sustainable growth. In addition to the interest rate tool, the central bank also has regulatory tools to prevent undesirable accumulation of financial imbalances. Indeed, the so-called “macro-prudential policy” has been used as a complementary policy tool to the interest rate policy long before the sub-prime crisis. To give you a few examples, the Bank of Thailand has imposed a cap on loan-to-value ratio on high-end real estate loans since 2003. We also tightened credit card and personal loan regulations in 2004 and 2005, respectively. These pre-emptive measures helped reduce balance sheet vulnerability and ensure Thailand’s resiliency against and fast recovery after the sub-prime crisis. Nevertheless, despite the success so far on the stability front, we cannot afford to be complacent about economic stability as shocks can occur at any time and in any form, thus we must remain vigilant. Ladies and Gentlemen, Economic stability is the means to an end but not an end in itself. This is because we can also have a stable economy that grows at an undesirably low rate, especially when productivity is sluggish. This brings me to the second success factor, namely high potential growth. Thailand, despite its strength in economic sustainability, has a moderate potential growth rate compared to her peers. Over the past decade, our GDP grew on average by 4.4 percent2 annually, and the average growth rate rises to 5.1 percent excluding the sub-prime crisis period. This growth performance has been somewhat lower than the Bank of Thailand’s research result3, which estimated Thailand’s potential growth at up to 6.1 percent for the next decade. Our estimate result is based on the assumption that the country’s investment growth over the next 5 years returns to its normal trend, which is approximately 10 to 12 percent growth per year as seen during 2002–2005. But, as you are aware, the current growth rate of investment has been around 9 percent, and this makes investment promotion a very challenging and important policy agenda going forward. My own assessment is that this policy challenge can be achieved by strengthened fiscal policy efforts as public investment has been progressing in recent years. Infrastructure projects, which have been long delayed due to political problems, are now back on track. The construction of airport rail link came to a completion last year. Two more railway routes under the plan of Bangkok Mass Transit System are presently under construction. Several other railway projects in other regions other than Mass Transit in Bangkok are also in                                                  1  Inflation rate of 2.6 percent is the average rate during 2001–2010 while 5.1 percent is the average rate during 1990–1996. 2  Average GDP growth rate during 2001–2010. 3  Chuenchoksan, S. and Nakornthab, D. (2008). “Past, Present, and Prospects for Thailand’s Growth: A Labor Market Perspective,” Discussion paper. Bank of Thailand. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 the pipeline. These public investments are welcomed steps towards further infrastructure developments, which will help lower logistic costs and boost Thailand’s productivity. In my view, public investment can and must do more to lower production costs and crowd in private investment over the medium term. Having said that, the physical infrastructure must be complemented by human capital development, to enhance productivity and potential growth. Over the past decade, the government has continuously worked to improve the country’s education and health care systems. There have been extensions in terms of years of compulsory education and more financial supports to increase access to higher education. Subsidized health care for the poor has been provided with extending coverage over the years. Although the public spending (as percentage of GDP) on education and health care in Thailand is comparable to its neighboring countries, the quality remains relatively low. This is evident in the cross-country comparisons of the ratio of those attending secondary schools as well as the relatively low life span, especially compared with Japan which has the longest life span4. Hence, in moving towards a higher labor-skilled economy, Thailand needs to further improve access as well as quality of education and health care to enhance the quality of our human capital. Distinguished Audience, Apart from strengthening infrastructure investment and human capital investment, the exchange rate also plays an important role in influencing Thailand’s productivity in the long-run insofar as it affects efficient resource allocation in the economy. Given the recent development of the global economy, many of you will agree that Thai baht is unlikely to go back to the level seen in the pre-2006 era. This structural change has two implications; first, uncompetitive export sectors will be the most challenged. Second, the strong baht is an opportunity for Thailand to increase productivity through higher imported-capital investments.  The first implication should not be of excessive concern as long as the unemployment rate remains low, which is the case for Thailand. This is because the market mechanism will allow efficient adjustment as uncompetitive firms have to either upgrade themselves, or close down and free up labor resources to more competitive firms. This reallocation process implies that the country makes a better use of labor resources and should therefore yield higher productivity. At present, Thailand’s unemployment rate hovers steadily around 1 percent despite strong baht appreciation in recent years. In the meantime, export growth has remained robust with a swift recovery from the global crisis. These developments possibly indicate that our export sectors have adjusted themselves well and labor resources are being allocated more efficiently. In line with this view, the baht appreciation has somewhat catalyzed the adjustment of Thai economy to a more efficient use of labor resources. In fact, Thailand has continued to face a shortage of labor supply and has to employ immigrant workers from neighboring countries. This tight labor market phenomenon creates incentive for firms to shift factor of production from labor to capital. This shortage of labor will then accentuate my second implication of a strong baht, since the shortage of labor, in addition to cheaper capital goods in baht term, gives incentive for investors to make imported-capital investments. This is the part where the private sector role is essential, especially as Thailand has benefited from immense foreign direct investment in which Japan played the top role. Ladies and Gentlemen, Let me now turn to the last success factor: inclusiveness, which is probably the weakest achievement among the three success factors so far. However, inclusiveness is something that has increasingly gained attention from Thai policymakers in recent years, as it was part                                                  4  IMD, 2010. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches of the root cause of political unrest. I believe that inclusiveness will be one of the long-term solutions for Thailand political stability. Yet, I should stress that inclusiveness has a different concept from equality. It focuses on creating equal opportunity rather than equalizing income. Income equality ultimately means that the reward system is independent of performance which erodes efficiency. Inclusiveness, on the other hand, refers to having equal opportunity which still preserves efficiency through reward incentive system while allowing the rich and the poor to have the same economic opportunity. As such, inclusiveness refers to equal access to public infrastructure such as education, fair competition and equal treatments of law and regulation to all. In this way, inclusiveness will provide equal exposure to yield the benefits from economic prosperity. Improving inclusiveness in Thailand will be a long process but some initiatives have already been put in place. These include decentralization of public spending, better access to education, informal sector debt alleviation, and better credit access for low income group. While these initiatives bode well for inclusiveness, the government must be careful not to excessively gear government spending towards populist policies that eventually add financial burden to the already-tight budget and sovereign debt in the future. In particular, it is important that the government prioritize and balance between public consumption and public investment accordingly. More importantly, efficient management with good governance will be the key ingredients to policy success in this regard. For our part, the Bank of Thailand has also put inclusiveness as one of the main agenda in the Financial Master Plan II, other than efficiency and provision of financial infrastructure. The objective is to provide financial access for all, particularly to the underserved, in an efficient and financially viable manner without compromising financial stability and prudence. This is still an on-going process which we are committed to. Ladies and Gentlemen, Before ending my talk this evening, I would like to address some of the concerns raised by Japanese corporations in Thailand, as reported in a survey from JETRO (Japan External Trade Organization). The key concerns include political stability, development of customs-related system and human resource development. On politics, I have good faith that the upcoming election is another important step towards political stability, while commitment to improving inclusiveness mentioned earlier would bring a long-term solution to the country. As for the customs system, Thailand has continued to improve the customs system over the past five year as attested by the improvement in indicators of trade across borders, which is a category in Ease of Doing Business assessment, done by the International Finance Corporation (IFC). Export-related requirements in terms of number of documents or period of procedure have been reduced or shortened over time. These improvements and further works will certainly help promote efficiency in international trades. With regards to the issue of human resources, I see that the reliance on migrant labour to fill the current labour shortage is not a long-term viable solution for Thailand. In fact, the economy, with joint efforts of private and public sectors, needs to raise labour productivity by upgrading production technology that uses higher skilled labour. Finally, let me close by stressing that the three success factors: growth, sustainability and inclusiveness are necessary and complementary to achieving long-term economic progress for Thailand. For the central bank’s part, many of the issues discussed this evening are beyond the functional scope of the Bank of Thailand. Our main role is to ensure sustainable growth by maintaining macroeconomic stability through appropriate monetary policy and financial regulations. For this, I can assure you that we are fully committed to our role and responsibility. As for broader national economic policy agenda, public policies aimed at improving the country’s productivity are necessary, but they alone are not sufficient to raise Thailand’s potential growth rate; your contribution from the private sector will be the key to the eventual success. And, I am convinced that working together to achieve our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 common goals will strengthen our long history of economic partnership and brings economic prosperity to both Japan and Thailand. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Sanusi Lamido Sanusi: Banks in Nigeria and national economic development – a critical review Keynote address by Mr Sanusi Lamido Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at the seminar on “Becoming an economic driver while applying banking regulations”, organised by the Canadian High Commission in joint collaboration with the Chartered Institute of Bankers of Nigeria (CIBN) and the Royal Bank of Canada (RBC), Lagos, 7 March 2011. *      *      * Protocol 1.  I am very delighted to be invited to present a key-note address at this important forum. I wish to commend the organizers, the Canadian High Commission, the Chartered Institute of Bankers of Nigeria and the Royal Bank of Canada for gathering top policy makers and operators in the banking and finance industry here today for this all important seminar which is focusing on the banking sector in Nigeria. The theme of this seminar “Transformational Banking for Economic Development” is indeed topical, and couldn’t have come at a better time, considering that the banking sector in Nigeria is passing through a critical and decisive path in reforms to reposition it to effectively impact on other sectors of the economy, especially the real sector.  2.  Economic development is about enhancing the productive capacity of an economy by using available resources to reduce risks, remove impediments which otherwise could lower costs and hinder investment. The banking system plays the important role of promoting economic growth and development through the process of financial intermediation. Many economists have acknowledged that the financial system, with banks as its major component, provide linkages for the different sectors of the economy and encourage high level of specialization, expertise, economies of scale and a conducive environment for the implementation of various economic policies of government intended to achieve non-inflationary growth, exchange rate stability, balance of payments equilibrium and high levels of employment.  3.  The role of finance in economic development is widely acknowledged in the literature. In particular, Schumpeter (1911) put the role of financial intermediation at the center of economic development. He argued that financial intermediation through the banking system played a pivotal role in economic development by affecting the allocation of savings, thereby improving productivity, technical change and the rate of economic growth. He believed that efficient allocation of savings through identification and funding of entrepreneurs with the best chances of successfully implementing innovative products and production processes are tools to achieve this objective. 4.  The endogenous growth literature also supports the argument that financial development has a positive impact on growth. Well functioning financial systems are able to mobilize household savings, allocate resources efficiently, diversify risk, and enhance the flow of liquidity, reduce information asymmetry and transaction cost and provide an alternative to raising funds through individual savings and retained earnings. These functions suggest that financial development has a positive impact on growth.  5.  Ladies and Gentlemen, for many of you here, I may be stating the obvious, by highlighting the central role that banks play in the development of every economy by mobilizing resources for productive investments and being the conduit for the implementation of monetary policy. Yet, I have given this the emphasis it requires. Due to the critical nature of these roles, and the fact that the ability of banks to effectively impact on economic development hinges largely on their soundness and efficiency, governments across the world continue to take variety of measures to safeguard the banking sector through reforms. Such reforms often focus on increased risk management procedures and enhanced corporate 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches governance in order to strengthen and reposition the banking industry to enable it contribute effectively to the development of the real sector through its intermediation process. In addition, such reforms may involve a comprehensive process of substantially improving the regulatory and surveillance framework; fostering healthy competition in banking operations, ensuring an efficient framework for monetary management, expansion of savings mobilization base, enforcement of capital adequacy, and the promotion of investment and growth through market-based interest rates. The need for reforms on an on-going basis has become more imperative with the increasing sophistication of the global financial products. The recent experience from the global financial crisis has further underscored the imperatives for countries to embark on banking reforms on a regular basis.  6.  Ladies and Gentlemen, the process of reforming a financial sector usually involves the movement from an initial situation of controlled interest rates, poorly developed money and securities market and under-developed banking system, towards a situation of flexible interest rates, an expanded role for market forces in resource allocation, increased autonomy for the central bank and a deepening of the money and capital markets. It would indeed be difficult to define the components of “good” banking sector reform in absolute terms. Generally speaking, good reforms would engender clear market entry and exit conditions; ensure the ability of banks to function according to market principles without state intervention in their decision-making; guarantee central bank independence and establish independent banking oversight. This means that reform in the domestic financial system will comprise of three key policy actions. The first is removal of price restrictions; that is, the removal of ceilings on deposit interest rates and restrictions on lending interest rates. The second component is removal of quantity restrictions; that is, the removal of direct credit allocation mechanisms, relaxation of reserve requirements, and removal of restrictions on foreign currency deposits. The third policy action consists of removal of entry barriers in the financial system. In countries with a heavy government presence in the financial sector, reform would usually involve privatization of public financial institutions and relaxation of restrictions on the creation of private financial institutions. Liberalization would also include opening up of the financial system to foreign players. All these actions aim at promoting strong competition in the financial system, which improves the efficiency of intermediation through the dismantling of monopolies in the financial system.  7.  Thus, a well repositioned bank is therefore expected to perform its role more efficiently and contribute to the development and growth of the economy. Banking sector reform leads to improved financial services which lead to cost reduction by the industrial concerns. More people will have access to funds from the banking system and this will increase aggregate demand for goods and services. Increased aggregate demand will impact positively on output and employment generation thereby reducing poverty – the ultimate goal of economic management. 8.  In the final analysis, bank reforms aim at ensuring financial deepening which implies the ability of financial institutions to effectively mobilize savings for investment purposes. The growth of domestic savings provides the real structure for the creation of diversified financial claims. It also presupposes active participation of financial institutions in financial markets, which in turn entail the supply of quality (financial) instruments and financial services.  9.  Ladies and gentlemen, I do not wish to bore you with a chronicle of distress and reforms that have taken place in Nigeria since the 1950s. I have done so in many fora. Suffices it to say that many crises had happened and many reforms had been initiated and implemented in the banking sector. At the inception of the reforms in 2004, the thrust of policy was to grow the banks and position them to play pivotal roles in driving development in other sectors of the economy, as well as induce improvements in their own operational efficiency. As a result, banks were consolidated through mergers and acquisitions, raising the capital base from N2 billion to a minimum of N25 billion, which reduced the number of banks to 25 from 89 in 2005 and later to 24. Beyond the need to recapitalize the banks, the reforms focused on ensuring minimal reliance on public sector for funds, but rather relying on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 the private sector. The adoption of risk focused and rule-based regulatory framework; adoption of zero tolerance in regulatory framework in data/information, rendition/reporting and infractions; strict enforcement of corporate governance principles in banking; expeditious process for rendition of returns by banks and other financial institutions through e-FASS; revision and updating of relevant laws for effective corporate governance; and ensuring greater transparency and accountability in the implementation of banking laws and regulation.  10.  The implications were that the resources base of such banks was weak and volatile, rendering their operations highly vulnerable to swings in government revenue, arising from the uncertainties of the international oil market. It was also observed that many banks appeared to have abandoned their essential intermediation role of mobilizing savings and inculcating banking habits at the household and micro enterprise levels. The apathy of banks towards small savers, particularly at the grass root level, had not only compounded the problems of low domestic savings and high bank lending rates in the country, it reduced access to relatively cheap and stable funds that could provide a reliable source of credit to the productive sectors at affordable rates of interest. 11.  Another aspect of the reforms which is seldom mentioned relate to the changes in policy approach at the CBN. Beginning from December 2006, the Bank introduced a low interest rate based framework and made the monetary policy rate the operating target. The new framework has enabled the bank to be more proactive in countering inflationary pressures. Also, in the use of the framework, upper and lower limits to the monetary policy rate were set, coinciding with the rate for the standing lending facility and standing deposit facility, respectively. The corridor regime has helped to check wide fluctuations in the interbank rates and also engendered orderly development of the money market segment. 12.  There are, no doubt, some positive outcomes of the reforms. First, banks by their size were enabled to undertake funding of large ticket projects, especially in infrastructure, and oil and gas sectors, through the new window in the enlarged single obligor limits. The larger size of banks also engendered improved customer confidence. The number of bank branches has increased from 3,247 in 2003 to over 5,837 in 2010 and employment in the sector rose from 50,586 in 2005 to 71,876 in 2010. Also, the capital market received a boost as several banks recorded successes in their initial public offers (IPOs). The consolidation exercise also impacted on the payment system positively as the fewer number of banks made it easier to deploy the new automated clearing systems and also reduced the length of time spent on the clearing floor. Concerning supervision, the relative ease of having to oversee 24 banks as against 89 deserves mention. 13.  In spite of these positive developments, a new set of problems emerged and threatened the financial system from 2008, coinciding with the global financial crisis. The surge in capital put pressure on the availability of human capacity in the sector and coupled with poor corporate governance and risk management frameworks this led to our recent experience with margin loans and other high risk investments. Consequently, when the capital market bubble burst, the balance sheet of banks became eroded to the extent that some of them remained for some time on “life support” from the CBN. Inter-bank rates spiked as banks tried to borrow at any rate in order to remain afloat, the size of non-performing loans significantly increased, customer panic re-emerged and several instances of unethical conduct among the managements of banks were revealed. In addition, the critical question “Are our banks playing the pivotal role of driving development” could not be answered in the affirmative. It was this scenario that set the stage for the most recent set of reforms.  14.  The reforms could be broadly divided into two. The first part of the reform focused on ensuring that the nine banks, which the CBN/NDIC special examination revealed were in a dire state, were rescued. Some of the actions included the reduction of cash and liquidity ratios, expanded discount window operations, which enabled the banks to borrow for up to 360 days from the CBN. It also admitted non-traditional instruments, like commercial papers, 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches promissory notes and bankers’ acceptances in the discount window. Interbank lending was also guaranteed to encourage banks to lend among themselves. The sum of N620 billion was injected into eight banks as a direct rescue package, while corporate governance was enhanced with the appointment of new management teams. Over all, we can now say that the system has been restored to the path of stability. 15.  The second aspect of the reforms is couched in terms of medium to long term objectives. Under this, financial sector stability is emphasized alongside the need to position the banks to provide funding for the development of the real sector of the economy. The four cardinal pillars of the reform are: enhancing the quality of banks, establishing financial stability, enabling healthy financial sector evolution, and ensuring that the financial sector contributes to the real economy, which is very critical to the type of growth that translates to improved welfare. 16.  Enhancing the quality of banks entails the initiation by the CBN of a five part programme to enhance the operations and quality of banks in Nigeria. This programme consists of the following: industry remedial programmes to fix the key causes of the crisis; risk-based supervision; reforming the regulatory framework; enhanced customer protection; and internal transformation of the CBN. Issues such as effective corporate governance, data quality, and financial crime have seen increased attention. More so, consumer confidence is also being tackled in the reform programme as complaint desks have been opened to ensure that financial services are delivered to customers as transparently and fairly as possible. 17.  Establishing financial stability entails conscious actions by the CBN, and other regulatory agencies to stem wide fluctuations in the key macroeconomic indicators. The high points of this pillar include, strengthening the Financial Stability Committee within the CBN, establishment of macro-prudential rules, development of directional economic policy and counter-cyclical fiscal policies by the government and further development of capital markets as alternative to bank funding. It is hoped that the new macro-prudential rules would leverage on the following:  Limiting capital market lending to a set proportion of bank’s balance sheet;  Prohibiting banks from using depositors’ funds for proprietary trading, private equity or venture capital investment; and  Adjusting capital adequacy and forward looking capital requirements driven by stress tests by the CBN. 18.  Enabling healthy financial sector evolution entails the CBN reviewing the basic one-size-fits-all model of banking. This has made possible the emergence of international, national, regional, mono-line and specialized banks such as non-interest banks, etc, with different capital requirements commensurate to the depth of their operations. 19.  The fourth pillar of the reform has direct bearing on the development of the real sector as it seeks to position the banking system to contribute to the growth and development of the various sectors of the economy. The spirit of this pillar is anchored on the fact that real economic growth must be supported by actual rise in physical goods and services. This segment of the reform has sought to break from the classical orthodoxy of leaving the allocation of financial resources to the market forces. Rather, the reform has identified priority sectors and developed tailored interventions to support and promote growth in these sectors. Some of the key interventions in the real sector under this reform pillar include: the N200 Billion Commercial Agricultural Credit Scheme (CACS); the N300 Billion Power and Aviation Intervention Fund; the N200 Billion Restructuring/Refinancing to the Manufacturing Sector/SME; the N200 Billion Small and Medium Scale Enterprises Guarantee Scheme (SMECGS).  20.  The CACS was established by the CBN in collaboration with the Federal Ministry of Agriculture. It is being funded through the issuance of FGN Bond worth N200 billion, by the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Debt Management Office (DMO) in two tranches. The first tranche of N100 billion had been raised and passed on to participating banks for on-lending to farmers. Loans made under this scheme are at single digit interest rate subject to a maximum of 9.0 per cent, while the CBN bears the interest subsidy at maturity. The scheme was initially to promote commercial agricultural enterprises but was later expanded to accommodate small scale farmers through the on-lending scheme of the state governments. The sum of N96.81 billion has been disbursed to 104 projects through 11 banks and 18 State governments including the Federal Capital Territory, as at end of December 2010. 21.  Under the Power and Aviation Intervention Fund, the CBN made available the sum of N300 billion to stimulate credit to the domestic power sector and the troubled airline industry. The amount was part of the initial N500 billion intervention fund sourced to catalyze financing of the real sector of the Nigerian economy. The main objective of the initiative was to help finance badly needed power projects and to allow banks to refinance loans to the heavily-indebted airline industry. The programme operates in such a way that borrowers will be able to access the fund at an interest rate of 7 percent payable on a quarterly basis including all charges in order to refinance existing loans and leases and provide working capital for the two sectors. The fund is managed by the Bank of Industry (BOI) while the Africa Finance Corporation (AFC) serves as the technical adviser to the fund. 22.  As part of efforts towards unlocking the credit market and to ensure that credit flows to the real sector of the economy, the CBN made available N200 billion for re-financing/re-structuring of banks’ existing loan portfolios to the manufacturing sector and SMEs. The main objective of the fund is to fast-track the development of the manufacturing sector by improving access to credit by manufacturers as well as improving the financial position of the DMBs. The types of facilities under the fund include long term loans for acquisition of plant and machinery, refinancing of existing loans, resuscitation of ailing industries, working capital and refinancing of existing leases. The loan amount for a single obligor is a maximum of N1 billion in respect of re-financing/re-structuring with an interest rate of 7 per cent payable on quarterly basis. All commercial banks and Development Finance Institutions (excluding BOI) had all been enlisted to participate in the scheme. As at the end of December 2010, N199.6 billion had been disbursed to 539 beneficiaries across twelve different sectors of the economy. 23.  The N200 billion Small and Medium Scale Enterprises guarantee Scheme established by the CBN in 2010 aims at promoting access to credit by SMEs in Nigeria. The scheme provides guarantees on loans by banks to the sector in order to absorb some of the risk elements that inhibit banks from lending to the real sector. The activities covered under the scheme include manufacturing and agricultural value chains; SMEs, processing, packaging and distribution of primary products. The maximum amount that can be guaranteed is N100 million and is in the form of working capital, term loan for refurbishment, equipment upgrade, expansion and overdraft. The guarantee covers 80 per cent of the amount borrowed and is valid up to the maturity date of the loan, with maximum tenor of 5 years. 24. A new financing framework for agriculture, the Nigerian Incentive–Based Risk Sharing System for Agricultural lending (NIRSAL) is being introduced. This model of financing agriculture is different in many ways from the current model which has not yielded the desired impact of making adequate credit available in the sector. NIRSAL is a demand driven credit facility rather than the current supply driven funding. It would adopt a value chain approach to lending and banks would be free to choose which part of the chain they would be interested in lending. It would build the capacity of banks to engage and deliver loans by providing technical assistance, reduce counterpart risks facing banks through innovative crop insurance products, reward performance in agricultural lending and would be managed with performance based incentives. NIRSAL would pool the current resources in CBN’s agricultural financing schemes and other investor funds and transfer these into the 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches different components of the programme. In other words, our existing agricultural financing and insurance scheme would be assessed, modified and integrated into NIRSAL. 25.  All of our development initiatives at the CBN have been underpinned by a new engagement with the Banking industry through the Bankers’ Committee by adopting a more collaborative approach for financial services led national economic development and transformation. The Bankers’ Committee has identified 3 key sectors: Power, Transportation and Agriculture, as most critical to development of the real economy, as well as the change that will drive other sectors and contribute to economic development of Nigeria. We work by identifying initiatives in each of the focus sectors that the financial system will support, determine requirements for success including funding and engage in advocacy to effect government policy changes. The Bankers’ Committee also supports industry-wide capacity-building and work on the development of regulation and legislation to support lending to these three key sectors.  26.  Available data shows that the macroeconomic environment has improved considerably. Inflation rate has moderated at a low double digit while the prime lending rate has gone down significantly. The exchange rate has been relatively stable. All these have impacted on the growth of the real economy. 27.  From the recent experience it is discovered that the preponderance of toxic assets in bank portfolios have largely contributed to liquidity challenge facing some banks. However, the operation of AMCON has started to strengthen the balance sheets of the deposit money banks. It is important that the banking system should learn to strictly to comply with the Basel requirements in their operations in order to safeguard their stability. Therefore, bank managers must be guided by professionalism and good corporate governance principles in their day to day activities so that our banks can remain safe, sound and competitive in the global market. 28.  Maintaining a safe and sound banking sector is essential, given the key role that banks play in facilitating economic growth and financing developmental projects, particularly key infrastructure, agriculture and industry. Most emerging market economies have been known to use the domestic financial institutions to execute real sector big ticket projects and financial institutions in Nigeria should not be an exception if we hope to achieve our developmental objectives. Therefore, for our banks to be globally competitive, the current reforms in the banking will be sustained and strengthened. 29.  Finally, ladies and gentlemen, some schools of thought have questioned the rationale for any central bank to pursue the so called multiple objectives. Let me emphasize the fact that in a developing economy such as ours in need of strong growth, typically a central bank’s objectives should include developmental role in addition to its core mandate of ensuring price stability. Indeed, during the global financial crisis, most central banks subordinated the price stability objective to achieving financial stability and initiating growth.  30.  Despite the unusual monetary policy environment, the CBN has recently pursued the objectives of financial stability and initiating growth, but with a critical eye on price developments. The point here is that a focus on price stability is not inconsistent with financial stability and economic growth objectives as you cannot have economic growth without price stability. Thus, it is our expectation that effective implementation of the recent initiatives would help to promote Small and Medium Enterprises, bring the necessary improvements to the power sector, increase agriculture output, create employment and reduce poverty as well as put Nigeria on the path to meeting the targets of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Benny Popoitai: The National Informal Economy Policy Speech by Mr Benny Popoitai, Acting Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the launch of the National Informal Economy Policy, Port Moresby, 24 February 2011. (Presented on the Acting Governor’s behalf by Dr Gae Y Kauzi, Manager, Research Department.) *      *      * Acknowledgement Honourable Dame Carol Kidu, Minister for Community Development  Mr. Joseph Klapat, Secretary, Department of Community Development, and your staff  Mr. Max Kep, Chairman, Informal Economy Committee, and your members  Mr. Paul Barker, Director of Institute of National Affairs, and your staff  The Consultative, Implementation and Monitoring Council Distinguished Guests Ladies and Gentlemen Introduction The Bank of PNG as the Central Bank of the country is pleased to have been invited to participate in this occasion – the launching of the National Informal Economic Policy. The Governor, Mr. Loi Bakani, has to attend to an obligatory engagement with one of our international partners so he passes his sincere apology. The Acting Governor, Mr. Benny Popoitai, has fallen ill and is not able to make it for the launching, and he also passes his sincere apology. I stand in to present this speech on his behalf. What the occasion is for and the role of the central bank The informal economy has the vast majority of the population, who does not have access to many normal services and therefore are hindered from taking part in economic activities. Greater participation by the mass of the country’s population in the development process is long recognized through the National Constitution with: the Preamble to the Constitution calling for “development to take place primarily through the use of PNG forms of social and political organization” and for economic development to give special emphasis to “small-scale artisan, service and business activity”; and also through one of the Eight Point Plan Aims adopted upon the attainment of independence calling for “greater and equal participation of the people” and for “equal distribution of wealth”. It is further recognized in the Government’s 2050 Vision launched in 2009, specifically in the wealth creation pillar that states “a concerted effort is required to empower citizens to create wealth from our vast renewable natural resources and through the development of entrepreneurial skills to ensure that the nation’s wealth is fairly distributed to the majority of the people.” This occasion – the launching of the Informal Economy Policy formalizes a necessary and a pre-requisite step – of having a policy statement that supports the Informal Sector Development and Control Act (2004) and guides the Government in its administration of the Act, and in all matters concerning development of the informal economy.  The Bank of PNG recognizes and accepts the need for greater participation of our people in meaningful activities for their benefit and thereby contributing to the development process. The Bank has and will do what it can within its domain of responsibilities to engage in the development process, especially with respect to financial services. The Bank of PNG and all the intermediaries in the financial sector can do more to get financial services to the vast majority (about 92 percent) of our population who do not have access to formal financial 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches services. There is definitely the need to progressively increase the level of financial inclusion (defined as to have access to formal financial services) of our people. Of interest to the Bank is the growth of the current financial service providers to complement each other in provision of financial services to a large unbanked population of PNG. The Bank has undertaken a few initiatives aimed at getting services to the people. I will give two examples of the work that the Bank did or is doing in the area of financial inclusion and financial literacy. In the area of microfinance, it has provided the oversight in the establishment of Wau Microbank in 2004 as part of the PNG-ADB Microfinance and Employment project and operated under a conditional license from BPNG. In 2008, approval was granted by the Bank for Wau Microbank to change its name to “Nationwide Microbank Ltd” under a full license and with branches in other centres, including Lae, Bulolo, Madang, Kainantu and Wewak. Its assets and the number of depositors have grown, many of whom are small savers and entrepreneurs. Over the years to 31st of December 2010:  Total assets of the Nationwide Micro increased from K4.3m to 43.8m  Total deposits increased from K2.8m to 39.1m  Total number of depositors was at 57,991  Total loans was at K13.9m  Branches in Wau, Bulolo, Lae, Madang, Kainantu, Wewak, Mt. Hagen, Kimbe, Kundiawa and Port Moresby. This illustrates what can happen if opportunities are created for our people. In this regard, I note that in the detailed policy strategies and priority action areas in the policy document to be launched today, microfinance is identified as the appropriate instrument for the objective of improving financial inclusion in the country.  In the last 10 years or so, there has been a strong interest in the area of financial literacy and there have been initiatives taken in government and private sectors to improve it in many countries, particularly high income countries. Currently, the Bank is overseeing a World Bank led research project to measure financial capability in selected communities in the country. PNG is one of the 8 countries participating in the project. The project will identify the levels and deficiencies of financial capability in PNG, out of which authorities such as the Bank of PNG can come up with policy measures to address and improve financial literacy of the people to in turn improve their financial capability. Similar research is being done in Fiji and Solomon Islands. This research initiative and the country’s participation together with the Institute of National Affairs ( INA) as the local consultant fits in well with the initiatives undertaken in the South Pacific region, specifically the Coombs Declaration (2008) made by the Pacific Finance, Central Bank Governors and Senior Officials from the Pacific and Timor-Leste, that proposes a regional umbrella – MoneyPacific and the related Pacific Financial Inclusion Program – that will address the issue of financial inclusion and capability across Pacific communities. Measures must be taken to encourage and harness the potential that the informal sector has in saving and investment to increase the inclusion of the people and improve their financial literacy and encourage responsible financial practices, and discourage the practice of informal sector lending. Increased savings and investments in the informal economy will contribute positively to economic activity and growth of the whole economy. Indeed there are evidences and experiences of high income countries having a positive correlation between the level of financial inclusion, literacy and (capability of people in handling and managing money) and economic activity and growth, and income. So we have to keep on striving hard to improve financial inclusion and financial literacy in PNG. In the literature on the subject of financial capability and financial literacy, providing financial education is seen as the key intervention that reduces ignorance and improves outcomes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Beside the initiatives mentioned above, the Bank is looking at the regulatory environment for mobile phone banking and has carried out a review of the national payments system with a view to reform the current payments system, with enabling legislation, to improve efficiency with respect to timely clearing of transactions, reduction in costs and risks, within PNG and with the rest of the world. Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen I have focused on the area of financial service and financial inclusion as a vehicle to empower our people in the informal economy to participate in the development process as this area concerns the Bank. But as we all know there are other areas of services – education, transport infrastructure, health, etc – that needs to be improved as well for our rural population. This is the responsibility of other agents in the country. Indeed, the Vision 2050 calls for a better service delivery model in the country. Improvement in these areas together with improvement in financial inclusion and literacy will go a long way in empowering the people in the informal economy and the whole economy to realize their potentials in contributing to the development of the country as aspired in the National Constitution, and now the Vision 2050.  While the informal economy is being recognized through the Act of 2004 and now the launching of the policy, there are others who can pick on some negatives, as in many initiatives. In particular, some may view the urban squatter settlements as the source for those who participate in informal activities. Port Moresby for instance has seen an increase in the number of settlements and expansion of existing ones. Many of the informal sector street vendors, for instance, come from settlements. The informal activities occur outside shops and at bus stops and provide an avenue for opportunists to steal/pick pocket from people of both formal and informal economies/sectors. Mothers and school children have fallen victims. These negative aspects must be minimized as stated in the mission statement. On the whole, there should be more positives that would outweigh the negatives if done and enforced properly. Other agents such as the law enforcement bodies must play their part in controlling the daily negative aspects of informal activities on the streets and weed out those who resort to petty crimes to earn a living, while also not unreasonably chasing mothers and stealing their items (like betelnuts) for sale. The launching of the Informal Economy Policy will provide the necessary step for the development of the informal economy towards the realization of that dream – of greater participation of the mass of our population in economic activities that will improve their income and life style, and contribute to the growth and development of the economy. Thank you. 
Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: What lies behind the success of the euro? Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the Investmentforum 2011, Salzburg, 21 March 2011. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to thank you for inviting me to this event. It was the Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter who stated that “a nation’s monetary system is a reflection of everything that the nation wants, suffers and is. … Nothing says what a nation is made of so clearly as what it does in terms of its monetary policy.” In the light of this, I would like to explore the ways in which our single currency and our single monetary policy have contributed significantly to the growth and stability of our economies. Over the last 12 years, the euro has been successful not only at bringing down inflation; it has also served as a defensive buffer during the crisis. Nevertheless, I would also like to talk about the fact that further efforts are required if we are to safeguard the success of the euro. Efforts are required, particularly on the part of governments, in devising economic and fiscal frameworks, which are of the essence to the single currency. However, efforts are also necessary on the part of financial market participants and supervisors, given that the maintenance of financial market stability is a crucial prerequisite for monetary and macroeconomic stability. When it was first launched in 1999 and then when the euro cash changeover took place in 2002, the euro was met with a certain degree of criticism and scepticism. Today, the euro is the single currency for 17 countries, with a total population of 330 million citizens. The euro has proved to be a resounding success. Given that the average rate of inflation in the euro area for the first 12 years of the currency’s existence stands at just below 2% (show chart), the euro is as stable as the deutschmark or the Austrian Schilling were earlier. And this is the case despite the testing times for monetary policy experienced of late – as evidenced by the recent financial crisis and the earlier turmoil in oil and commodity prices (for example, oil prices reached a peak of USD 145 per barrel). Even by international standards, the euro fares well. Indeed, the regional differences within the euro area in terms of rates of inflation and growth are more or less comparable with regional differences observed in the United States. Furthermore, the euro has established itself as the second international reserve currency behind the US dollar, and investors trust the euro when investing in euro-denominated financial products. I would like to take this opportunity to:  provide you with an insight into our current of the current economic situation;  explain how the single currency has contributed towards the management of the financial market crisis;  offer you an overview of the financial market reforms in the European Union;  outline what is still to be done to guarantee the stability of the euro over the long-term horizon. Assessment of the economic situation of the euro area Allow me to first explain the ECB’s current assessment of the economic outlook from a monetary policy perspective. As regards the economic situation of the euro area, there are a BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
number of positive signals. The economy is following an upward trajectory (show chart). Since its trough in the second quarter of 2009, the economy has made up close to half of its recession-induced production losses. The relatively low rate of growth observed until now is in line with experiences of other economies recovering from severe financial crises. A peculiarity of the current recovery in comparison with previous upturns is the relatively low contribution to growth stemming from consumer spending. However, in this area to, there are some positive signals. As regards private households, the labour market situation is stabilising, which should boost consumers’ purchasing power and, by extension, domestic demand. The impact of the crisis weighed more strongly on the number of hours worked than on the number of employed. That is why the rebound in economic activity is also making itself felt more in the number of hours worked than in the rate of unemployment, although the latter has been hovering around 10%. In the near future, all available forecasts indicate that the gradual recovery of economic activity in the euro area is likely to continue. According to the most recent projections of ECB staff (table), the real economic growth rate is expected to stand at between 1.3% and 2.1% this year and between 0.8% and 2.8% next year. At the same time, the outlook for growth in the area of exports and domestic demand is now predicted to improve. Overall, the most recent economic data confirms that the underlying momentum of economic growth in the euro area is favourable. However, as regards economic activity and the medium-term risks to price stability, the surge in oil prices is increasing cause for concern (show chart). In the light of heightened geopolitical uncertainties, the price per barrel of the leading North Sea oil, Brent crude, has been ratcheted upwards by around 25% since the beginning of the year, peaking at close to USD 117. Rising oil prices have already had a clearly visible effect on the rate of inflation in the euro area. This stood at 2.4% in February of this year and will hover markedly above 2% in the coming months on the back of persistently elevated oil prices.  Our assessment is that the risks to medium-term price developments are tilted to the upside. In their most recent projections for the euro area, ECB staff see inflation ranging between 2% and 2.6% this year and between 1% and 2.4% next year. It must be stressed, however, that these projections do not take into account the recent oil price hikes and are based on the assumption that wage pressures will remain subdued. The question also remains unanswered as to whether indirect taxes and administered prices stemming from the necessary fiscal consolidation measures of the next few years will rise more sharply than currently anticipated. Against this background, strong vigilance is, of course, necessary and we are monitoring the situation closely. Should there be any signs of inflationary risks over the medium term, the ECB is ready and determined to take appropriate action in good time. In summary of our assessment of the current situation, it is safe to assume that the cyclical recovery that is under way stands on sound foundations. The oil price-indiced increase in inflation is being monitored closely. The fact that this view of the overall economic situation is actually rather favourable, ladies and gentlemen, is due not least to the stability of the euro, to a monetary policy stance oriented to stability and to the decisive action undertaken in the financial crisis to stabilise the banking sector. Let me explain this in somewhat greater detail. The financial crisis as a test of the strength of the euro The financial crisis has put the euro and the economy of the euro area well and truly to the test. During the financial crisis, the Governing Council of the ECB proved its capacity to take the necessary steps in a timely manner and its readiness to contribute positively to financial stability. The speedy intervention of the ECB made it possible to prevent the liquidity and confidence crises from spiralling into a systemic crisis. The ECB responded immediately – as early as 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
9 August 2007 – to the tensions that suddenly emerged in the money markets. Ever since, the Eurosystem has bolstered stability in the interbank market through extensive liquidity provision. Within the space of only seven months, the ECB lowered its key interest rate by 325 basis points to just 1% (show chart). In order to provide further support to financing conditions and the provision of liquidity to the banking system, the Eurosystem has implemented a string of temporary non-standard measures over the past two and a half years. The financial crisis soon made evident that monetary policy is only able to achieve its goals if also economic and financial policies at the national level live up to their responsibilities. A large number of governments adopted sizeable measures to strengthen the capital bases in, and guarantees for, the financial sector, as well as economic stabilisation measures to curb the real economic downturn. Together with the stabilisation packages put in place by the governments, the non-standard measures of the ECB have had a stabilising effect on both the financial sector and economic activity in the euro area. The concerted efforts have contributed to the financial stability and economic recovery in the euro area. In recent months, the situation in the money markets of the euro area has improved further. On the whole, banks are requesting significantly less liquidity than before. Since last summer, an ongoing process of normalisation has been observed in interest rate spreads in interbank money markets (EONIA), which have more or less returned to the levels prevailing before the onset of the financial crisis in August 2007. These developments are indicative of the increased trust among banks in the euro area – a development due largely to the decisive action undertaken by the ECB. Looking at other important money markets (such as that of the United States or the United Kingdom), we see that there, too, interest rate spreads have narrowed at a similar rate. Their central banks had likewise intervened in the form of interest rate cuts and extensive non-standard measures. The government stabilisation measures come at a price, however. In particular, the financial crisis has put public finances under pressure – not only in euro area countries but indeed in all advanced economies. This phenomenon has been most clearly manifested in surging public deficits and government debt ratios (show chart). As a result of the financial crisis, budget deficits in other industrialised countries, such as the United Kingdom, the United States and Japan, have even reached double-digit levels. According to the autumn 2010 economic forecasts of the European Commission, the public deficit for the euro area stood at 6.3% of GDP last year, while a decline to 4.6% of GDP is projected for this year. These figures far exceed the 3% ceiling laid down in the Stability and Growth Pact. The deterioration of public finances in a number of euro area member States has impacted negatively on investors’ confidence in government bonds issued by these countries, and thus to further turbulences in the financial markets. This is also reflected in the sharp increase in the cost of provisions for losses on the government bonds of a number of euro area countries. The additional distortion has not only given rise to further instability in the financial system, but has also had an impact on the ECB’s monetary policy action. Allow me to take a closer look at two of these aspects: the first is the need for a stable financial system and the second relates to the safeguarding of the stability of the euro by way of stability-oriented economic and fiscal policies. Financial market reforms in the European Union The financial crisis has highlighted that turbulences in the financial markets can have a massive impact on economic growth. The crisis, which originated in the markets for complex financial instruments, rapidly evolved into a crisis encompassing large parts of the financial sector. This resulted in a decline of lending to households and enterprises, as well as in a drop of 4% in euro area growth in 2009. BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 
Although the causes of the financial crisis are multifaceted and complex, far-reaching reforms that lead to an improved regulatory framework for, and a better supervision of, the financial markets are essential in order to avoid a recurrence of such adverse developments in the future. There is a general consensus on the necessity of improving the regulatory framework and supervision. The G20 countries were quick in striving for reforms, which have since been elaborated further by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Financial Stability Board (FSB). All in all, some progress has already been made in the area of reforms to financial market regulation, with the most notable advance being the agreement reached in the Basel Committee, i.e. “Basel III”. The accord calls for a strong reinforcement of current capital requirements and the liquidity reserves of financial institutions. Even in relation to previously unregulated or lesser regulated financial institutions, such as investment funds and ratings agencies, tentative steps are being taken to improve transparency. Banks operate internationally, and financial flows have become global in character. Regulatory and supervisory measures, by contrast, are largely taken and coordinated at the national level and fail to take these developments into consideration to an adequate extent. That is why the reforms in the field of financial market supervision are much to be appreciated. The Heads of State or Government have agreed on a new structure for financial supervision in the European Union (EU), with a view to better preventing future financial market disruptions. This three newly established European Supervisory Authorities for banks, insurance companies and financial markets became operational at the beginning of 2011 and are designed to enhance micro-prudential supervision. However, the financial crisis has not only reminded us of the fact that banks operate on an international scale, but has also taught us that, given close financial interlinkages, disruptive developments within an individual credit institution may have for-reaching consequences for the financial system as a whole. Risks to the financial system as a whole can emanate from individual institutions, but also from specific components of the financial market or from financial instruments used. The identification and surveillance of these systemic implications are a matter of public interest. In Europe, it was with this in mind that the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) was established with the mandate to conduct macro-prudential supervision within the EU. Headquartered in Frankfurt am Main, the ESRB is expected to help ensure that we are better able to deal with systemic risks in the future, in particular by giving political decision-makers an earlier warning of systemic risks. Much has thus been achieved with respect to reforming financial market regulation and supervision since the onset of the financial crisis. But the efforts undertaken in this respect thus far need to be continued. Let me mention just three aspects that I regard as particularly important: First, the regulatory net needs to be cast wider and wider. The crisis has revealed the significance of systemic risks. If we are to better counter risks of a systemic nature, all systemically relevant financial institutions, markets and infrastructures must be regulated and treated in exactly the same way. This holds particularly true in the event of more stringent regulatory requirements being imposed on the traditional banking sector. Where systemically relevant financial institutions are concerned, it is also essential to continue to investigate whether additional regulatory provisions are needed and how such institutions might contribute to the costs of dealing with a crisis. Second, greater transparency is required as regards over-the-counter trades and activities in the non-banking sector. Greater transparency would be possible if more financial products were to be traded on central trading platforms, such as stock exchanges, or settled in clearing houses. Given their growing importance, it is particularly crucial for clearing houses to have appropriate risk management schemes in place. Furthermore, the activities of non-4 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
banks must become more transparent. This also includes improving the quality and plausibility of risk assessments by rating agencies. And third, the banks themselves must be encouraged to undertake reforms and to accept responsibility, in particular, for reviewing their individual corporate governance models as regards risk assessment, incentive structures and compensation. Safeguarding the future stability of the euro Ladies and gentlemen, allow me now to turn to the second aspect that is of key importance for the stability of the euro, stability-oriented economic and fiscal policies. In order to counter the potential systemic implications of the government debt situation in a number of euro area countries in a decisive and timely manner, the Heads of State or Government in the EU have agreed on the establishment of a permanent European Stability Mechanism (ESM) to safeguard fiscal stability in the whole euro. This mechanism will supersede the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), which will remain temporarily in place until June 2013. The ESM will be activated when the financial stability of the euro area as a whole is in jeopardy. Member countries in financial distress will receive financial assistance in the form of credit, subject to their fulfilment of strict conditions. I regard this decision as an important contribution to keeping the financial system stable, and thus to safeguarding the stability of the euro. Nevertheless, the existence of this mechanism should not be seen as an inducement to postpone a correction of the stance of economic policy for too long and to trust in the help of other euro area countries. In order to prevent this from happening, it is essential that the permanent stabilisation mechanism is underpinned by a fundamental strengthening of the regulatory framework for compliance with fiscal policy objectives and the need for competitiveness. It is thus crucial that the framework for monitoring both the public budgets and economic activity in the euro area is reformed in an effective manner. The Van Rompuy task force and the European Commission have put forward proposals on how improvements can be made in these two areas. The proposals recommend a strengthening of the Stability and Growth Pact. In particular, it is suggested that possible sanctions for member countries with excessive deficits should be imposed sooner than currently foreseen. Next year, an enhanced macroeconomic surveillance framework applicable to the euro area will also be implemented. This comprises the introduction of an early warning mechanism based on a scoreboard of predefined macroeconomic indicators. At the same time, the European Commission will assume responsibility for using these indicators in order to identify potential macroeconomic imbalances and excesses, and then reporting thereon to the political authorities. The ECB is of the opinion that the current reform efforts in both areas are not sufficiently extensive. In fact, the Governing Council of the ECB considers that while the proposals tabled by the European Commission may indeed go some way towards improving macroeconomic and fiscal surveillance in the euro area, they fall short of the quantum leap forward that is needed in the surveillance of the euro area and in order to guarantee the smooth functioning of Economic and Monetary Union. As regards fiscal surveillance, greater automaticity of procedure and the definition of clear and binding regulations for reducing debt ratios are required. In terms of macroeconomic surveillance, clearly defined sanctions are necessary. Efforts must focus more clearly on the most vulnerable countries (those which have suffered from losses in competitiveness), in order to ensure the sustainable effectiveness of the latest framework. Moreover, the procedure requires more transparent and more effective trigger mechanisms. In the future, the stability of the euro, the stability of the financial system and sound economic and financial policies will need to be viewed as inseparable from one another. The Monetary Union was designed to be an economic and monetary union. What we need now is also the second pillar. BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 
The ECB has done what it can by pursuing a stability-oriented monetary policy, by keeping the value of money stable and by providing for crisis-related liquidity needs. The other policy domains mentioned are now called upon to shoulder their part of the burden and safeguard the stability of both the financial system and the single currency over the long term. A single market and a common currency also demand well-coordinated economic and fiscal policies. This calls for clear rules and mechanisms for monitoring these policies. Allow me to now briefly discuss the three key areas which I consider to be vital to the long-term success of the euro. These elements are: a sound fiscal policy, sustainable economic growth and a stable financial system. 1. Sound fiscal policy The soundness of public finances was to be guaranteed by the Stability and Growth Pact. Unfortunately, however, the rules of the Pact have been ignored all too often – even prior to the financial crisis. For this reason, it is imperative that, first, fiscal consolidation efforts at the European level comply with the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact. Second, the foundations of the Stability and Growth Pact are in need of reinforcement. 2. Sustainable economic growth Stable prices are a precondition to sustainable growth and the generation of employment. Equally important is the competitiveness of euro area member counties. In some euro area countries, excessive increases in unit labour costs and current account imbalances have caused their competitiveness to decline significantly over the past few years. This meant that some countries were in a position where they were unable to respond to the crisis with the degree of flexibility required, which resulted in weakening economic and productivity growth and a surge in unemployment. To combat this, economic reforms that foster growth and employment on a sustainable basis are essential. Such reforms should be directed at increasing competitiveness. To this end, flexible labour and product markets are required, as well as long-term projects to enhance infrastructure and competitiveness and, above all, the promotion of innovation through investment in training and research. 3. A stable financial system The financial crisis has illustrated the significance of systemic risks. It has made clear that the procedures in place for assessing threats – stemming from the proliferation of individual, mutually reinforcing, risks of relevance to the stability of the financial system or the real economy as a whole – were inadequate. The governments and central banks have both contributed to stabilising the financial system. Its lasting stabilisation, however, calls for institutional reforms that lead to a better regulation and supervision. In addition, it is essential that consideration be given to the question as to how the private sector itself might be able to better protect itself against the consequences of a financial crisis, in order to create stronger incentives for risk awareness and a longer-term perspective in economic activities undertaken in the financial sector. Ladies and gentlemen, over the past 12 years, the euro has contributed significantly to Europe’s economic sustainability and stability. If we succeed in implementing the necessary reforms in a decisive manner, then the ECB will be able to guarantee the long-term stability of the euro. I am confident that the success story of the euro will endure, to the benefit of all EU citizens.   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 
     8 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 
      10 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Protocol to bring the National Bank of Serbia into line with EU central banking standards Introductory statement by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the press conference on the occasion of the signing of the protocol between the European Central Bank, the National Bank of Serbia and the Delegation of the European Union to the Republic of Serbia, Belgrade, 18 March 2011. *      *      * Mr Šoškić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, Mr Degert, Ambassador and Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the Republic of Serbia, Ladies and gentlemen, I am very happy to be back here in Belgrade. Like last time, I am here to announce the start of a close cooperation programme between the ECB, the national central banks of the EU and the National Bank of Serbia. This programme, which has in fact already been under way since 1 February 2011, is again funded by the EU. Much has happened since I was last in Belgrade on 1 September 2008. At the end of the previous cooperation programme, we delivered a needs analysis report to the then Governor, Radovan Jelašić. Since then we have experienced a major financial crisis that has affected both the EU and the Republic of Serbia. I would like to reflect on these two points in my introductory remarks.  The needs analysis report that we completed in May 2009 made a number of recommendations for further advancement of the National Bank of Serbia in technical domains and for amendments that would be required to Serbian legislation. Such changes are necessary for Serbia to receive acknowledgement as being prepared for joining the European Union and the National Bank of Serbia to have reached a level that would be commensurate with being ready to join the European System of Central Banks. The ECB cooperated with 17 national central banks in preparing that needs analysis report for the National Bank of Serbia. Today we are proud to announce that we have 21 national central banks on board. We have elaborated a detailed plan of what we intend to do when, and how, over the next two years, on the different components of the programme. We believe that having such a large group of partners working with the ECB will benefit both the programme and the National Bank of Serbia. In the needs analysis report two years ago we looked at six areas of central banking of the National Bank of Serbia. As part of the current programme, as you can see from our joint press release, we will cover a diverse range of topics that spans 11 areas of the National Bank of Serbia’s competencies. In 2008 and 2009 much of the work involved in preparing the needs analysis report was in the hands of EU central bank experts. They proposed a benchmark against which the National Bank of Serbia should measure itself in assessing its readiness for joining the ESCB. They were responsible for delivering an assessment and recommendations on areas that could be further improved. The new project that has just started offers training sessions for staff of the Bank and support in the preparation of new draft legislation as well as internal the rules of procedure and policies that will bring the Bank into line with EU central banking standards and working methods. Governor Šoškić and his team are committed to preparing a large number of programme outcomes or deliverables, and for our part, we from the EU will do all we can to support our Serbian colleagues in reaching the targets they have set for themselves. Today I will formally confirm this support and commitment on behalf of the EU BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
central banks by signing the relevant protocol alongside Governor Šoškić and Ambassador Degert. Let me now briefly turn to the second element of change over the last three years that I highlighted a moment ago. The financial crisis that has gripped the world since October 2008 has been challenging for the EU as well as for Serbia. There are many lessons to be learned from this crisis. In view of the time available, I would like to focus on two of them. One is the importance of good public finances and the other is the role of central banks in helping to safeguard financial stability. In the EU, the Stability and Growth Pact has always been seen as a key component in the process of ensuring sound public finances while fiscal policy remains a national competence and we have not advanced further towards a federation and/or harmonised fiscal policies. Very much to the ECB’s regret, the reform of the Stability and Growth Pact in 2005 weakened the fiscal framework substantially. The greater flexibility that was created has led to a lack of enforcement of fiscal discipline at the EU level and insufficient national incentives to comply with the EU rules. Drawing the lessons from the current crisis for the euro area in particular, the ECB has advocated a quantum leap in terms of economic governance: better coordination between countries, clear rules for economic policy conduct, quasi-automaticity in their implementation and sanctions for non-compliance. I would like to underline how important it is for a country like Serbia, as for any other advanced or emerging economy, to pursue sound fiscal policies. As an open economy facing balance of payment challenges, it is crucial that Serbia pursues stability-oriented macroeconomic policies that will bring international recognition and put the country in a position to finance domestic and external deficits temporarily, which in turn would smooth its development process. Another lesson drawn from the crisis by the EU was that there was a need to review and reinforce the structures for micro and macro-prudential supervision. The result has been the establishment of three pan-European supervisory authorities that have been given powers to promote EU interests in securing financial stability while day-to-day supervisory powers remain at the Member State level. On the macro-prudential side, the ECB has been asked to take on challenging new obligations arising from the establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). The ECB provides the Chair of the ESRB and its Secretariat. While the ECB has for many years raised its voice on financial stability concerns and risks in the euro area, the new ESRB must work from an EU-wide perspective and assume the additional role of issuing warnings and recommendations. The authorities responsible for financial stability will either need to comply with those recommendations or explain why they do not wish to do so. We consider this a useful way forward in the absence of the more radical step of a transfer of competencies from the national to the European level. From the point of view of the individual country, including Serbia, I would also stress how important it is that the financial stability mandate is clearly allocated and that the central bank plays an important contributory role in this context. We have drawn a number of other conclusions from the financial crisis in Europe – including at central bank level. We draw our inspiration from a firm intention to perform our tasks in a better way so as to avoid a repetition of what we have been through over the last couple of years. The implication of this is that, to some extent, the best practices of central banking in the EU are a moving target, since we consider it our duty to remain always at the forefront of developments that will help us to achieve our objectives in the best way possible. From this perspective, today’s event should not only be seen as marking the continuation of an already strong partnership between the National Bank of Serbia and a large number of national central banks in the European Union. It should hopefully also highlight a partnership that will continue for many years, even after we have successfully concluded this current programme at the end of January 2013. 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 The ECB will coordinate the programme from Frankfurt am Main and has dispatched a Resident Programme Coordinator who will remain in Belgrade until it is completed. The national central banks have identified their respective experts on supervision, foreign exchange reserve management and payment systems, to give just a few examples. The National Bank of Serbia has also made very strong commitments, assigning substantive resources to the programme and its coordination. I wish all the experts and managers involved success in achieving the ambitious targets of this two-year central bank cooperation programme. Many thanks and good luck to you all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Svante Öberg: My view of monetary policy 2006–2011 Speech by Mr Svante Öberg, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at Handelsbanken, Stockholm, 18 March 2011. *      *      * I have now been at the Riksbank for over five years and my appointment as Deputy Governor of the Riksbank expires at the turn of the year. I will have celebrated my 65th birthday by then and I have informed the General Council of the Riksbank that I will not be seeking reappointment. This makes it natural for me to look back at the conduct of monetary policy over the last five years and, in the light of this experience, discuss the direction of monetary policy in the years ahead. The three theses that I will argue for in this speech are:  Monetary policy was too expansionary before the financial crisis  Monetary policy worked well during the crisis  The repo rate needs to be raised at every meeting this year (and perhaps next year too) Monetary policy was too expansionary in the years before the financial crisis My first thesis is thus that monetary policy was too expansionary in the years before the full force of the financial crisis hit the world in September 2008. This applies both in Sweden and abroad. I will present arguments to support this thesis in this section. Abroad Monetary policy was expansionary in the years before the financial crisis in both the United States and the euro area. The short-term real interest rate, that is the short-term nominal interest rate minus inflation, is commonly used to describe how expansionary monetary policy is. This can be assumed to average approximately 2 per cent in the longer term. In the United States, the real interest rate was negative in the period 2003–2005, while in the euro area it was approximately 0 per cent in the same period (see Figure 1).  At the same time, China and other countries had their currencies tied to the US dollar, which resulted in expansionary monetary conditions in these countries too. Large current account surpluses in China and in oil-producing countries led to capital flows to the United States and the euro area and this also kept down long-term interest rates. The consequences of the expansionary monetary policy became apparent in the development of the economy. Inflation in the United States was over 2 per cent measured using various measures of core inflation, Resource utilisation was higher than normal and there was a rapid expansion of credit. From the mid-1990s to 2006, real housing prices increased unusually rapidly, by approximately 80 per cent, after having been relatively stable from the early 1950s to the mid-1990s (see Figure 2). Housing prices increased dramatically in some parts of Europe too, for example in Ireland and Spain, while they remained largely stable in other countries, for example Germany. However, for the euro area as a whole the increase in prices was not as large as in the United States. The expansionary monetary policy contributed to the very high level of growth in the world in the period 2004–2007. GDP growth was between 4.5 and 5 per cent per year. Such a long period with such rapid growth around the world had not occurred since the early 1970s (see Figure 3). 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches The high level of global growth led in turn to a substantial increase in the price of oil between 2004 and 2008 and to rising inflation in many countries towards the end of the period. The similarities to the years preceding the oil-price shocks of the 1970 are striking. In these years too, monetary policy was expansionary, GDP growth was high and oil prices were increasing. The price of crude oil increased rapidly in 1973 and 1979, which led to higher inflation (see Figure 4). It was, however, not just an expansionary monetary policy that caused the credit expansion and housing price bubble in the United States. There were a number of other causes, for example the new financial products that spread risks from the banks to investors who did not understand the risks. The aim of housing policy in the United States had also long been to increase home ownership by providing support from the semi-nationalised mortgage companies Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. There were also several other problems, for example the fact that regulation and supervision of the financial markets were too weak. In Europe, the common currency was introduced in 1999. This meant that interest rates in several countries that had previously had a higher interest rate than Germany were reduced to a common euro level. In these countries, this contributed to a dramatic expansion of credit, rapid growth and a high level of inflation. In addition, regulation and supervision of the financial markets were national processes, despite that fact that the operations concerned were crossborder. However, it did not become apparent that this situation was untenable until the spring of 2010 in connection with the crisis in public finances in Europe. Each country certainly believed that they had good reasons for conducting their particular choice of monetary policy. But for the world as a whole, which in itself is a closed economy in which overall monetary policy affects growth and inflation, monetary policy became too expansionary. This resulted in strong GDP growth and rapidly increasing prices for crude oil and other commodities, as well as a rapid credit expansion and rising asset prices, above all for housing in certain regions. This ultimately led to the financial crisis when the housing-price bubble burst. Now, you may say that it is rather pointless to criticise something with hindsight. It is easy to say now what should have been done then. However, my point is not to criticise what was done but to learn from history. Even today, we can see the same pattern: that is an expansionary monetary policy for the world as a whole, strong growth and rising energy and commodity prices.  Sweden My view, with hindsight, is that monetary policy in Sweden was also too expansionary in the years preceding the financial crisis. The repo rate was gradually reduced to 1.5 per cent in July 2005. I think it was reduced too much and was too low for too long. Both the nominal and the real short-term rates were lower than normal for most of the period leading up to the crisis. In my opinion, a normal level for the nominal short-term rate is around 4 per cent, while a normal level for the real short-term rate is around 2 per cent1 (see Figure 5). Swedish economic growth was high in the years before the crisis. Resource utilisation was also higher than normal. The GDP gap was positive, while unemployment was lower than the average for the preceding years. Inflation was nevertheless low in the period 2004–2006. Measured in terms of the CPIF2 and in terms of the measure used at that time, the CPIX,3 it                                                  1  Sveriges Riksbank, “What is a normal repo rate?”, article in Monetary Policy Report, February 2010. 2  The CPIF is calculated as the CPI with a fixed mortgage rate and is thus not directly affected by changes in mortgage rates. 3  The CPIX excludes households’ mortgage interest expenditure and the direct effects of changes in indirect taxes and subsidies from the CPI. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 was well below 2 per cent. In their evaluation of Swedish monetary policy in the period  1995–2005, Giavazzi and Mishkin say that this was a sign that monetary policy had been too tight from the beginning of 2002.4 I do not agree with them. Looking back after the event, we can perhaps say that a couple of repo rate increases in 2001 and 2002 could have been avoided. The previous Governor of the Riksbank, Lars Heikensten, also admitted this at a hearing in the Riksdag Committee on Finance on 1 April 2004. But my view is that the repo rate was then reduced too much and was too low for too long. I can see four factors that support this. First, resource utilisation was probably higher than the Riksbank then estimated. The GDP gap is difficult to calculate, particularly at the end of a time series and in connection with severe downturns. According to the two GDP gaps presented in the Monetary Policy Report in February, the GDP gap prior to the crisis was approximately +4 per cent. My own assessment is that the GDP gap was in fact approximately +2 per cent.5 However, the fact that resource utilisation was so high was not as apparent before the crisis. This can be seen, for example, by comparing the calculations of the GDP gap in real time, that is at the point in time concerned, and the most recent calculations. The calculations in real time show that the GDP gap was actually assessed as relatively normal before the crisis (see Figure 6). Second, inflation gradually increased in 2007 and 2008 to over 4 per cent. Inflation increased rapidly even if the effect of rising mortgage rates is discounted. This was largely due to rising energy and food prices. These price rises, as I mentioned earlier, were rooted in the expansionary monetary policy and the high level of growth in the world as a whole. The impact of monetary policy comes after a considerable time lag and the rate of inflation we see in these years is affected by monetary policy in previous years (see Figure 7).  Third, inflation expectations also increased. The fact that inflation expectations one year ahead increased is natural given that the measured inflation rate also increased. However, inflation expectations five years ahead can be interpreted as an indication of whether monetary policy is credible or not. As long as these expectations are close to the inflation target, then this is a sign that the respondents expect the Riksbank to attain its target in the long term. The fact the long-term inflation expectations increased to over 2.5 per cent was therefore more worrying (see Figure 8). Fourth, there was a rapid expansion of credit and a rapid increase in housing prices. Lending to non-financial companies and to households increased by 10–15 per year in the years preceding the crisis and house prices increased by around 10 per cent per year. The prices of tenant-owned apartments increased even more rapidly. This trend began already in the mid-1990s, but it accelerated in the years preceding the crisis6 (see Figure 9).                                                   4  Giavazzi, Francesco and Mishkin, Frederic: An evaluation of Swedish monetary policy between 1995 and 2005, Riksdag Committee on Finance, November 2006. 5  See for example Svante Öberg: Potential GDP, resource utilisation and monetary policy, Sveriges Riksbank, 7 October 2010. 6  Giavazzi and Mishkin (op. cit.) said that one reason why inflation had been low in the period 2002–2004 was that the Riksbank, since 2002, had begun to take house prices into account. However, in later papers Mishkin wrote that one lesson from the crisis is that that there are stronger reasons for monetary policy to counteract credit-driven asset price bubbles, see for example Mishkin, Frederic: Monetary Policy Strategy: Lessons from the Crisis, October 2010. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches A comparison with a simple Taylor rule7 also indicates that the repo rate should have been significantly higher. A Taylor rule can indicate whether the level of the repo is reasonable. Based on inflation measured in terms of the CPIF or the HICP8 and the GDP gaps I presented earlier, the repo rate, according to the Taylor rule, should have been around 7 per cent in the third quarter of 2008. I now believe, as I said earlier, that the presented positive GDP gaps are exaggerated. With my assessment of the GDP gap, the repo rate according to the Taylor rule would instead have been around 6 per cent in the third quarter of 2008, but still considerably higher than the 4.75 per cent it reached before the crisis (see Figure 10). When I look back on the monetary policy conducted since I joined the Riksbank on 1 January 2006 up to the point when the financial crisis hit Sweden in September 2008, I therefore believe that monetary policy was too expansionary in the years preceding the crisis. Inflation increased and reached a level that was tangibly higher than the inflation target, Resource utilisation was higher than normal and there was a rapid expansion of credit. Despite this, the repo rate was lower than normal for most of the period leading up to the crisis. A more rapid increase of the repo rate would thus have been better.  There are also two other circumstances that I for my own part believe were unfortunate. The first is that I did not enter a reservation in April 2006 when the Executive Board decided not to increase the repo rate, which I regretted afterwards. This would not have made any difference to the actual development of interest rates, but it would have been a good idea to make my view clear already at that time. I did subsequently enter reservations in favour of an increase in the repo rate several times in 2007 when the majority on the Executive Board decided not to increase it.9 The second thing is that I accepted such a low repo-rate path the first time we presented our own path in February 2007. This was just before the completion of wage negotiations for large parts of the labour market and it sent the wrong signal to the social partners; that is that wages could be significantly increased without consequences in the form of too high inflation. Wage expectations had then risen to the highest level since the mid-1990s. But we were too focused on all the work that was required to produce and decide on the repo-rate path for the first time for me to adequately realise the consequences of the decision.  When visiting different venues to speak about monetary policy, I have often been asked why we raised the repo rate from 4.50 to 4.75 per cent in September 2008, just before the financial crisis hit Sweden with full force. The members of the Executive Board were divided on the issue, with three for (including me) and three against and Stefan Ingves had to use his deciding vote to push the decision through. I usually say that with the information we had at the time I would have made the same decision again. I feared that we were facing a period of stagflation; that is high inflation and low growth, similar to the period that followed the oil-price increases of the 1970s. In such a situation we must, under the terms of our mandate, give priority to keeping inflation down close to the inflation target. However, the financial crisis radically changed the preconditions for monetary policy.                                                  7  Taylor, J.B., (1993). Discretion versus policy rules in practice. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 39 (1993) 195–214. Amsterdam: North-Holland. The Taylor rule has the following simple form and describes the monetary policy conducted in the United States in the period 1987–1992 well: r = p + 0.5y + 0.5(p-2) + 2 where r = the policy rate, p = inflation over the last 12 months in per cent and y = the GDP gap in per cent. In the formula, it is assumed that the inflation target is 2 per cent and that the real policy rate in the long term is 2 per cent. 8  The HICP is a harmonized index for consumer prices that, among other things, is used in the EU for comparisons between the member states. Mortgage rates are excluded when calculating the HICP. 9  Minutes of the monetary policy meetings held on 29 March 2007, 3 May 2007 and 18 December 2007. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Monetary policy worked well during the financial crisis My second thesis is that monetary policy worked well during the financial crisis. I will explain why. But first I would like to describe very briefly what characterised the crisis. The characteristics of the financial crisis I have experienced two crises in the past, one in the late 1970s and early 1980s and one at the beginning of the 1990s, and have seen them both mainly from the perspective of the Ministry of Finance. When I came to the Riksbank I believed that the worst crises were behind us. However, this was not the case. Instead we experienced a third crisis, which in international terms was the most severe crisis since World War II. The financial crisis hit Sweden and the rest of Europe with full force in September 2008, when the major US investment bank Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy. It became much more difficult for the banks to fund their operations as the financial markets were not functioning normally. Some markets were not functioning at all. The central banks took on the role of lenders of last resort and several governments provided guarantees and support programmes for the banking sector. Monetary policy also quickly became more expansionary in the United States, the euro area and other countries. In addition, a number of central banks adopted measures to also push down the longer-term interest rates. There was also a shift towards a more expansionary fiscal policy. Despite extensive policy stimulus, the financial crisis led to a severe downturn in the United States and Europe and in developed countries in other parts of the world. Experience of previous financial crises shows that they are usually followed by long periods of weaker growth, higher unemployment and seriously weakened public finances.10 GDP fell in both the United States and the euro area in 2009 and unemployment increased. Inflation fell rapidly, mainly because the earlier increases in the prices of energy and food turned into price decreases. However, there were other parts of the world that were not affected by the crisis to any great extent. Countries such as China and India continued to enjoy high rates of growth. The financial crisis mainly affected Sweden through the fall in the international demand for Swedish exports. GDP fell by 5.9 per cent between 2007 and 2009, but then increased by 5.5 per cent in 2010. Already a year after the downturn had bottomed out, production had returned to more or less the same level as before the crisis. But GDP was still far below the level that a postulated trend increase without the crisis would have led to (see Figure 11). Unemployment peaked at almost 9 per cent at the turn of the year 2009/2010. The increase in unemployment was much less than predicted in the Riksbank’s earlier forecasts and much less than indicated by normal Okun links between GDP growth and unemployment.11 This is probably because the crisis primarily affected the industrial sector with substantial effects on GDP but smaller effects on employment, while activity in other parts of the economy was kept up by expansionary monetary and fiscal policies (see Figure 12).  CPI inflation has fluctuated considerably in recent years, mainly because the repo rate was cut rapidly in connection with the crisis. CPIF inflation, which excludes these effects on inflation, has fluctuated much less and if we also adjust for energy and food then inflation has been close to the long-term target for the CPI of 2 per cent (see Figure 13).                                                  10  Reinhart, Carmen and Rogoff, Kenneth: “This Time is Different: A Panoramic View of Eight Centuries of Financial Crises”, 2008. 11 Sveriges Riksbank, “The effects of the financial crisis on the labour market – a comparison of Sweden, the euro area and the United States”, article in Monetary Policy Report, February 2011. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches The Riksbank’s measures during the crisis My second thesis is thus that monetary policy worked well during the crisis. But the Riksbank’s efforts did not just concern monetary policy, they related to an even greater degree to measures to preserve financial stability. The experience gained from the financial crisis tell us that measures to preserve financial stability and monetary policy measures must cooperate to counteract the negative consequences of the crisis and that it is not always so easy to relate one type of measure to a certain problem and the other type to another. The reasons why I think the Riksbank was able to handle the crisis well are that the measures were taken quickly and were forceful and that they helped to preserve financial stability and keep up domestic demand. They were also implemented during a limited period of time and thus did not become part of a more permanent support system. The Riksbank thus reacted quickly to the problems that arose. Of course, the Swedish banks were not exposed to the US housing market to any great extent. But they were dependent on the markets functioning in order to get funding. In order to cover the loss of normal funding channels, the Riksbank provided loans of approximately SEK 500 billion during the autumn of 2008.12 This increased the Riksbank’s balance sheet total from approximately 7 per cent to approximately 22 per cent of GDP, that is more than the balance sheets of the Federal Reserve (FED) and the European Central Bank (ECB) in relation to GDP. Around half of this lending was in kronor and half in dollars. In order to be able to lend so much in dollars, the Riksbank borrowed dollars from the FED through a rapidly-concluded swap agreement. The Riksbank’s own dollar assets were far too small. In the autumn of 2008, the foreign currency reserve corresponded to SEK 200 billion and was invested in a number of different currencies. In 2009, the reserve was strengthened by borrowing approximately SEK 100 billion via the Swedish National Debt Office (see Figure 14).  Monetary policy also reacted quickly and forcefully. The repo rate was cut rapidly from 4.75 per cent in September 2008 to 0.25 per cent in July 2009. The largest cut came already in December 2008. The repo rate had never been this low before. In July 2009, the Riksbank also assessed that the repo rate would remain at this exceptionally low level for the next 12 months or so. This was expressed in the repo-rate path at the time. In order, to underline the assessment that the repo rate would remain at this low level throughout the following year, and to keep down longer-term interest rates too, the Riksbank, on three different occasions, provided loans totalling almost SEK 300 billion at a fixed interest rate of 0.25 per cent for one year (see Figure 15). In July 2010, the Riksbank began normalising monetary policy. The repo rate was raised from 0.25 per cent to 0.5 per cent and has subsequently been raised another four times to 1.50 per cent in February 2011. The large loans were repaid by the banks without being replaced by new, similar loans. The Riksbank’s balance sheet total thus fell to approximately 10 per cent of GDP. This is in contrast to the balance sheet totals of several other central banks, which have continued to increase. It has been possible to carry out the reduction of the Riksbank’s balance sheet without giving rise to any significant problems on the financial markets. This is because the Riksbank only lent money to the banks and did not, like the Fed, the ECB and the Bank of England, purchase bonds and other assets during the crisis.13 If the Riksbank had done so, this could have led to more serious problems when the time came to phase out the support measures. It is of course difficult to estimate the effects of the measures taken by the Riksbank in connection with the crisis as so many other things also had an impact on the course of events, not least fiscal policy and the measures taken by other authorities to preserve                                                  12  The Riksbank also extended the types of collateral that could be approved for loans and provided liquidity assistance to two small banks, Kaupthing and Carnegie. 13  By only lending money, the Riksbank also avoided exposure to a substantial interest rate risk. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 financial stability. Nevertheless, it can be noted that the Swedish banks came through the crisis well. Total lending to households and non-financial companies continued to increase throughout the crisis. It can also be noted that the fall in production and employment was less than feared. Domestic demand has been kept up by the expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. Conclusions With hindsight, I think that we can draw two conclusions about the actions taken by the Riksbank in connection with the financial crisis. First, we did not see the crisis coming. Of course, not many other observers saw the crisis coming either. However, we did draw attention to the problems on the housing and mortgage markets in the United States, and in our Financial Stability Reports we did mention the problems relating to the Swedish banks’ credit expansion in the Baltic countries. But the new feature of this financial crisis was that the banks were unable to fund their operations on the market and this was something we were not prepared for.14 Second, the Riksbank reacted quickly and forcefully once the crisis hit Sweden. The Riksbank’s extensive lending to the banks and the rapid reduction of the repo rate to an exceptionally low level softened the impact of the crisis on the Swedish economy. Together with an expansionary fiscal policy this kept up the level of domestic demand and meant that employment decreased less and unemployment increased less than could have been expected, and that inflation was kept at a reasonable level. Underlying inflation was kept close to 2 per cent and inflation expectations five years ahead, which had increased before the crisis, fell back again and stabilised at around 2 per cent. Monetary policy needs to become less expansionary in the period ahead My third thesis is that the repo rate needs to be raised at every meeting this year, and perhaps next year too. I will now explain why I make this assessment. I begin with a brief description of international developments over the next few years and then present my view of Swedish monetary policy in the period ahead. Abroad There are many similarities between the situation in the autumn of 2008 and the spring of 2011. For the world as a whole we once again expect to see a GDP growth of over 4 per cent per year, although there are considerable differences between different regions. Growth is continuing in the United States and Europe although, due to the financial crisis, at a slower rate than after a normal downturn. We expect to see a GDP growth of around 3 per cent per year in the United States and of just below 2 per cent per year in the euro area, with an inflation rate of almost 2 per cent in both areas. But the emerging economies are growing rapidly (see Figure 16). The strong increase in demand in the emerging economies is pushing up the demand for energy and commodities. There has therefore been a substantial increase in crude oil prices and the prices of other commodities recently. There is a risk that these prices will continue to rise and that inflation will therefore also rise in both the emerging markets and the developed countries. Inflation expectations have also increased in recent months and there has been an upward shift in monetary policy expectations (see Figure 4).                                                  14  Report of the Swedish National Audit Office 2011, “Measures taken by the authorities to safeguard financial stability: Lessons in the light of developments in the Baltic countries 2005–2007”. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches Recent developments in North Africa and the Middle East have pushed up the price of crude oil even further. Uncertainty about the future supply of oil has contributed to the oil price now being higher than it was when the Monetary Policy Report was published in February. This illustrates the fact that price trends become even more sensitive to supply disruptions when demand is high in relation to supply. The earthquake in Japan is the greatest catastrophe the country has suffered since World War II. The consequences for the Japanese people are devastating and the material damage is huge. It is still too early to determine what the economic consequences of the earthquake will be. In the short term it has already led to production losses, but later this year production may rise in connection with reconstruction work following the disaster. The fact that some nuclear power stations are now out of operation has already led to disruptions in the supply of electricity and in production, but in the longer term a reduction in the capacity to generate electricity using nuclear power in both Japan and other countries may lead to rising prices for other types of energy, including oil. As always, we are monitoring developments carefully and in connection with the Monetary Policy Update in April will make a renewed assessment of the international outlook in which we will also take into account how events in Japan may affect the development of the global economy in the slightly longer term. Sweden At the latest monetary policy meeting in February, we decided to raise the repo rate from 1.25 per cent to 1.50 per cent and our assessment was that the repo rate would need to be increased to 3.6 per cent by the end of the forecast period, that is in three years’ time. My assessment was that we will need to raise the repo rate by 0.25 per cent at every meeting in 2011 to 2.75 per cent at the end of the year. This entails a somewhat steeper upward path in the second half of 2011 than the repo-rate path presented in the main scenario of the Monetary Policy Report. However, in light of the uncertainty about the development of interest rates, I did not enter a reservation against the repo-rate path but confined myself to commenting on this at the meeting (see Figure 17). I will now discuss my view of monetary policy in the years ahead in a little more detail and take the picture of the economic outlook presented in the latest Monetary Policy Report as my starting point. The discussion is based on the analytical framework and so-called loss function used at Norges Bank.15 This includes the deviation of inflation from the inflation target, resource utilisation, the interest rate level in accordance with simple interest-rate rules and changes in the interest rate. Asset prices, the exchange rate and market rates can also be taken into account. Inflation The forecasts for inflation are sufficiently close to the inflation target to justify a repo rate increase and the presented repo-rate path. The forecast for CPI inflation is 2.4 per cent per year on average during the forecast period, while the forecast for CPIF inflation is 1.8 per cent. It is estimated that CPIF Inflation will be around 2 per cent at the end of the forecast period. However, there is considerable uncertainty concerning forecasts for inflation and in relation to this the deviations from the target may be regarded as small (see Figure 18).  My assessment is, however, that the inflationary risks are primarily on the upside; in other words the risk of a higher rate of inflation than expected is greater than the risk of a lower rate of inflation. If inflation increases more than is expected in the Monetary Policy Report, it is, in my view, likely that the repo rate will need to be raised more quickly than predicted in the repo-rate path. In this case it is quite possible that it will need to be raised by more than                                                  15  Monetary Policy Report 1, 2011, pages 17–19, Norges Bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 0.25 percentage points at one or more meetings and that it will need to be increased to 4 per cent already next year. Resource utilisation In my overall assessment, resource utilisation is more or less normal at present and with the present forecasts it will be higher than normal and rising towards the end of the forecast period. This also indicates the need for a higher repo-rate path than the presented path. The Riksbank uses several different measures of resource utilisation. According to these measures, the GDP gap, for example, will be approximately –1 per cent in the first quarter of 2011. My own assessment is that it will be a little higher than this, more or less zero. The level indicated by the so-called RU indicator also supports the claim that resource utilisation is largely normal. The RU indicator, which has been developed by the Riksbank and weighs together a large number of indicators to form a summary measure of resource utilisation, reached a normal level already in the fourth quarter of 2010. Several other measures also indicate that resource utilisation is normal (see Figure 19).  Unemployment, on the other hand, is still higher than normal. Unemployment varied between 6 and 8 per cent around an average of 7 per cent during the ten years preceding the financial crisis.16 If the current rate of fall in unemployment continues, it will reach a normal level in the autumn of 2011. Although, the assessment in the Monetary Policy Report is that this will not take place so quickly, we should remember that both the Riksbank and others have underestimated the strengthening of the labour market in recent years (see Figure 20). Monetary policy must also take into account how the development of the economy affects wage formation. Monetary policy must resist the temptation to stimulate production and employment in the short term over and above the level that is compatible with a stable development of wages and inflation. A very rapid improvement of the labour market may lead to problems in the wage negotiations that will begin in the autumn. Wage formation has worked well in the last 15 years and this has helped to keep inflation at a low and stable level. It would be unfortunate if wage negotiations had to be conducted in a situation where there is overheating on the labour market.  In the current situation, the shortage of labour is probably a better measure of how strained the labour market is than unemployment. The shortage of labour in the business sector was back to an almost normal level in the fourth quarter of 2010. In several parts of the business sector, however, the shortage was greater than normal, for example in the manufacturing industry and the construction industry, and for several types of labour, for example technical white-collar workers in the industrial sector and computer consultants (see Figure 21). The fact that the shortage of labour is already so high even though unemployment is still higher than normal indicates that matching on the labour market has deteriorated. This is also indicated by the Beverage curve, which shows the relation between unemployment and vacancies. This has shifted outwards, that is a certain level of vacancies is compatible with a higher rate of unemployment. In part, this may be a cyclical phenomenon, but the change is so large that it may also relate to a structural deterioration (see Figure 22).                                                  16  One difficulty at present is to assess whether the normal rate of unemployment has changed due to the financial crisis and economic policy. In connection with a severe downturn, the sustainable rate of unemployment (NAIRU) usually increases, at least initially. But the NAIRU will probably also be affected by the labour-market reforms implemented in recent years. Some of these reforms will probably reduce the NAIRU while others may increase it. It remains to be seen what the net result of these factors will be. 
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches Repo rate level I also believe that we should take the level of the repo rate into account when deciding on monetary policy. Particularly strong reasons are required for setting a repo rate over a long period of time that is considerably lower than what can be regarded as a long-term average. Monetary policy can sometimes be used to stimulate the economy and sometimes be used to tighten the economy, but not to permanently stimulate the economy by means of a low interest rate. Long periods with a very low interest rate can namely lead to financial imbalances. They can, for example, lead to a rapid expansion of credit which in the long term may lead to some households being unable to afford to meet the interest and amortization payments on their mortgages. The households’ interest rate expectations are retrospective and long-term expectations are reduced by the low interest rates that have prevailed for a number of years. Problems arise when interest rates then rise. But this is not just about households and mortgages. As I said in the first part of the speech, a too-expansionary monetary policy can also contribute to other kinds of financial imbalances. I therefore usually also look at what the Taylor rule mentioned above would entail for the repo rate level. The Taylor rule indicates, as I said earlier, that the repo rate should have been higher than it actually was before the crisis, which I think is reasonable. The Taylor rule also indicates that the repo rate should have been reduced more or less as quickly and as much as we actually did when the crisis hit. If instead we, members of the Executive Board, had followed the results of the simulations in the Riksbank’s model Ramses when the crisis hit, then the repo rate would have been reduced very slowly. Applied to the current situation in Sweden, the Taylor rule would give a repo rate of 3 to 4 per cent. This indicates that the repo-rate path should be even higher than it is. Repo rate changes Even though there are thus factors that with the current forecasts indicate that the repo rate should be increased more rapidly, I believe that there is a value in changing the repo rate at a steady pace in small steps. Unexpected, substantial changes may entail costs for households and companies and could cause instability on the financial markets. This was also my reasoning in 2006 and 2007 when the Riksbank was in a period of repo rate increases. I entered a reservation at every meeting in 2007 when the majority did not want to increase the repo rate by 0.25 percentage points. The most important thing for me therefore is that the repo rate continues to be raised in small steps meeting by meeting. My assessment at the latest monetary policy meeting was that it will need to be raised by 0.25 percentage points at every meeting this year so that it reaches 2.75 per cent at the end of the year. However, it is more difficult to assess the situation after the turn of the year. This is partly because uncertainty increases in the longer term, and partly because I myself will no longer be a member of the Executive Board and nor, by the way, will Lars Nyberg. Other members of the Executive Board may make different assessments of the direction of monetary policy.  However, if inflation turns out to be higher than we estimated in the Monetary Policy Report, the Riksbank may need to increase the repo rate faster than indicated in the repo-rate path. It is then quite possible that it will be raised to 4 per cent already next year. Conclusion My overall assessment is that monetary policy has worked well during the more than five years I have been a member of the Riksbank’s Executive Board. The average for CPI inflation in the period 2006–2011 is 1.8 per cent with the current forecast for inflation this year. It is estimated that the repo rate will on average be somewhat lower in 2011 than it was 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 in 2006, which contributes to reducing the average for CPI inflation somewhat during this period. The average for CPIF inflation during these six years is 2.0 per cent, that is equal to the inflation target. The Riksbank has also helped to keep up the level of production and employment during these years. On the other hand, it is my view, with hindsight, that monetary policy was too expansionary in the years preceding the financial crisis. Inflation increased to a level that was tangibly higher than the inflation target, resource utilisation was higher than normal and there was a rapid expansion of credit. Despite this, the repo rate was lower than normal for most of the period leading up to the crisis. A more rapid increase of the repo rate would have been better.  We did not foresee the financial crisis, but once it hit the Swedish economy with full force in September 2008 the Riksbank acted quickly and forcefully. This mainly concerned measures to preserve financial stability. However, the expansionary monetary policy conducted by the Riksbank also played an important role in reducing the severity of the downturn that followed in the wake of the financial crisis. Looking forward, I think that the repo rate should be raised at every meeting this year, considering the economic development we envisaged at the last monetary policy meeting. If inflation becomes higher than we had expected, it may be necessary to raise the repo rate to a normal level of around 4 per cent as soon as next year. The average for the repo rate over the last 10 years cannot be taken as a starting point for what the average repo rate should be in the longer term. However, at the same time, I am, of course, prepared to reassess my view of the direction of monetary policy if the external conditions should change significantly, as they did in September 2008.  There are those who think that monetary policy is too tight. However, with a rate of growth of over 5 per cent and a repo rate of 1.50 per cent, I do not think we can say that monetary policy is tight. It is just gradually becoming slightly less expansionary. There are not four hawks and two doves on the Executive Board at present, only six doves.  
12 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 13    
14 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 15     
16 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
BIS central bankers’ speeches 17    
18 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
BIS central bankers’ speeches 19    
20 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
BIS central bankers’ speeches 21    
22 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Thomas M Hoenig: Monetary policy and shifting economic risks Speech by Mr Thomas M Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at the London School of Economics, London, 30 March 2011. *      *      * Introduction The past three year period has been a great challenge to policymakers worldwide, including central bankers. Unprecedented steps have been taken to restore stability to the world economy and, just as importantly, to assure a sustained recovery. I certainly support these goals. While I argued for handling the largest financial institutions differently than was done, I supported the Federal Reserve’s massive liquidity injections designed to staunch the financial crisis. After all, central banks exist in part for just that purpose. However, when the crisis is past, it is incumbent upon central banks to return to another of their responsibilities: creating conditions for a sustained economic recovery that requires looking beyond short-term goals to long-term consequences.  For more than a year, I have advocated, not for a tight U.S. monetary policy, but for one that would begin unwinding those policies put in place during the crisis. In January 2010, as the recovery entered its third quarter, I expressed the view that the Federal Open Market Committee should modify its rate guarantee to the market. That is, while agreeing that policy should remain accommodative, I voted against promising “exceptionally low rates for an extended period.” As the recovery continued into the spring, I judged that the Federal Reserve should gradually shrink its enlarged balance sheet with minimal market disruption by disposing of mortgage-backed securities that were trading in the market at a premium. Thus, I voted against replacing maturing MBSs with similar or other securities. Finally, in the fall, I questioned the long-term benefits of further easing monetary policy during a recovery – and I voted against QE2.  Today, my view has not changed. The FOMC should gradually allow its $3 trillion balance sheet to shrink toward its pre-crisis level of $1 trillion. It should move the U.S. federal funds rate off of zero and toward 1 percent within a fairly short period of time. Then, after evaluating the effects of those actions, it should be prepared to move the funds rate further toward a level that could be reasonably judged as closer to normal and sustainable.  I recognize that these actions are not simple to implement. They would impact different economic sectors differently and to varying degrees. They involve tradeoffs in their effects and uncertainty about the short-term reactions of financial markets and the real economy. However, they are not unreasonable or radical or inconsistent with our experience in dealing with past crises. They are focused on the longer run – reflecting a sharp awareness that policy geared too long toward extensive accommodation undermines market discipline and encourages speculative activities. Put another way, these actions reflect the view that the longer exceptionally accommodative monetary policies remain in place, the greater the danger that resources will be misallocated within and across world economies.  Given the wide differences in views around these issues, I want to take time this evening to share my perspective on U.S. monetary policy choices and their effects on economic and financial outcomes.  Recovery is under way The financial crisis is over, and the U.S. economy is recovering. GDP growth in the United States averaged 3.0 percent from the third quarter of 2009 through the fourth quarter of 2010. And it is worth noting that for the same period, the International Monetary Fund estimates that global GDP growth averaged 4.9 percent. Also, the United States added 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 1.5 million jobs into the private sector over the one-year period ending in February of this year. Other parts of the world, especially Asia, have experienced particularly strong growth. While parts of Europe and the U.K. have grown less robustly, the fact remains that the U.S. and much of the world is experiencing sustained economic growth.  With the United States and many world economies experiencing such growth and with the U.S. financial crisis over, I would expect to see a change in policy in which stimulus put in place at the height of the crisis would be throttled back. However, this change in policy is on hold in the United States. The reason for the delay is the existence of significant productive capacity that remains unused in many of the developed nations. While the U.S. economy has clearly strengthened, it has not yet returned to pre-crisis output and employment levels. Its unemployment rate, for example, remains near 9 percent. In the U.K., unemployment remains near 8 percent. Thus for many the issue of policy turns on one’s confidence in the long run economic trends and the degree of monetary accommodation needed to ensure that those trends continue.  Shifting economic risks The monetary policy being implemented currently within the United States and much of the world is more accommodative now than at the height of the crisis. Policy interest rates remain zero, and the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet continues to expand even as the economy improves. With these actions, the FOMC’s objectives have shifted from that of containing a global crisis to that of more quickly accelerating economic growth. Its components focus on raising inflation expectations, increasing asset values and pushing up growth in aggregate demand, and, as stated in its September 2010 press release, employment. While I agree these are worthy goals, I am concerned that maintaining a crisis-oriented policy as the tool to achieve them significantly changes the economic risks. Past success in pursuing this form of policy is mixed at best.  Central banks and the long run A Swiss central banker once advised me that the duty of a central banker is to take care of the long run so the short run can take care of itself. In the United States, this simple expression has been codified in its laws. The Federal Reserve Act requires that, “The … Federal Open Market Committee shall maintain long-run growth of the monetary and credit aggregates commensurate with the economy’s long-run potential to increase production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.”  These mandates recognize that the factors of production come together in a systematic fashion across economies, sectors within economies and resource availability to create growth. The process is not simple nor does it occur quickly – which is the purpose of putting policy in the context of the long run. It is within this context that policy should acknowledge the improving economic trends and begin to withdraw some degree of accommodation. If this is not done, then the risk of introducing new imbalances and long-term inflationary pressures into an already fragile recovery increase significantly.  Short-run actions have consequences In the spring of 2003 there was worldwide concern that the U.S. economy was falling into a “Japanese-like” malaise; the recovery was stalling, deflation was likely to occur and unemployment was too high. This was the prevailing view despite the fact that the U.S. economy was growing at a 3.2 percent annual rate and the global economy’s average growth was nearly 3.6 percent. In addition, the fed funds policy rate was 1 ¼ percent. Although most 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 knew that such a low rate would support an expanding economy, in June 2003 it was lowered further to 1 percent and was left at that rate for nearly a year, as insurance.  Following this action, the United States and the world began an extended credit expansion and housing boom. From July 2003 to July 2006, the monetary base in the United States increased at an average annual rate of 4.9 percent, credit increased at an annual rate of 9 percent, and housing prices increased at an annual rate of about 14 percent. The long-term consequences of that policy are now well known. The United States and the world have just suffered one of the worst recessions in decades.  The crisis has sometimes been described as a “perfect storm” of unfortunate events that somehow came together and systematically undermined the financial system. Such events included, for example, weak supervision and a misguided national housing policy. While these factors certainly contributed to the severity of the crisis, monetary policy cannot escape its role as a primary contributing factor.  In reviewing data from this and earlier economic crises, the fact is that extended periods of accommodative policies are almost inevitably followed by some combination of ballooning asset prices and increasing inflation. I recently compared the movement of real policy interest rates and inflation for four countries: the United States, the U.K., Germany and Korea from 1960 to the present (Chart 1). The relationship between negative rates and high inflation is unmistakable. Also, the relationship between negative rates and housing price busts in advanced economies since 1970 is instructive. In this instance, nearly 50 percent of the housing price busts were preceded by negative real policy rates in the years before the busts (Chart 2). If a housing bust is thought of as a tail-risk event, these percentages are too high. Thus, it is also worth noting that as of this month, the U.S. real federal funds rate has been negative for 11 quarters.  These relationships, of course, must be tested more vigorously before final conclusions are drawn; but the data are strongly suggestive and the findings consistent with those of scholars such as Allan Meltzer. Extended periods of accommodative policy, pursued to enhance short-term economic growth, are often highly disruptive in their economic effects. After the easing actions of 2003, unemployment declined from 6.3 percent in June 2003 to 5 percent two years later and to 4.6 percent the following year. However, by late 2009, following the worst of the credit crisis, the unemployment rate was more than 10 percent.  The future As in 2003, concerns were voiced this past year that the U.S. economy was facing the prospect of deflation, slow growth and high unemployment. This was the case despite the many actions world economies had taken to remedy the crisis and stimulate growth. For me, it was difficult to conclude that more monetary expansion would assure a sustained recovery, and while there may be events that may slow economic growth, those events are related to other real factors.  As the United States continues to ease policy into its recovery, once again there are signs that the world is building new economic imbalances and inflationary impulses. I would suggest also that the longer policy remains as it is, the greater the likelihood these pressures will build and ultimately undermine world growth. In the United States, for example, with very low interest rates, we are beginning to see some assets accelerating in price. Agricultural land prices, for example, are increasing at double-digit rates. High-yield securities in financial markets are demanding price premiums beyond what some would judge reasonable relative to risk. Why? To quote a market participant, “What are my choices?”  The world for some time now has been experiencing rapidly rising commodity prices. While some of the increase may reflect global supply and demand conditions, at least some of the increase is driven by highly accommodative monetary policies in the United States and other economies. And, more recently, in the United States there is evidence of accelerating 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches increases in core prices. Over the past four months, core PCE inflation in the United States has increased from a modest rate of 0.7 percent to a rate of 1.5 percent. I understand the U.K. also is experiencing rising prices. While no one can say with certainty whether this will continue, evidence is mounting that it might.  I conclude my remarks this evening with the following observation. I tracked the average growth of money and the price levels in the United States from the 19th century to the present (Chart 3). It should surprise no one that there is a striking parallel between the long-run growth of money and the growth in the price-level index. From the end of World War II alone, the price index has increased by a factor of ten. With such a track record, it is hard to accept that deflation should be the world’s dominant concern.  Conclusion Central bankers must look to the long run. If current policy remains in place, we almost certainly will stimulate the growth of asset values and inflation. This may temporarily increase GDP and employment, but in the long run, we risk instability, damaging inflation and lost jobs, which is a dear price for middle and lower income citizens to pay. However, the long run is not yet here. We have opportunities to assure greater long-term stability. Moving policy from highly accommodative to merely accommodative would be a step in the right direction. In this way, we can achieve a better long-run outcome than if we delay normalization.     
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5      
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Brian Wynter: The year ahead – the view from the bank Address by Mr Brian Wynter, Governor of the Bank of Jamaica, to the American Chamber of Commerce (AMCHAM) Forum, Kingston, 25 March 2011. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen: For as long as most of us can remember, Jamaica has been hamstrung by persistent macroeconomic problems. They are well-known but they bear repetition: low GDP growth, adverse fiscal and debt dynamics and the related unsustainable imbalances. These problems were exacerbated by the global economic and financial crises which commenced in 2008. In order to break this cycle, the country took some bold steps in 2010 which have so far resulted in successes in key performance indicators.  In January 2010, the Government successfully negotiated the Jamaica Debt Exchange (“JDX”) with local investors resulting in an astonishing rate of participation. This paved the way for the signing of a Stand-by Arrangement with the International Monetary Fund (“IMF-SBA”) which entailed Jamaica giving a commitment to an economic path and a set of reforms that would establish and maintain the fundamentals that are conducive to sustainable growth and development. The key objectives of the resulting medium-term programme are to set Jamaica’s debt to GDP ratio on a downward trajectory, entrench fiscal discipline and accountability and raise the growth rate of real GDP. In this context, monetary policy is aimed at bringing inflation down to mid-single digit levels and maintaining it there for the medium-term in the context of a flexible exchange rate.  These commitments enabled the Government to access unprecedented levels of funding from the multilateral financial institutions. A combined total of US$2.4 billion, amounting to about 20 per cent of GDP, is expected to be received by Jamaica over the programme’s two-year period to provide budgetary support and meet balance of payments needs. So, what is the progress to date? Well, so far we have seen the materialisation of a number of the goals envisioned by the medium-term programme.  It was envisioned that the fiscal policy strategy and the resulting stable medium-term outlook would create the conditions for substantial and sustained reductions in interest rates. This would be achieved by consolidating public finances which would set the stage for lower deficits and progressively lower financing needs.  And, indeed, this has been the result. For fiscal year 2011/12, we are expecting that the process of fiscal consolidation will continue. The Government has shown its commitment to this process by continuing to adjust expenditure where the revenues fall below budget. Additionally, the Government has demonstrated its commitment to fiscal transformation with the commencement of the phased implementation of the Central Treasury Management System, which will result in more efficient management of public sector finances.  The process to divest the Government of public bodies that are a drag on the budget has achieved major milestones and is continuing. With these developments, there is going to be a continuing decline in the fiscal deficit and the debt ratios. Lower demand for financing from the domestic market by the Government will continue to result in more and more resources being available for private sector credit.  Repeated success in meeting the quantitative targets under the IMF-SBA has led to increasing confidence about the prospects for the economy. We saw this in the strong preference for Jamaica Dollar assets during the fiscal year and the steady appreciation in the exchange rate. The Bank ended 2010 with strong net international reserves (“NIR”) of 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches US$2.17 billion, an increase of US$442.1 million for the year. Gross international reserves, at US$2.98 billion, represented 23.7 weeks of projected goods and services imports. In the context of the relatively stable market conditions during the year, the Bank lowered the interest rate on its 30-day certificate of deposit by 375 basis points to 6.75 per cent by end-February 2011. In addition, the Bank increased the pool of loanable funds in the system by reducing the cash reserve requirement for both Jamaica Dollar and foreign currency deposits. Market-determined interest rates also trended down during the year at a faster pace than the Central Bank’s policy rate.  Despite emerging challenges from rising international commodity prices, headline inflation continued its progress towards the achievement of the target for the fiscal year of 7.5 to 9.5 per cent. STATIN released its inflation report for February ten days ago although this may come as a surprise to you as the news media appear to have concluded that the results in the report are not sufficiently newsworthy to be reported in a timely manner. Interestingly, I read a statement in one of today’s newspapers that food prices rose by 25 per cent last year in an environment where the minimum wage is J$4,500 per week. Well, not exactly. In the same inflation report for February that was released by STATIN ten days ago, prices in the Food category recorded an increase of 7.8 per cent for the 12-month period ending in February 2011.  Headline inflation for the month of February was minus 0.4 per cent. With January’s decline of 0.2 per cent, inflation for the 11 months of the fiscal year-to-date is 6.7 per cent. It is now quite clear that the target for fiscal year 2010/11 is likely to be comfortably achieved. At the same time, there was a weaker than projected performance of the economy in terms of GDP growth last year. This came in the context of adverse local and international weather conditions (Tropical Storm Nicole, ash clouds in Europe) and the temporary fall-out that the economy experienced, particularly the tourism sector, from the disturbance in West Kingston in May. However, looking forward to the next 12 months, it is expected that with lower interest rates and an abundance of credit resources there will be an increase in investments in the productive sectors of the economy. In this regard, the Central Bank is projecting gradual recovery in the coming fiscal year with GDP growth expected to be in the range of 1.0 to 2.0 per cent. The initiatives being spearheaded by the Planning Institute of Jamaica to identify and synchronize high impact projects that enhance inner city communities, improve the economic infrastructure and protect the environment should result in a further acceleration of growth as they come on stream.  Ladies and gentlemen, interest rates in the money market are now at the lowest we have seen in several decades. This is not a phenomenon to pass over lightly. It has no doubt been brought about in part by the confidence exhibited by the multilateral financial institutions in Jamaica’s economic programme, a confidence that has been affirmed by the credit rating agencies. Of greater significance, confidence in the country’s economic prospects has been demonstrated by the willingness of local investors to accept lower and lower rates on their investments. Foreign investors have also shared this optimism by their overwhelming participation in the global bond that was offered in February. With the policies that were undertaken in 2010, Jamaica is being set firmly on a path for sustainable growth and development. The on-going reforms in the financial sector will further increase its stability and soundness. Stable financial markets will reassure investors about the safety of their investments. Ladies and gentlemen, fiscal year 2011/12 is set to be a year of accelerated progress and I urge you to be a part of the change.  Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Joanne Kellermann: The challenge of diversity in central banks Speech by Ms A J Kellermann, Executive Director of the Netherlands Bank, at the European Central Bank (ECB) Diversity forum, Frankfurt am Main, 28 March 2011. *      *      * Within De Nederlandsche Bank, role models are important for the emancipation of its female staff. As the first and only woman on DNB’s Governing Board, I am glad to act as a role model in that sense. Although DNB may appear to be a male bastion, it’s good to remember that its continuance – shortly after its establishment – depended on a woman: the widow Borski. When King Willem I founded De Nederlandsche Bank in 1814, not all of the 5000 issued shares were sold immediately. However, Madam Borski had confidence in the newly established bank and, in 1815, she decided to buy the remaining 2000 shares. Her purchase was subject to a secret condition that the King would not issue any extra shares for three years. Many years later Madam Borski sold her shares at a tidy profit. Introduction – general Many women are inclined by nature to wait until the organisation notices their management potential. They only apply for a position if they comfortably meet all the job requirements. When interviewing job candidates of their own sex, recruiters tend to more easily recognise gender-specific aspects and to value them more highly. Personal Within our organisation too – despite our successful diversity policy – these gender aspects sometimes play a significant role. As a woman member of DNB’s Governing Board, I see it as my task to speak out in such situations. For example, not a single woman was included in a recent list of potential candidates for the position of Divisional Director. However, I was able to intervene to add the name of a good female candidate to the list. Why do we need a diversity policy? DNB is convinced that diversity among its staff will lead to better results. In view of the tighter labour market, DNB is keen to use female potential. Finally, as a guardian of financial stability, DNB has an important social role. In keeping with our social responsibility, we wish to pursue a diversity policy that ensures that our workforce is a good reflection of our society. This means that diversity within DNB embraces more than just the gender aspect, which I am focusing on today. Cases in point are employees with different cultural backgrounds, an occupational handicap or different sexual preferences. I’m glad to tell you that DNB has its own network for homosexual and lesbian employees and that, for the third time, DNB will participate with its own boat in the Canal Parade as part of the Amsterdam Gay Pride celebration. The Talent to the Top Charter Let me tell you about an interesting Dutch initiative, launched in 2007 by the government, corporate sector and women’s representatives: the Talent to the Top Charter. The idea behind the Charter is to bring more talented women to the top and help keep them there. The Netherlands was lagging behind internationally in respect of the number of women in top 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches management positions. In 2008, the signatories reported that the number of women in top functions at their organisations was 16.7%. Their aim is to bring this figure up to 24.6%. The Talent to the Top Charter has since been signed by almost 170 organisations, including DNB in 2008. Commitment by DNB By signing the Charter, we committed ourselves to realising and preserving a continuous smooth flow of women into top positions. Here is an overview of the exact percentages at DNB over the past few years. A commission will monitor whether we actually honour our commitment as a signatory. Starting from the year 2009, when women were underrepresented at 28%, DNB has set itself a target that women will fill 32% of its management positions in 2012. It’s important to note that at that moment – in 2009 – there were not many women whose potential talent had been recognised and who were being groomed for a managerial position. So what is DNB’s vision and policy to meet the challenge of increasing gender diversity. What measures have been taken to realise this vision? I’d like to share our experiences and the lessons we have learnt in the process. DNB’s vision and objectives In the context of our commitment to the Talent to the Top Charter, we have set some target figures for 2012. These clear and measurable targets show where we are heading, but are not an end in themselves. The slide shows the situation in 2004, where we are now, and our target for 2012.  The target for divisional directors is set at 25%, for department heads at 30% and for section heads at 40%. DNB’s Governing Board has expressly committed itself to these targets and the Supervisory Board is given an annual update on progress towards them. DNB has translated this vision into several diversity targets. Within DNB, we promote that:  more women enter the organisation as professionals and later move on to management positions,  more women participate in training and mentoring programmes,  more women are nominated for management vacancies and are appointed and  more women with valuable capacities are seen and stimulated to put themselves forward and to present themselves as management candidates. We deploy a range of instruments to realise these diversity targets. Let’s take a look at some specific instruments. Instruments 1) Entrants We made our recruitment and selection process diversity-proof by enhancing the awareness of gender aspects among our recruitment and selection staff. In addition, the HR advisors who interview candidates are trained to operate from a broader gender perspective. Moreover, we try to always include a woman in the selection commission, which generally consists of an HR advisor, line manager and sometimes a team member. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 2)  Development – VLOT and questions DNB has its own year-long training programme to develop management potential. Within DNB, this management development programme is important for employees’ chances of securing a management position. Formerly, candidates applied to join the programme themselves. Now, the divisional directors have been asked to nominate candidates and to ensure that at least half of the nominees are female. If the ratio falls short, our management commission will discuss the nominations with the divisional director. Women should make up at least 40 percent of the group that is eventually admitted to the management development programme. To create a sufficient pool of high-potential women, DNB launched a personal development course for young promising staff a few years ago. At least 40 percent of the entrants to this group, too, should be women. 3)  Appointments to management positions DNB uses an open application procedure for management vacancies. Management development staff regularly discuss gender diversity with the persons involved in selecting and interviewing candidates. The name of the preferred candidate is passed on to a management commission, consisting of four divisional directors, which then puts the proposed nomination before the DNB Governing Board. An important success factor in recognising female management potential is that women make up 50 percent of this management commission. After all, people are more inclined to appreciate gender-specific aspects in a candidate of their own sex. Another important success factor is that Management Development staff actively encourage female colleagues to apply for a management position. Women still appear to need such encouragement. Finally, I notice that divisional directors are becoming more keen to appoint a female candidate to enhance diversity in their team. 4)  Discovering female talent  Within DNB, too, women tend to wait until the organisation notices their management potential. The Human Resources department hence engages in active dialogue with DNB’s female staff. In this way HR officers detect management potential and gain an overall impression of women’s professional desires and ambitions and the obstacles facing them in their career. Our terms of employment are already conducive to female participation thanks to the opportunity for a 36-hour working week over four days and partially paid parental leave. Moreover, working times at DNB are flexible. We aim to support talented women with the ambition to become managers. Through our “Empower yourself” workshops and mentoring, women with valuable capacities can be identified and encouraged to profile themselves as management candidates. As our mentoring system had proved itself in practice as an effective development tool, we decided to radically expand it in 2009. Part of the success of mentoring is that it is an easy and quick way for adults to learn. 5)  Management targets The success of these diversity measures hinges on management commitment. When we introduced this diversity policy we made managers aware of the prejudices against women, but also of the benefits they bring to the workplace. Diversity, in a broader sense too, was highlighted through workshops and seminars.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches All managers at DNB are required to set personal performance targets for promoting diversity. The point is not to meet a specific target figure but to give an undertaking to actively support more diversity. Role models are also important within DNB. Role models make employees aware of the effect of their own behaviour and create support for the envisaged changes. A women’s network at DNB organises a wide range of activities for all DNB staff. As of 2007, a man or women who acts as a role model for others is chosen from a shortlist. A person who makes an significant contribution to shifting the boundaries within DNB is awarded an annual trophy. I am honoured to say that the trophy bears my name because, thanks to my position, I can act as a role model for many female colleagues. I’m sure you are wondering whether our measures have worked. Fortunately, the answer is unmistakably yes. We are on track, and it now looks as if women will fill 32% of management positions at DNB in 2012. Finally, I’d like to share a key insight: recruiting talented women takes a woman’s touch.     
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Daniel Mminele: The current state of payment system integration Remarks by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Payment System Integration Workshop, Centurion, 22 March 2011. *      *      * Good morning ladies and gentlemen.  It is a pleasure to be with you once again, and an honour to have been asked to make a few remarks at the opening of the SADC Payment System Integration workshop. It is only little more than a year since we launched the project to integrate the region’s payment systems. If we cast our minds back, at that time we were all reasonably constructive about where the world was going. Most parts of the world had just emerged from a severe recession, the global economy had been successfully pulled away from the brink, and economic indicators were generally pointing the right way, albeit with some risks that we could identify. We had subsequently seen very encouraging growth rates during the first quarter of 2010. All this, however, started to change during the second quarter, when the European sovereign debt crisis presented new challenges, which are still with us today, and in the process exposed how fragile the banking and financial systems still were after the crisis, and delivering the very sobering message that the road to a strong and sustainable global recovery was going to be a rather slow one, and would be uneven across countries and regions. More recently, we have witnessed a series of natural disasters, and geopolitical risks increasing, the full impact of which on the global economy remains uncertain at this stage. And of late in some parts of the world inflation concerns are coming to the fore again, requiring delicate balancing acts on the part of policy makers to ensure that inflation expectations remain anchored while avoiding any undue damage to recovery prospects. As we will be starting our monetary policy committee meeting later today, I will certainly not comment on the South African situation, but refer you to the statement that we will issue on Thursday afternoon. We have many lessons to learn from the crisis, while the crisis has also left many questions unanswered. These challenging and uncertain times that we are experiencing will in some way or another also have a bearing on the SADC payment system integration project. Two areas specifically spring to mind: The one being the evolving agenda and package of measures to address the root causes of the global banking crisis, the other being the events in Europe, where certain euro zone member countries had to be rescued by others together with multilateral organisations, resulting in the European integration project being put to a rather severe test.  The two circumstances can present very different sets of challenges and could impact the SADC integration project in different ways, in that each could impact a different set of role-players. The emergence of measures to address issues that led to the global banking crisis has a direct impact on commercial banks, and on regulators who are required to refine existing or introduce new regulatory and supervisory measures. The events in Europe, which revealed that, while there are no doubts about the benefits of monetary unions, under certain circumstances they can put serious constraints on countries, on the other hand may harbour even broader implications. Countries in the SADC region will probably carefully monitor the situation in Europe to reassess the admittance criteria and control measures for a future SADC monetary union.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Commercial banks will be required to conform to more stringent regulatory requirements because of the new measures introduced following the banking crises.  Regulators are required to review their oversight and supervisory procedures of commercial banks. A higher level of co-operation between regulatory bodies is becoming essential to ensure that different facets of a commercial bank’s structure and operation are adequately examined. Joint oversight and mutual co-operation initiatives between regulators are being formalised by memoranda of understanding and we are observing the formalisation of roles of the different regulators in integrated environments. The significant commitment required of commercial banks to meet the new requirements could result in a shift in focus away from regional initiatives. Regional initiatives could take lesser priority for the banks. The role of the SADC Banking Association becomes even more crucial in the effort to integrate the payment system environment. Commercial banks, despite their commitments to effect changes to meet new regulatory requirements, should continue to play their part in making the regional integration initiative a success, not least because they stand to benefit from the opportunities that regional integration will bring with it. The SADC Banking Association is ideally positioned to work with the banking community, and a close working relationship with the project team is similarly of paramount importance.  Events of the recent past in Europe have prompted SADC to examine more carefully the criteria for admittance to the monetary union. This together with the time being taken for the establishment of control measures and procedures, will more than likely delay the eventual establishment of the SADC Central Bank and the introduction of the SADC single currency.  The dates initially contained in the Regional Indicative Strategic Development Plan (RISDP), which called for the establishment of the SADC Free Trade Area (FTA) by 2008; a SADC Customs Union by 2010; a SADC Common Market by 2015; a SADC Monetary Union by 2016; and a Single Currency by 2018, are now being reviewed.  With the target dates being reviewed, sufficient care should be taken to ensure that the momentum of the individual projects is not lost, and that the project teams should continue to focus on their goals. As members of these project teams, you are required to manage the uncertainties and the changing operating environment, and deliver a system in time for the introduction of the SADC currency. The changing environment and possible change in schedule requires flexibility in the approach to managing the project. The SADC Payment System Project team has therefore made some adjustments in its approach and strategy. I believe that the consequences of this changed approach will be the focus for discussions at this workshop. Established regional structures could possibly make a significant impact in the integration process. By simply broadening the base they could make ideal starting points for the SADC integration. It is being increasingly suggested that structures like CMA and SACU can be leveraged and expanded to include the other SADC countries. Legal constraints could be addressed and legal frameworks enhanced to create an environment, which allows SADC countries to be included as and when they meet the convergence criteria. The Payment System Project team has adopted this approach for the payment system integration project and is introducing the concept of a model for integration based on the CMA. I am sure the technical and legal issues will be discussed in detail at this workshop and that there will be ample opportunity to exchange views around the proposed strategy. The significant aspect of the CMA solution for payment systems is that parity already exists between the four currencies involved. This allows the project team to build a single-currency system and have it tested, implemented and have the legal, emotional and psychological 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 barriers removed. We all know how emotive an issue it will be to eventually let go of national infrastructures, even if it is for the greater good. The SADC integration project is wide ranging. It will require the co-operation and commitment of varied role-players to make it a success.  It is therefore significant that the different sub-committees of the CCBG are represented here today. The speed at which different sub-committees are moving needs coordination so as to avoid a situation where the payment system project is running ahead of other projects. Your presence will enhance the discussions and will ensure that relevant issues are tabled and that they are adequately addressed. Your agenda for the next three days is quite rich. This could be a very significant three days for the SADC integration project. You may look back at this workshop, when the project is successfully completed, and appreciate some of the preparatory work that you would have completed over the next 3 days, and I am sure be proud to have been part of it. I wish you well in your discussions and that you have a successful workshop.  Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 José De Gregorio: Adjustment in the global economy Keynote address by Mr José De Gregorio, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, at the 2011 Institute of International Finance (IIF) Latin American Economic Forum, Calgary, 27 March 2011. *      *      * I am grateful to Luis Oscar Herrera, Enrique Orellana and Tatiana Vargas for valuable comments. Thank you very much for the invitation to speak at this 2011 IIF Latin American Economic Forum. The last few years have been the most challenging for economic policy around the world in many decades. From an unprecedented inflationary shock in 2007–08, the global economy went through a financial crisis and a recession in 2008–09, of a scale not seen since the Great Depression. Now, we are experiencing a process of recovery with strong inflationary pressures and tensions in the world economy as a result of asymmetries in this process. The purpose of my talk today will be the global adjustment, how it has been proceeding and what the current challenges for policymaking are, with special focus on the asymmetries and their implications for economic policy. The uneven recovery The world economy is growing unevenly and subject to many tensions. Most advanced economies are recovering from the crisis, but they still have high rates of unemployment and excess capacity, and this is expected to last for some time. Although there are signs of improvements in the recovery, many economies are still in a weak financial position, and domestic demand is expected to grow at low rates for some time. After years of financial excesses, households in many countries, particularly in the U.S., have accumulated excessive debt.  Many advanced economies also have weak fiscal positions, due to fiscal expansions implemented to contain the recession, measures to support the banking sector, or simply the fiscal profligacy that took place prior to the crisis. In particular, the level of government debt in some European countries will require a significant and protracted fiscal consolidation to avoid insolvency. Therefore, the deleveraging process of households and governments implies that domestic demand is unlikely to be an engine of growth. As a consequence of this scenario, the inflationary pressures will be relatively contained. The rise in commodity prices is having effects on headline inflation, but the propagation to other prices will be limited because of a negative output gap. This is in sharp contrast with the situation in emerging market economies (EMEs). Accordingly, monetary policy in advanced economies will remain expansionary, and despite some tightening in the near future, they will still have lower interest rates than those in EMEs, and which will be well below what used to be considered a neutral stance. In contrast, EMEs have been growing strongly, and after suffering moderately from the global crisis, many have already reached levels of full capacity, and some of them may even be overheating (Figure 1). At a global level, the buoyancy of EMEs has resulted in higher commodity prices, which coupled with some specific factors, such as weather problems impacting agricultural production and tensions in the Middle East and North Africa, have pushed food prices to record highs and oil prices to very high levels as well. This price shock, coupled with strong domestic activity, results in inflationary pressures that must be contained with tighter monetary policy. Contrary to the situation in advanced economies, international price (supply) shocks find fertile territory to propagate to wages or other prices when the economy is in a strong cyclical position. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches This uneven recovery of the world economy is resulting in an uneven monetary policy landscape (Figure 2), which strengthens currencies in EMEs and induces capital inflows to these countries. Free trade and export-led growth have been a successful growth strategy in developing countries, which see the strengthening of their currencies as a threat to this strategy. Consequently, many countries have been trying to fight the appreciation via capital controls and exchange rate intervention. China and the U.S. deserve special mention, as they are at the center of the tensions of the adjustment. China has been the growth engine of the world, and it would not be an exaggeration to call it the “grower of last resort” for the global economy. They have decided to appreciate gradually, much more slowly than most EMEs and commodity exporters. Since December 2009, the yuan has appreciated almost four percent, while this figure is much closer to ten percent for most EMEs. The comparison is even more dramatic when looking at a longer period of time. This has been achieved through massive reserve accumulation and limited financial integration. However, for measures in the foreign exchange market to have real effects – that is, on the real exchange rate, which is the relevant variable from the point of view of competitiveness – these measures need to have some support from the real side of the economy. In the case of China, this is a very high savings rate. China saves about half of its GDP and the resulting current account surplus sustains a depreciated real exchange rate. Otherwise, attempts to maintain a depreciated nominal exchange rate sooner or later lead to inflation, which is the way to achieve relative price adjustment when the nominal exchange rate is not allowed to adjust. The U.S., in turn, is undertaking an extraordinary monetary expansion. Beyond having reached the zero lower bound for the federal funds rate, unconventional measures are adding additional monetary stimulus. In particular, the massive purchase of securities implemented in the so-called QE2 program. This explains why the dollar has reached its lowest level in several decades (Figure 3), but this is not only the result of expansionary monetary policy, but also of the lack of domestic demand and of the external imbalances. Global rebalancing of the world economy needs countries in a strong cyclical position to direct domestic demand to imports, while countries with insufficient domestic demand to increase exports. Exchange rate adjustment should facilitate this process. Therefore, a faster appreciation of the yuan would relieve some appreciatory pressures in other EMEs, making the adjustment more balanced. But, for this to be achieved on a sustained basis, it is not enough to let the exchange rate adjust. Structural reforms will also be required to achieve a sustainable and efficient reduction of China’s savings rate. On the other hand, a rise in advanced economies’ interest rates, in particular in the U.S., would also alleviate currency tensions. However, the main responsibility for policymakers is to secure sustainable growth in their home economies that favors their citizens, and we all have to deal with the repercussions of those actions. The response in emerging market economies Emerging market economies have been facing two challenges as a consequence of this global environment. First, exchange rate appreciation and a resumption of capital inflows, and second, inflationary pressures. Sometimes, these two challenges may lead to inconsistencies in macroeconomic management. However, it is important to highlight that in small open economies any attempt to persistently manage an exchange rate away from its fundamentals, in particular at an overvalued level, may end up leading to inflation. If the adjustment does not come from a change in the value of the currency, it will happen through inflation. This is the reason why it is an illusion to think that central banks can control both the exchange rate and the inflation rate. However, there are options available to transitorily reduce pressure on the exchange rate while monetary policy continues to focus on price stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 In a flexible inflation targeting framework, a first implication regarding exchange rate fluctuations is that monetary policy would tend to lean against the wind. Indeed, a persistent exchange rate appreciation would have disinflationary effects and would induce a looser monetary policy than the one that would prevail with a more depreciated exchange rate (everything else constant). However, in the current juncture, this effect does not prevent the need to tighten monetary policy, given strong growth in EMEs and inflationary pressures coming from commodity prices. A second option to mitigate currency appreciation is exchange rate intervention. In order to keep control on the interest rate, this intervention must be sterilized. Of course it has lower effects than when the monetary impact is not sterilized, but it is consistent with inflation stabilization. In Chile, since 2008 we have intervened twice, and we have implemented it in a pre-announced way, with a known schedule for intervention and sterilization, so it does not interfere with monetary policymaking. The rationale for the intervention was twofold. On the one hand, to accumulate reserves, strengthening our international liquidity position, and on the other hand, to provide some transitory relief to sectors that need to undergo an adjustment due to current international conditions.  A more debated tool is the use of capital controls. This is particularly important for countries that are going through a period of important net capital inflows, which is not the case of Chile. Capital controls are part of the central bank’s toolkit in EMEs. However, their effectiveness is still a matter of discussion, and instead of discussing this evidence I would like to point to distortions that they may bring about. First, they may redirect capital inflows from controlled segments of the financial system to uncontrolled ones, fostering the shadow banking system. And second, they may generate discriminations in the corporate sector as some firms may have access to foreign financing free of controls, while other firms, especially small and medium sized enterprises, have to seek financing from more expensive domestic sources. Capital controls are not only a macro tool, but have recently been considered “macroprudential” measures as well. Their purpose is to avoid the building up of financial vulnerabilities, in particular currency and maturity mismatches. But, this can also be achieved with regulation directly introduced to prevent these mismatches and through appropriate risk management. Finally, given some recent calls for the use of capital controls in EMEs, there is a collective action problem. As one country imposes capital controls, it pushes international financial flows elsewhere, inducing others to impose capital controls, and so on. Now assume that all countries are able to impose capital controls so that at the margin, there are no changes in net capital flows. Then the global adjustment would not take place, EMEs would grow beyond their potential, generating inflation, while weak economies would be trapped with low demand growth. EMEs can still try to temper capital inflows transitorily, but to completely avoid them would be unfeasible and inefficient.  Concluding remarks Despite all the current tensions, the global economy is adjusting. Exchange rates of EMEs and commodity exporters have been strengthening – albeit at different speeds as some economies try to smooth the adjustment – and the global recovery is taking place (Figure 4). Fortunately, trade restrictions, which represent the biggest threat to the global recovery, have not been implemented. In recent weeks we have witnessed increased tensions in the world, such as the turmoil in the Middle East and North Africa and the natural and nuclear disasters in Japan. We need to play close attention to these developments, but they should not change the perspectives of the dual-speed recovery in the world economy. As discussed above, the policy decisions in large countries have repercussions on the rest of the world. However, the main role for policymakers is to secure recovery and to create the basis for sustainable growth, which requires macroeconomic and financial stability. Policy 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches measures in the U.S., such as QE2, are trying to do just that. Beyond our professional assessment, a successful recovery in the U.S. is good for the world economy. By the same token, Chinese authorities have decided on a gradual path of adjustment to secure enough growth for all the social and economic needs they face. From a macroeconomic standpoint, their policy of exchange rate management is something many EMEs have tried several times, and although I am a firm believer that exchange rate flexibility is crucial for small open economies, it is of course not the general rule and is not be to be applied in all cases and under all circumstances, especially for large low-income economies. Overall, the world needs a sustained recovery in the U.S. and growth in China. The same is valid for EMEs. We need to contribute to the global adjustment, but our main concern must be the welfare of our citizens. Containing the current inflationary pressures is essential to allow for sustainable growth. Delaying monetary policy adjustment may result in more severe adjustments in the future. Also, rebuilding fiscal buffers is important in order to have a more balanced recovery and to be better prepared to conduct macroeconomic policies. Some days ago, the Chilean government announced a timely and relevant fiscal tightening that should contribute to the moderation of aggregate demand. The world is not going through a currency war; neither are EMEs being flooded by liquidity from advanced economies. But, in EMEs, there are many tensions and challenges that we must deal with appropriately in order to build more resilient economies and take full advantage of the great progress achieved during recent years in terms of macroeconomic and financial stability. These are the main contributions central banks can make to their countries.   Figure 1(annualized quarterly change, percent)World output (1)Output gap (3)(1)PPP-weightedregions.(2)Thefourthquarterisanestimate.(3)GapobtainedwiththeHPfilter,except in advanced economies, where OECD estimates were used. Sources:CentralBankofChilebasedondatafromBloomberg,ConsensusForecasts,OECD,andthestatistics offices of each country.-10-5051015-10-5051015050607080910Emerging economies (2)Developed economies-6-4-2024-6-4-2024000204060810Developed economiesEmerging AsiaLatin America
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Figure 2Monetary policy rates around the world (1)(percent)Sources: Central Bank of Chile and Bloomberg.(1)Correspondstoasimpleaverageofthereferenceratesforeachgroupofcountries.(2)IncludesEuroarea,Japan,UnitedKingdom,andUnitedStates.(3)IncludesBrazil,CzechRepublic,China,Colombia, Hungary, South Korea, Mexico, Peru, Poland, and South Africa.01234567890123456789060708091011ChileDeveloped econ. (2)Emerging eco. (3)  Figure 3U.S multilateral nominal exchange rate (*) Sources: Bloomberg and U.S. Federal Reserve.(index, March 1973=100) (*) An increase indicates a depreciation of the dollar against main trading partners. 6080100120140160608010012014016073798591970309 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Figure 4(index; 2005=100)Source: BIS.Real exchange rate (1)(1)Correspondasimpleaverageoftherealexchangerateforeachgroupofcountries.Anincreaseindicatesdepreciation.(2)IncludesArgentina,Brazil,ChileandMexico.(3)IncludesChina,HongKong,Indonesia,Malaysia,SouthKorea,andThailand.(4)IncludesHungary,Poland,CzechRepublic,and Russia. (5) Includes Australia, Canada and New Zealand.708090100110120708090100110120060708091011Latin America (2)Emerging Asia (3)Emerging Europe (4)Commodity exporters (5)United States  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Jean Boivin: The “Great” Recession in Canada – perception vs reality Remarks by Mr Jean Boivin, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the Montreal Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) Society, Montreal, 28 March 2011. *      *      * Introduction I am very pleased to be able to deliver this speech today to the Montréal CFA Society – my first speech in Quebec as a Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada. As active stakeholders in the Quebec and Canadian economies, you are at the centre of the economic life of the country. Thus, I don’t have to tell you that the past few years have been challenging. Barely three years ago, the financial crisis was a source of major concern worldwide. This unprecedented event had serious and costly repercussions, which we continue to feel today.  In the aftermath of the crisis, the global economy entered a recession that we can rightly characterize as “great.” Economic activity in the G-7 countries dropped by more than 5 per cent. According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the number of unemployed persons around the world jumped by more than 30 million, most of them from advanced economies.1 This is a striking figure, especially when we think of it as almost equal to the entire population of Canada.  The Canadian economy was not spared: It still faces major difficulties, and significant risks remain on the road ahead. Yet, it is also true that the country’s economic prospects have improved since the crisis, as we see in Montréal, which has enjoyed the strongest growth among Canadian urban centres. In fact, coming out of the recession, Canada is a leader among the G-7 countries. Employment and economic activity have surpassed their pre-recession levels. In light of the progress we have made, we can now ask: What was the real extent of this recession? What are the lessons to be learned, and what are the implications for the future?  The purpose of my speech today is to reflect on events that are still fresh in our minds. Let us remember, however, that the answers to these questions will become clearer over time, as new data and analysis become available.2 The recession: first impressions At first glance, the answers seem simple. After all, a recession is defined as a generalized and sustained decrease of economic activity, of which the broadest measure available is GDP. It would then appear that our task is simply to measure the extent of the decrease in GDP during the most recent recession and then to compare this decrease with other, similar episodes in Canada, or elsewhere. Child’s play, you might think. This could be the first approach that our descendants – future economists, yet to be born, with no inkling of what we just lived through – would take: to study and compare economic cycles in Canada. Examining the economy from this angle, they would observe that the recession of 2007–09 did not seem to be any more serious than previous recessions in Canada and that, in fact, it was much shorter (Chart 1). The behaviour of employment would                                                  1  M. Dao et P. Loungani (2010), “The Human Cost of Recessions: Assessing It, Reducing It,” IMF Staff Position Note No. SPN/10/17, International Monetary Fund, 11 November. 2  With the publication of the national accounts for the first quarter of 2011, scheduled for 30 May, Statistics Canada will begin a historical review of the past four years. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches seem to confirm such a diagnosis: employment losses were much less serious and, compared with other recessions of the past 30 years, jobs were regained much sooner (Chart 2) But any diagnosis based on a narrow, mechanistic reading of statistical measures of economic activity could prove to be false, or at the very least, incomplete. If our descendants were open-minded enough, they might be led to examine some of the headlines from this time: « L’Économie canadienne paralysée », La Presse, le 31 mai 2008 “A Financial Drama with No Final Act in Sight,” New York Times, 14 September 2008 « Nous sommes au milieu d’une crise grave », Le Droit, le 25 septembre 2008 “It Couldn’t Get Worse, But It Did,” New York Times, 12 October 2008 « L’économie canadienne s’atrophie encore », La Presse Affaires, le 2 mars 2009 « Nous étions au bord de la catastrophe,» Le Devoir, le 18 juillet 2009 On the basis of their preliminary diagnosis, our descendants might wonder what all the fuss was about. Let us hope, however, that curiosity spurs these future economists on to further inquiry. Behind this first impression hides a much more complex reality. Canada’s economy weathered a very violent storm, but thanks to wise precautions and appropriate navigation, it arrived safely in port, damaged perhaps, but still afloat.  The global economy on the edge of the precipice But we cannot judge the severity of the storm on the basis of a safe arrival. Let’s go back to the autumn of 2008. Ministers of finance and central bank governors from around the world meet in Washington. The tension and anger in the air are palpable. After the credit bubble burst in August 2007, the financial crisis spread like wildfire. The liquidity crisis turned into a solvency crisis. In September 2008, the crisis worsened, and its effects were felt throughout the entire American financial system, triggering a series of events at breathtaking speed. In very short order, we witnessed the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers and the nationalization of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.3 The contagion then spread to Europe, where key British, German and Belgian banks were either nationalized or needed major bailouts. Stock markets registered their greatest drops in more than 75 years.  The spectre of the Great Depression of the 1930s hovered on the horizon, reminding us that recessions following financial crises are usually longer and more difficult than others and leave behind indelible scars.4  Implications for Canada Although Canada was not at the epicentre of the crisis, the contagion can spread through a number of transmission channels. The financial crisis was clearly leading to a massive                                                  3  Officially, the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. 4  In the decade following a financial crisis, growth of annual GDP is usually one percentage point lower, while the unemployment rate is generally five percentage points higher. See C. Reinhart and V. Reinhart (2010), “After the Fall,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 16334. In a recent study conducted with its international partners, the Bank estimated that the costs of a financial crisis for an economy represent about 63 per cent of GDP. See Strengthening International Capital and Liquidity Standards: A Macroeconomic Impact Assessment for Canada (Bank of Canada, 2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 slowdown of global economic activity, with a direct impact on foreign trade. Since three-quarters of our exports are destined for markets in the United States, experience taught us that when the United States sneezes, Canada catches a cold (Chart 3).  Further, with the increasing integration of the global economy, the fates of national economies are much more closely interrelated, even more than might be expected based on the scale of our international trade.5 A global financial crisis, therefore, can affect Canada not only through international trade, but also by weakening financial markets, shaking consumer and business confidence, and postponing capital investments, in light of the high level of uncertainty.6 Phase one: sudden slowdown  For all these reasons, the financial crisis was expected to have a significant impact in Canada, and for the first phase of the cycle, this was certainly the case. During the last recession, GDP declined by 3.3 per cent over three quarters. In contrast, over the same period of time in the 1980s and the 1990s, it fell by 2.2 per cent and 1.9 per cent, respectively A prominent feature of the recent recession was the spectacular drop in exports. Exports were harder hit than in any previous recession, decreasing by 16 per cent over three quarters, while the most significant drop during the recessions of the 1980s and 1990s was only 8 per cent (Chart 4). Investments were equally hard hit by the recession. There was a 22 per cent downturn in investments over just three quarters (Chart 5). Nothing like this has ever been seen. It took two years during the 1980s recession, and three years during the 1990s recession, before a downturn of comparable magnitude was recorded. This recent decline in investment is partly due to the exceptionally high levels of uncertainty haunting the global economy. In sum, the recent recession was different from previous ones, owing to a more pronounced slowdown triggered by unusually steep drops in exports and investment. During its initial phase, the effects of the crisis in Canada – albeit to a somewhat lesser degree – were comparable to those in the United States and showed real signs of becoming a “Great Recession” (Chart 6). Phase two: rapid recovery Despite the rapid slowdown, the recovery was faster than those that followed previous recessions. Why? Neither exports nor investments can provide the answer. While GDP has recovered to pre-recession levels, business investment and exports have only recovered 45 per cent and 67 per cent, respectively, of the losses incurred during the recession.                                                  5  Empirical studies show that the links between countries are particularly tight when countries simultaneously sustain the same shock. See, for example, J. Boivin and M. Giannoni, “Global Forces and Monetary Policy Effectiveness,” in International Dimensions of Monetary Policy, J. Gali and M. Gertler (eds.) (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008). 6  Recent research at the Bank of Canada has empirically demonstrated that the financial channel plays a key role in the transmission of shocks originating from the United States. See K. Beaton and B. Desroches, “Financial Spillovers Across Countries: The Case of Canada and the United States,” Bank of Canada Discussion Paper No. 2011–1 (2011); and K. Beaton, R. Lalonde and S. Snudden, “The Propagation of U.S. Shocks to Canada: Understanding the Role of Real-Financial Linkages,” Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2010–40 (2010). 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches If the recovery was speedier, despite weaker contributions from investment and exports, support for the recovery must have come from household and government spending. This was indeed the case. Household spending declined by only 2 per cent between 2009 and 2010, compared with 6 per cent during the previous two recessions. The contribution of government spending to growth was more than one percentage point in each year. The greater strength of household and government spending reflects Canada’s favourable position at the outset of the recession. Major adjustments had been made to the structure of the Canadian economy. Business and household balance sheets were relatively sound, and the banking system was robust, managed prudently, and sufficiently capitalized. Canada’s monetary policy framework had been effective and was credible. The fiscal situation was favourable, and the social safety net and regulatory framework were effective. As well, household spending was boosted by the prosperity arising from strong demand for our natural resources and by improved terms of trade.  This favourable position gave Canada the flexibility it needed to respond strongly to the crisis without compromising the credibility of our public policy frameworks. Thanks to the expansionary monetary and fiscal measures adopted in concert with other G-20 countries, Canada was able to support domestic demand which contributed significantly to the economic recovery.  Important lingering issues  In Canada, then, we had room to manoeuvre to help us effectively absorb the aftershocks of the global economic crisis. It is essential to maintain this buffer in light of the elevated risks that still exist worldwide and the structural issues that persist in the Canadian economy, even after the recession. The standard of living that we will be able to sustain in the medium term will depend, in fact, on our ability to address these issues. Allow me to address three of these issues: household indebtedness, international competitiveness and, more importantly, our productivity.  Household indebtedness  Let us start with household debt. Since the beginning of the recovery, household credit has increased at twice the rate of personal disposable income. In the autumn of 2010, Canadian household debt climbed to an unprecedented level of 147 per cent of disposable income (Chart 7).  The relatively healthy financial condition of Canadian households at the beginning of the “Great” Recession helped the Canadian economy to better withstand the initial shocks of the crisis. However, going forward, it is essential to maintain the necessary room to manoeuvre to keep household spending on a viable path. This leads us to believe that the rate of household spending will more closely correspond to future earnings, and certain signs to that effect have already been observed. Canada’s international competitiveness The second issue is our ability to compete internationally. The slow recovery of exports is due in part to the sluggishness of global economic activity. It is also due to the continued erosion of Canadian business competitiveness over the past ten years. This erosion can be attributed to the appreciation of the Canadian dollar and Canada’s poor productivity performance. Thus, Canadian exporters are seeing their market shares for a wide range of goods drop in the U.S. market – by far the most important market for Canada – while exporters in other countries, such as China and Mexico, are gaining ground (Chart 8). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 As global economic growth continues to take root, we are seeing early evidence of a recovery in net exports. But, at this point, exports are still weak when compared with previous recessions. And in a world of growing international competition, we should not assume that the forces causing the erosion of competitiveness through the previous decade will simply fade away because of a global recovery.  This situation highlights the need to diversify our export markets and increase our ability to compete, not only with American producers, but also with other foreign exporters. Productivity and investment This brings us to the third issue. As I just discussed, international competitiveness is based on our ingenuity, the efficiency with which we produce, or, for short, productivity. But beyond its influence on international competitiveness, productivity is a fundamental determinant of our economic well-being. To improve productivity, we need investment. The slow recovery of investment in this cycle is particularly surprising in light of relatively favourable financial conditions: interest rates remain low, and the exchange rate facilitates imports of machinery and equipment.  The elevated level of uncertainty experienced during the recession, especially from a global perspective, was a major hindrance to business investment. This uncertainty was not confined to our borders: the link between uncertainty and business investment was clearly evident in the economies of the United States, Germany and the United Kingdom.7  Yet heightened uncertainty is only part of the explanation. Although the recession in the United States was more serious and Americans faced at least the same degree of global uncertainty as we experienced in Canada, Canadian business investment in machinery and equipment lags behind that of the United States (Chart 9). In 2009, Canadian workers had access, on average, to approximately half the capital expenditures in machinery and equipment and information and communication technologies (ICT) of those available to their American counterparts. This is not a new phenomenon. In fact, between 1987 and 2009, Canadian investment in machinery and equipment and ICT per worker represented, on average, 77 per cent and 59 per cent, respectively, of similar American investments.  It is true that business investment started to recover at the end of 2009. Yet much progress remains to be made: less than half of the extraordinary drop in investments of the last recession have been recovered. With the increasing globalization of markets and the demographic challenges we face, maintaining our standard of living will require improved productivity. We must continue to innovate and to invest in promising projects.  Conclusion: perception vs. reality  We are fond of repeating the old adage: “An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.” Recent experience expands the notion and shows that good prevention measures can also make the cure more effective. Before the Great Recession, Canada was able to protect itself by ensuring that it had room to manoeuvre to absorb the shocks of the crisis. The lessons we learned from the past were reflected in the adoption of sound public policy frameworks. A                                                  7  See R. Bachmann, S. Elstner and E. Sims, “Uncertainty and Economic Activity: Evidence from Business Survey Data,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 16143 (2010); N. Bloom, “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 13385 (2007); and N. Bloom, J. Van Reenen and S. Bond, “Uncertainty and Investment Dynamics,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 12383 (2006). Many older studies on this issue are also available. See, for example, B. S. Bernanke (1983), “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 98 (1): 85–106. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches solid position, combined with the relatively healthy state of Canadian households, gave us the flexibility to withstand the worst effects of the global shock.  Future economists studying the 2007–09 recession in Canada may find it difficult to go beyond their first impressions and assess its true impact. Some will undoubtedly surmise that the economic activity of this time did indeed reflect, not only the extent of the shock, but also our ability to absorb it. The storm we weathered was a major one. We should not forget that it could have struck at a time when we were more vulnerable and less flexible. Things could have unfolded very differently, with disastrous results.  It is some comfort to know that, collectively, we were able to limit the damage. We must proceed with the strategy that has served us so well: continue to learn from our experiences to ensure better prevention and, when necessary, a better cure. For this, we must strive to deal with the issues that confront us with strength and determination.  Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7   
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9   
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Brian Wynter: What’s in your wallet? Address by Mr Brian Wynter, Governor of the Bank of Jamaica, at the opening of the 12th Annual Sir Arthur Lewis Institute of Social and Economic Studies Conference, Kingston, 23 March 2011. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen: Thank you for inviting me to this gathering of minds meeting here to consider what we have done with our political and economic freedom since Independence, what we should learn from the experience and where we want to go. Coming to a shared vision of the future is one thing that has always eluded us and it might be expecting too much for that to be the outcome of the conference. I believe we can agree, however, on some aspects of our experience that we would like to keep re-living and others that we would not wish upon the next generation. In contributing to this process, I am going to focus on an important aspect of the Caribbean experience not explicitly addressed elsewhere in the agenda – the role of monetary arrangements in shaping our development. They form a defining component of the policy choices that we made after Independence and, to my mind, have accounted for more of the outcome than we have generally acknowledged. There is another reason that makes this occasion an opportune time for introspection and reflection on these issues. The year 2011 marks the 50th anniversary of the start of operations at the Bank of Jamaica. The establishment of the institution in 1960 preceded Independence as it was seen as part of the institutional machinery that should be in place when the time came to manage our own affairs. So, we at the Bank are very much in tune with your theme of celebration and welcome the opportunity to appraise the Central Bank’s role in our collective affairs and to contemplate the form that this role might take in the future. In this context, most of my remarks will be focused on Jamaica, with references to our Caribbean neighbours for background and contrast. The path taken – post independence, post Bretton Woods I will begin with a sketch of the path that was taken after independence and during the post- Bretton Woods era. Among the group of former British colonies in the Caribbean, Jamaica was the first to establish a central bank, followed by Trinidad & Tobago in 1964 and Guyana in 1965. By the end of the 1960s these central banks had taken over the note issuing function of the currency boards that they replaced but would have done little else in the way of exercising discretion over monetary and exchange rate policies. So, while national currencies appeared, they maintained the look and the parities of the old money except that they were now issued by institutions of the newly christened nation states. After the break-up of the Bretton Woods system in 1971 and the adoption of generalised floating by the major industrial countries, Caribbean nations, like other developing countries, were faced with the issue of what type of monetary arrangements they should adopt. Typically, the considerations included a desire for policy independence, “balanced growth” and price stability at home, all in the context of continued traditional trade links with the industrial countries. The options they faced ranged from the creation of currency enclaves as in Panama or Puerto Rico, a wide variety of pegging arrangements and institutional structures, to the formation of currency unions such as the one eventually adopted in the Eastern Caribbean. The most liberal extreme, joining the system of independently floating currencies, was not immediately feasible. For the most part, these developing countries 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches responded to the changes in the international monetary system by pegging to the currency of their major trading partner.  However, pegging arrangements came under unprecedented pressure following the oil shocks of the 1970s and the subsequent swings in demand for commodity exports from developing countries. The alternative to the economic compression and restructuring demanded by these sharp changes was international borrowing; indeed, this proved to be the road most travelled. But, as it became clearer in the 1980s that further large-scale borrowing was unaffordable and that economic restructuring was inevitable, the question of suitable monetary and exchange arrangements once again arose. The smallest states of the Caribbean – member countries of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank – as well as Barbados, Belize and The Bahamas chose to make adjustments to their economies without changing the exchange rate and, in the process, experienced some loss in competitiveness but not obviously more than elsewhere. In these territories, wage awards and monetary conditions needed to be consistent with low inflation and a stable exchange rate, leaving the brunt of the adjustment process on government finances, employment and output.  The larger states of the Caribbean – Jamaica, Guyana and Trinidad & Tobago – all adopted flexible exchange rates as part of their structural adjustment programs. The prevailing consensus on development thinking, led by the Washington-based institutions, pointed to the likelihood of greater export diversity, sustainable balance of payments and improved economic efficiency if the adoption of flexible exchange rate regimes was accompanied by other economy-wide reforms. In Jamaica, many of these changes in the areas of trade liberalisation, tax reform and fiscal adjustment were implemented. A period of economic growth, spearheaded by nontraditional exports, occurred towards the end of the 1980s but the multilaterals themselves agree that the results of the process were relatively modest and short-lived when compared with the fast and sustained growth that was promised at the start. One outcome of this process that was particularly sharp in Jamaica was its impact on inflation. Even after the initial adjustments to the domestic price level that accompanied these changes tapered off, they had set in motion a wave of negative expectations about exchange rate depreciation accompanied by inflation which, in turn, pushed organized labour into making wage demands to protect living standards. Government expenditure expanded to meet these and other needs which were funded, in large measure, by borrowing. Fiscal dominance, an open capital account and the absence of reserves defined a heavy role for monetary policy in reining in domestic expenditure. A large part of the book “Bank of  Jamaica – The First Forty Years’ is devoted to narrating the range of policy responses undertaken by the Central Bank and the uphill fight to maintain macroeconomic stability. The inflation experience The average inflation, growth in GDP and change in per capita income experienced by Jamaica in each of the last five decades is interesting:  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Alarming as they are, the average inflation rates for each decade in fact mask episodes of even more alarming instability. In one seven-year period – 1990–1996 – inflation amounted to 248 per cent and an annual average of 35.5 per cent. We need to pause to consider what inflation rates at this level do to fixed contracts like pensions, savings and the salaries of persons with low bargaining power. Inflation at these levels virtually destroys the value of the income that they rely on to meet normal expenses and erodes the provisions they had put aside for retirement. It is a grim but silent reaper that leaves behind a mass of working poor and indigent pensioners while transferring windfalls to owners of property and assets denominated in other currencies. Many of you who lived through this period would have had the experience of purchasing an insurance policy to help fund a child’s education or to provide a source of income in retirement. You would have found, for example, that a princely $100,000 policy purchased in 1971 redeemed today would be worth less than $200 in 1971 dollars. While the face value was seen as the equivalent of US$110,000 then, it could purchase just over US$1,200 today.  People whose lives are shaped by such experiences adapt their responses to survive in that environment. Workers negotiate shorter contracts and demand adjustments that compensate for past losses and insist on provisions that anticipate further erosion of purchasing power. They demand higher interest rates on their savings to sustain the purchasing power of their deposits and are attracted to instruments such as insurance policies with a heavy investment component and periodic adjustment which are inherently better able to keep pace with inflation. And, for many, diversification has been the solution where despite the interest rates available on domestic instruments the quantum of foreign currency deposits in domestic financial institutions exceeds US$2.0 billion and keeps rising each year. The inflation experience spawns other behaviour. It makes otherwise sane and conservative people condone, “invest in” and even promote wild financial schemes. It sends economic activity underground – to avoid taxation and to seek higher returns. Can this type of behaviour be described as a rational reaction to recurring bouts of instability? That is an open question. But nothing in my reading of events over the last 50 years better explains the perennial uncertainty, constant hedging, relentless rent-seeking and absence of commitment to any project with a delayed pay-off that typifies economic behaviour in Jamaica.  You would have noted from the figures that I read out that in the last decade, things have been improving. You would not know it from the usual media channels but, over a week ago, STATIN released, on the usual date, its inflation report for the month of February. The outcome was a reduction in prices by 0.4 per cent bringing inflation for the 11 months of the fiscal year to date to 6.7 per cent. The Treasury Bill auction today delivered a yield of 6.46 per cent on the three-month instrument and 6.63 per cent on the six-month instrument. So, annual inflation has fallen, financial markets have been more stable and, more recently, market-determined interest rates have fallen to their lowest levels in decades. A number of factors would have contributed to this including fiscal consolidation, external support and the cooperation of many local wealth holders and decision makers. The analysis of that on-going transformation is something that will no doubt form part of your discussions later in the Conference. The key point that I wish to make in this context is that this juncture provides an ideal time for us to consider the institutional safeguards that could preserve price and macroeconomic stability for the next 50 years and leave the next generation with a different and better experience. Policy and institutional options for a different future We have on the menu essentially the same set of options that policymakers had post-Bretton Woods: pegging (or fixing) the exchange rate, monetary union, dollarisation and independent central banks. The difference now is that we have had 40years of experience since then and have spent a lot of time and energy in discussing some of them as regional issues.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches The first three – a fixed peg, a monetary union and dollarisation – all imply relinquishing discretion over monetary policy. They differ in the degree of commitment or reversibility inherent in each regime and, in a sense, what the actual currency units would look like. The answer to the question “what’s in your wallet?” would tell the world what your choice was. A fixed exchange rate A fixed peg has the appeal of establishing a known and predictable parity for the Jamaica Dollar against, most likely, the US Dollar. It would thus keep the Jamaica Dollar in your pocket and preserve its nominal external value by fiat. Other things being equal, policy would limit the permissible rate of domestic monetary expansion and would thus, in the absence of local supply shocks, tie domestic inflation to that of the United States. Given the current strength of the Net International Reserves and the growing record of exchange rate stability, this might seem to many to be the perfect time to establish an official fixed exchange rate.  Going back to where we were is not, however, a straightforward move. Somewhat akin to the idea of original sin, there is a reputational issue that has been burned into people’s psyche – that of perennial uncertainty and the option that the Government would continue to have to adjust the parity whenever it deems it necessary. The issue of credibility is stacked against years of experience with expedient adjustments when pressures have arisen and the absence of any statutory or institutional commitment to maintaining the parity.  There are other realities. Supply shocks are a feature of life in the Caribbean, some of which, if they are long-lasting, may require an adjustment to economy-wide prices like the exchange rate. Further, exchange controls, which have traditionally been the institutional safeguard to ensure reserve adequacy, would be an anachronism in these times of open borders and financial integration. Thus, while the reserves may be sufficient at this time to support exchange rate stability, a change in investor sentiment and a consequent outflow of capital could only be managed by restrictions on credit expansion, reserve requirements and interest rate hikes. This would all be geared towards sustaining a rate which may well be unsuitable to the economic circumstances of the country and would thus provide a safe target for those who would wish to bet against the parity being maintained. In light of these realities, I would rule out fixing the exchange rate. Determining a parity that would be suitable in all states of economic nature is nearly impossible. Defending an inappropriate parity is a very expensive losing proposition which is almost guaranteed to occur as circumstances are bound to arise that will test the resolve of the authorities. Finally, exchange control, which is the companion measure that is necessary in order to support a peg, is ruled out by law, by international agreement, by de facto integration and by progress. Monetary union The next candidate is joining the rest of the Caribbean Community (“CARICOM”) in a monetary union and using a single Caribbean currency. Partly to enhance the credibility of monetary policy commitments but mainly to facilitate regional integration, the Heads of Government of CARICOM took a decision in July 1992 to establish a Caribbean Monetary Authority by 1997 and to move towards a full monetary union of all CARICOM members by the year 2000. Suriname and Haiti subsequently joined the group and membership by the Dominican Republic is being considered. A CARICOM-based monetary union would thus embrace virtually the whole Caribbean area. The development of monetary cooperation is seen as an important and symbiotic adjunct to the tendency towards hemispheric cooperation in trade since it would reduce uncertainties about payments. It would also seek to deflect the issue of each individual member contending with pressures on their balance of payments by pooling their foreign reserves and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 conducting monetary policy through a regional monetary authority that would aim at maintaining the integrity of the regional currency. Whatever its original merits and clear advantage in facilitating regional trade, the initiative has clearly lost steam over the 20 years of discussion. Part of the reason is that even in its absence there is no difficulty in making payments across borders using the de facto Caribbean currency – the US dollar. The other main drawback is that signing on to a single currency implies ceding control over some parts of national governance to a regional authority. While there would always be representation from each member, a regional monetary policy stance would necessarily affect members differently given the wide differences to be found in the economic characteristics of members in several important areas. This would not be the first union to face that issue but others, like the United States with different conditions among its member states, like the European Union and others, have mechanisms for effecting fiscal transfers to compensate for the adverse effects of a common policy on some members. In this regard, we can note as an example that the so-called “less developed countries” of CARICOM have always been extremely sensitive to the need to protect their populations via “special and differential treatment”. In similar vein, Jamaica has always been and continues to be focused on North America and Europe in its external economic relations in a way that relegates a mechanism to promote commerce with CARICOM to a secondary role. Replacing the Jamaica Dollar with a Caribbean Dollar would be likely to enhance the predictability of its external and internal value and would offer a stronger level of commitment than an announced peg. By the same token, it would prove to be a stronger handicap where fundamental economic adjustment is required locally and where any change in parity requires unanimity among equal partners in the union. Dollarisation Dollarisation has returned to the discussion table periodically and has been touted as an even stronger commitment to monetary stability as it would abolish the currency entirely and replace domestic money with the US Dollar – both for circulation and for accounting purposes.  As in the case of the Caribbean Dollar, the adoption of the US Dollar would offer the benefit of tying our inflation experience to that of the United States and monetary policy would flow from the Federal Reserve in Washington. Of course, there are key differences between US dollarisation and Caribbean dollarisation. There would be no domestic input into policy making. There would be no right to the sharing of seigniorage – the income that accrues to the issuer of national currencies. There would be no means of supporting the financial system if liquidity shortages arose. Dependence on the United States for currency for circulation could raise issues of security and sovereignty (as is reported to have occurred in Panama).  Therefore, dollarisation could offer the kind of assurance that we are seeking to establish for ourselves but it would not be our doing and would say to the world “we are just not capable”. More important, it would present no guarantees as to reversibility especially when questions of security, sovereignty and independent national development issues assume centre stage in a nation’s political life. I would argue that there is a better alternative. A strong and autonomous central bank The starting point for offering succeeding generations a much more pleasing environment for price stability, growth and development is to define for ourselves what is a tolerable rate of inflation and what is not. Currently, our medium-term forecasts are built around getting inflation down to the 4%–5% range which is, approximately, the collective experience of our 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches trading partners. There needs to be a public consensus, involving the highest levels of leadership, academia, commerce and an informed public, about the level of inflation that the authorities should be held to. This is the first step. The second step is to deal with the perennial imbalances in public finances that are the counterpart to the imbalance in our current account. These have led to a huge overhang of debt the servicing of which consumes virtually all of the Government’s tax revenue and crowds out public investment in infrastructure and social development. This is part of the story behind the slow growth and sluggish change in per capita income. It also retards growth in productivity which is the one sure way of achieving growth in GDP without inflation.  The third step is to put in place the institutional arrangements that ensure that low and stable inflation becomes the key responsibility of the central bank and that measures to ensure accountability are in place. This is not as difficult as it sounds and requires only a modification to the legal and operational framework that we already have. The emerging literature on the redesign of central banks follows two strands: on the one hand, the delegation of monetary policy to a conservative central bank that then determines policy consistent with its low-inflation preferences (the “reputational” option); and, on the other hand, the formulation of strict principal-agent contracts where inflation targets are still set by elected officials but their achievement is contracted to a central bank empowered with the instruments to implement this (the “contractual” option). The Federal Reserve Board of the United States is an example of the first option while New Zealand’s Reserve Bank is often cited as an example of the second type. Their relative merits are still unfolding but, given the dependence of the reputational solution on the personality of a single institution, the contractual option holds out greater promise of a credible, long-term, apolitical solution. An autonomous central bank would be one that is insulated from short-term political priorities both by its terms of reference and by its governance provisions. Its focus on low and stable inflation would be monitored by its reporting to Parliament and by its implementation of an inflation targeting regime which has proven to be an effective anchor for inflation expectations in a growing number of industrial and developing countries. It would retain responsibility for financial stability and would thus have the mandate and the wherewithal to respond to potential threats to stability before they arise and to support systemically significant entities where the need arises. Such an institution would be of our making, could achieve all of the goals that we think are important to our collective well-being and would see us through the next 50 years proudly holding Jamaican dollars in our wallets. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Ryuzo Miyao: Economic activity and prices in Japan and monetary policy Summary of a speech by Mr Ryuzo Miyao, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Oita, 23 March 2011. *      *      * Introduction  It is my honor today to talk to Mr. Kugimiya, Mayor of Oita City, and business leaders in Oita Prefecture. And I express my gratitude for your understanding and cooperation in various business operations of the Bank of Japan’s Oita branch.  First, I extend my deepest condolences to the people hit by the Tohoku-Pacific Ocean Earthquake, particularly those who have lost their loved ones. The earthquake was the biggest on record, and the damage has been geographically widespread. The quake has exerted various adverse effects on daily life and economic activity, as seen in the heightened problem of power supply shortages associated with the damage. Although the situation may be deemed a national crisis, it is important for us to have our determination to overcome the difficulties and rise from the disaster.  In my remarks today, I will talk about the upheaval caused by the earthquake and the Bank’s responses, followed by an overview of Japan’s economic and financial developments as well as monetary policy. I will conclude by offering my impression of the regional economy of Oita Prefecture.  I. Effects of the Tohoku-Pacific Ocean Earthquake and the Bank’s responses  A.  Settlement systems and financial markets  Looking first at the settlement systems following the quake, there were incidents – mainly in the Pacific coastal areas in the Tohoku region – including the destruction of some branches and disruption of automated teller machines at financial institutions. Moreover, on the day the earthquake occurred, there were system troubles at some financial institutions. Financial institutions have been making strenuous efforts to combat the situation by utilizing their undamaged branches and/or making deposit withdrawals through operations on weekends and holidays. Some clearing houses in the quake-stricken areas continue to suspend their bill and check clearing (15 clearing houses as of March 18), but through the efforts I have just mentioned, the settlement systems, including the Bank of Japan Financial Network System (BOJ-NET), in other areas have been operating smoothly as a whole.  The Bank has also been striving to ensure its own business continuity through, for example, setting up a disaster management team immediately after the quake occurred and making sure that the BOJ-NET is running as normal. The Bank has provided, through its branches and offices, cash to the quake-stricken areas on Saturdays and Sundays as well (the amount of cash provided through branches and offices in the Tohoku region was 55 billion yen for Saturday, March 12 and Sunday, March 13, and 256 billion yen during March 14–18). Also, in response to the subsequent planned power outage on concerns over power supply shortages, the Bank has been taking all possible measures to stem an interruption in the settlement of funds, partly by continuing its business using in-house power generation at some branches. The BOJ-NET has been provided with a stable power supply, as it is the cornerstone of Japan’s settlement system infrastructure. Since various financial needs are expected to arise in the quake-stricken areas, such as demand for cash and exchange of damaged banknotes and coins, the Bank will do its utmost to support these areas. Through such aggressive responses, the Bank will continue to ensure smooth BOJ-NET operation 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches and cash supply and make every effort to ensure the stability of Japan’s settlement system as a whole.  In the money market, fund providers have increasingly held back their fund provisions since the morning of Monday, March 14, and it has become difficult to make transactions in the call market. In response, the Bank conducted same-day operations, the first since May of 2010, and offered 82.4 trillion yen in one week (21.8 trillion yen on March 14, 20.0 trillion yen on March 15, 13.8 trillion yen on March 16, 15.6 trillion yen on March 17, and 11.15 trillion yen on March 18), of which 57.8 trillion yen was actually provided to the market. As a result, the overnight call market has been relatively stable in recent days.  By contrast, in the CP and corporate bond markets, investors’ risk aversion has been strong and underwriting of CP and corporate bonds has declined, resulting in a significant rise in the issuing rates. The issuing rates have recently been somewhat high, which seems to be attributable in no small part to the protracted problem of the quake-stricken nuclear plant as well as the effects of the earthquake. In addition, in stock and bond markets, stock prices and long-term interest rates have fallen, reflecting investors’ risk aversion due to heightened uncertainty regarding the future. In particular, stock prices declined significantly, and on May 15, the Nikkei Stock Average plunged by 1,015 yen from the previous day. This rate of decline was the third largest in history, following only the declines recorded on Black Monday in 1987 and after the failure of Lehman Brothers in 2008. Moreover, in the foreign exchange market, while the yen depreciated immediately after the earthquake occurred, it then appreciated – reflecting the trend of risk aversion – and reached the range of 76.0–76.5 yen against the U.S. dollar in the early morning of March 17. Subsequently, due mainly to the concerted intervention by G-7 countries on Friday, March 18, the yen has been hovering around 80–81 yen against the U.S. dollar and stock prices have also recovered somewhat.  B. Economic activity  As for the effects of the earthquake on economic activity, the damage has been geographically widespread, with social infrastructure including ports and roads having been heavily damaged in the Tohoku region, and some large-scale factories being damaged in the Tokyo metropolitan areas. It is expected that a return to normal for the distribution system will take some time and that concerns regarding stable power supply, including in the metropolitan areas, will continue. In the meantime, restoration efforts have been made day by day.  In this situation, the following could be pinpointed, albeit qualitatively, as three future effects.  First, for some time, the effects of the damage will be seen substantially on the supply side, including production capacity, which will have an impact on economic activity, mainly in production and distribution. Since there are many parts manufacturers for automobiles and electronic devices in the quake-stricken areas, supply chains at home and abroad will be forced to be cut off, albeit temporarily. Second, uncertainty over the future could put downward pressure on economic activity through a deterioration in household and business sentiment. And third, while various forms of demand associated with restoration should emerge in the medium term, the timing and size of such demand is uncertain at present and quite difficult to envisage.  While it is difficult to quantitatively gauge the effects of the earthquake at present, it is very much a situation in which the restoration of lifelines, utilities, and distribution has been slow, given that the earthquake was the biggest on record for Japan and accompanied by enormous tsunami. With that in mind, at least the extent to which economic activity will be pushed downward from the supply side could be larger and might be prolonged compared with, for example, the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake of 16 years ago, and this warrants due attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 C. Policy responses  With these things in mind, the Bank recognized that, in ensuring stability in public sentiment and in financial markets, it will be critical to examine the effects of the earthquake on Japan’s economic and financial conditions in the immediate future as well as promptly announce its guideline for money market operations. Therefore, the Bank shortened the duration of its Monetary Policy Meeting to one day from an initially scheduled two days and, upon examining the current situation, judged it necessary to further enhance monetary easing. In particular, given that preventing any deterioration in business sentiment or any increase in risk aversion in financial markets from adversely affecting economic activity was considered to be the most appropriate policy response at present, the Bank decided to increase the amount of the Asset Purchase Program, mainly of the purchases of risk assets, by about 5 trillion yen to about 40 trillion yen in total. Specifically, the 5 trillion yen increase in asset purchases will be made mainly in risk assets – namely, CP, corporate bonds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) – for about 3.5 trillion yen and in government securities for about 1.5 trillion yen.  While there remains uncertainty over the future, the Bank will endeavor to gauge the effects of the earthquake on financial institutions and the financial system, as well as take all possible measures in order to secure stability in settlement systems and financial markets.  II. Developments in economic activity and prices and monetary policy in Japan  A. Overview  The Bank has judged that Japan’s economy will get out of the soft patch and, from a longer-term perspective, continue to recover moderately. At the same time, the impact of the earthquake on Japan’s economy is projected to be by no means small, at least in the short run. It is necessary to examine with vigilance how the earthquake will affect the Bank’s previous outlook for economic activity and prices, together with the risk factors the Bank has highlighted. Next, I will examine those issues – although most are judgments made prior to the earthquake – starting with overseas economies.  B.  Overseas economies  Let me first talk about the U.S. economy. The economy has continued to recover, coupled with additional stimulus measures both from the financial and fiscal sides. Business sentiment has improved among manufacturing and nonmanufacturing firms, and stock prices have been improving as a trend supported also by the good performance of global businesses. In this situation, business fixed investment has been on a recovery trend, albeit a moderate one, and private consumption has been recovering, exceeding the level before the Lehman crisis. On the other hand, balance sheet adjustments in the household sector are likely to take more time and housing investment has been at a low level, especially in terms of sales of newly constructed houses. The employment and income situation has improved somewhat, but the pace of improvement has remained moderate.  In such circumstances, due attention should be paid to how the recent rise in commodity prices will affect the U.S. economy. Inflation expectations perceived by the market have been on an uptrend since the autumn of 2010. Household inflation expectations have risen since the turn of the year and the recent indicators of consumer sentiment have turned toward a decline.  The pace of the rise in commodity prices has accelerated, due partly to speculative capital inflows and the unrest in the Middle East amid originally robust demand in emerging economies. While commodity prices have recently been soft as risk aversion has heightened globally, triggered by the earthquake in Japan, the trend of price rises and continuous high prices is likely to remain to some extent if the basis of such a trend is the real demand on the 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches back of high growth in emerging economies. I will pay close attention to future developments in commodities prices and their effects on inflation expectations around the world, including the United States. Next, looking at East Asian emerging economies, especially China, those economies have exited the deceleration phase starting from the latter half of 2010 and have continued growing at a rapid pace. The structure of growth indicates the ongoing virtuous circle in which the continuing robust expansion of domestic demand in the Chinese economy is increasing exports to China from some peripheral Asian countries, which in turn is spreading to domestic demand in those countries.  In this situation, within Asian emerging economies, concern over inflation has started to heighten partly because of the rise in commodity prices, as well as the robust domestic demand. Moreover, in terms of maintaining the domestic demand expansion, wage increases in tandem with price rises are inevitable. This might in turn increase upward pressure on inflation. Therefore, Asian emerging economies have proceeded with the gradual rise in policy rates to create an environment for sustaining high growth. If the previous accommodative policy conduct – referred to as “behind the curve” – prolongs and high inflation takes hold, this will have a negative impact on the economy. Thus, in order to prevent such negative impact, it is important to act ahead of time. As Asian emerging economies are the driving force behind global economic growth, attention is being paid to their potential future actions.  Lastly, European economies are recovering moderately led by exports, driven in particular by Germany and other major economies. The rising inflation trend has become more pronounced and the European Central Bank has suggested a future policy rate rise. In some peripheral European countries that suffered fiscal problems, long-term interest rates have stayed high and uncertainty has remained elevated.  C. Japan’s economy  In light of such recovery in the U.S. economy and high growth in Asian emerging economies, the effects of inventory adjustments in IT-related goods have run their course around the world. Private consumption in Japan is showing signs of picking up after suffering the reverse following the sharp increase seen previously. Although this represents the judgment made prior to the earthquake, Japan’s economy is getting out of the soft patch, driven in particular by the recovery in exports and production. Looking at market developments prior to the earthquake, stock prices remained on an uptrend while the yen was in the range of 80–85 yen against the U.S. dollar. This is attributed to the fact that overseas stock prices, especially U.S. stock prices, rose in reflection of monetary easing in the United States, and that corporate profits and their cash flows improved substantially. On the other hand, the improvement seen in components related to domestic demand, such as business fixed investment and private consumption, and in the employment and income situation remained moderate. The pace of improvement in the output gap and price developments was generally moderate. Just like in the United States, the channel through which the favorable performance in the corporate sector fed into the household sector seemed to be somewhat weak.  The likely underlying mechanism is as follows. Even if the economy were to achieve an export-led recovery, a rise in import costs due to the increase in commodity prices would cause the terms of trade to worsen and real income to be undermined. As a result, even if the GDP figure increased, gross domestic income (GDI) would not increase that much. For example, during the recovery phase in the 2000s – that is, during 2002–2007, before the Lehman crisis – the real GDP growth rate was 1.8 percent on average but the real GDI, excluding trading losses, remained 1.2 percent on average. During the same period, the increase in real GDP brought by net export expansion, accumulated over the six-year period, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 amounted to 23 trillion yen. The trading losses during the period amounted to 18.7 trillion yen, meaning that the real GDI only grew by 4.3 trillion yen.  These figures suggest that some sectors in the economy have been burdened with these losses. During the recovery phase in the 2000s, firms contained total labor costs by constraining wages. The reduction in costs for wages represents firms’ strenuous efforts to achieve structural transformation and streamlining. The reduction in production costs plays a role in stimulating the economy from the supply side, thereby constraining price rises. On the other hand, the reduction in total labor costs and wages leads to a reduction in household income, which in turn undermines a transmission mechanism working on domestic demand. Thus, it can be said that the trading losses during the recovery phase in the 2000s burdened the household sector through the streamlining in the corporate sector.  If such mechanism underlies the economic recovery led by exports and production, this trend seems to have continued even in the recovery phase after the Lehman crisis. It appears that, on the back of the global and increasingly competitive environment and the yen’s appreciation, firms have enhanced their efforts to proceed with structural transformation and to increase growth potential by accelerating their shifting of production sites overseas. It also seems that firms are maintaining their cautious stance in allocating corporate profits brought by the efforts just mentioned to domestic business fixed investment, or to employment and wages. There is a possibility that such mechanism has continued to operate while, until recently, the uptrend in commodity prices has constrained domestic income.  I will closely examine whether such a trend will continue and how it would affect the outlook for Japan’s economic activity and prices. Let me repeat that the views I have presented so far were in consideration before the earthquake struck. Therefore, I will examine with vigilance the earthquake-triggered risk aversion around the world and its effects on the global economy, as well as Japan’s economy. D.  Monetary policy  In October of 2010, the Bank decided to implement comprehensive monetary easing to further pursue powerful monetary easing. Comprehensive monetary easing can be briefly summarized as follows. First, the Bank clarified its adoption of a virtually zero interest rate policy. Second, the Bank confirmed that it would maintain the virtually zero interest rate policy until it judged that price stability was in sight, and that the judgment would be based on the “understanding of medium- to long-term price stability.” Third, taking into account that there was little room for a further decline in short-term interest rates, the Bank established the Asset Purchase Program, which aimed at purchasing various financial assets – namely, government securities, corporate bonds, CP, ETFs, and J-REITs – with a view to encouraging a decline in longer-term market interest rates and various risk premiums.  This is a quite extraordinary and unconventional monetary policy package that includes the Bank’s commitment to the continuation of the virtually zero interest rate policy, balance-sheet expansion, and purchases of risk assets. When the package was introduced, on the back of the slowdown in overseas economies and the sharp appreciation of the yen, business and household sentiment deteriorated and asset prices including stock prices were sluggish. Correcting the sentiment and risk-taking appetite that have excessively deteriorated in the markets is expected to produce sustained effects on lowering risk premiums. In fact, in the period after the introduction of comprehensive monetary easing until the earthquake, risk premiums generally declined, as seen in the rise in stock prices and REIT prices. It is also expected that the Bank’s bold measure to encourage risk taking will boost firms’ “animal spirits,” thereby leading to an increase in Japan’s growth potential and an improvement in productivity.  Also, in the United States, in the period following the Lehman crisis until the introduction of a large-scale asset purchase program – the so-called “quantitative easing II” – in November of 2010, unconventional monetary easing measures were implemented four times. In particular, 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches the decision to purchase 600 billion dollars of longer-term Treasury securities in November of 2010 has produced some effects through the decline in long-term interest rates and borrowing costs. It also appears to have had the effect of boosting stock prices through moderating overly pessimistic market views on the U.S. economy seen from the summer of 2010 and correcting the trend of excessive risk aversion, thereby continuing to affect risk premiums requested by market participants.  As the dollar is the world’s key currency, monetary easing in the United States may have another global transmission channel. Specifically, as a result of the Federal Reserve’s commitment to the virtually zero interest rate policy as a policy action after the Lehman crisis, economies that have a strong linkage with the dollar, such as emerging economies and commodity-exporting economies, have ended up importing U.S. monetary easing, which in turn brings about economic expansion in countries other than the United States. U.S. global firms, both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing, are deeply involved in business operations widely around the world. Thus, economic expansion in areas with a strong linkage with the dollar would enhance the profits and growth expectations of U.S. businesses, which would in turn entail a rise in U.S. stock prices and lead to a recovery in private consumption. Therefore, it can be said that the powerful monetary easing policy that has continued for more than two years in the United States has been entailing “international spill-over effects” of stimulating its economy at home, due to the rise in U.S. stock prices through the expansion of overseas economies. It is important to note that the unconventional policy measures being implemented in Japan and the United States are not undisciplined, unlimited monetary easing. In the case of Japan’s comprehensive monetary easing, and to clarify that it is after all a temporary and extraordinary policy measure, the Asset Purchase Program has been established and managed on the Bank’s balance sheet. Similarly, in the case of the United States, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke emphasized that the large-scale asset purchase program is a short-term policy measure and the Federal Reserve is committed to achieving medium- to long-term price stability.  So far, I have examined monetary policy and its effects on Japan and the United States. What has been highlighted as a common factor is that, when market sentiment and confidence have swung excessively in the direction of pessimism, central banks’ aggressive actions and asset purchases were made to correct that situation and influence risk premiums in a sustained manner.  As mentioned earlier, in response to the earthquake, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held at the beginning of last week, the Bank decided to increase the amount of the Asset Purchase Program, mainly of the purchases of risk assets, with a view to further enhancing monetary easing. This measure is expected to have an effect similar to the one mentioned above, in that, confronted with an unprecedented earthquake disaster, the measure aims at counteracting any deterioration in business sentiment or an excessive increase in risk aversion, thereby preventing economic activity from deteriorating. While uncertainty is likely to remain high, the measure taken by the Bank will exert powerful effects as various efforts toward normalization pay off.  Concluding remarks: the economy of Oita Prefecture  In conclusion, I will refer to the developments in this area.  Oita Prefecture was designated as a new industrial city during the high-growth period, and it has been actively attracting growth-promising companies to the region, through cooperation between the public and private sectors, for a little less than the 50 years that have passed since the Oita coastal industrial zone was formed. Therefore, its industrial structure is quite well balanced and solid, with not only materials industries such as steel and oil having congregated in the area, but also processing industries such as precision machinery, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 semiconductors, and automobiles. Looking at the ratio of manufacturing to the prefectural gross product as of fiscal 2007, Oita posted a high 23.3 percent compared with the national average of 21.2 percent and the Kyushu average of 17.1 percent. There are many factories with extremely high production efficiency, as suggested by the value of manufactured goods shipments per establishment and per worker both being number one in Kyushu and number three in the nation. Since this region has a high share of manufacturers, it was significantly affected by the decline in exports and production caused by the failure of Lehman Brothers. Subsequently, in view of the many productive and efficient new factories, Oita’s exports and production have been recovering relatively steadily in tandem with the recovery in overseas economies.  Moreover, I rediscovered that Oita is blessed with an abundance of resources with high brand recognition, ranging from fruits of the sea such as Seki aji, Seki saba, and Shiroshita karei, as well as dried shiitake mushroom and kabosu, for which production is the largest in Japan, to internationally popular hot springs resorts such as Yufuin and Beppu. Moreover, Oita has a geographical advantage of being located near rapidly growing East Asian economies, which gives the region a great advantage in terms of production and tourism. In addition, the improvement in traffic infrastructure, including the full opening of the Kyushu Shinkansen Line this month and ongoing extension work in the region for the Eastern Kyushu Expressway, is expected to intensify the interaction within the Kyushu region and with other areas including the Kansai region.  Looking toward the future for Oita’s economy, I am paying close attention to the following two issues that could lead to future growth in Oita Prefecture. First, wide-ranging cooperation in the medical and welfare areas. Many medical equipment manufacturers have been congregating in Oita Prefecture and the prefecture’s total value of medical equipment production ranks fourth in Japan. In October of last year, Oita Prefecture formulated an “Initiative for Eastern Kyushu Local Medical Industrial Center (or Eastern Kyushu Medical Valley Initiative)” in cooperation with its neighbor Miyazaki Prefecture. The medical and welfare areas have been considered as growth areas in the nation’s growth strategy, and, given their characteristics of not being influenced substantially by a business cycle, are expected to contribute to the regional economy. I believe that cooperation among the government, industries, and the academia will be enhanced based on such wide-ranging cooperation, and that industrial congregation will advance in the future.  The second issue is regional revitalization by utilizing natural energy. Oita Prefecture is the top in the nation in terms of the number of hot springs sources and the amount of hot water, and, supported by such geothermal energy, is an advanced prefecture in natural energy utilization, with the supply and self-sufficiency ratio of natural energy being ranked first among the prefectures in Japan. As for natural energy, there have recently been nationwide efforts by both the public and private sectors to enhance its utilization together with the beefed-up efforts toward solving environmental problems. Also in Oita Prefecture, there have been signs of promoting the use of natural energy sources other than geothermal power generation, including small hydroelectric generation and biomass generation. In perceiving the natural energy area as a business opportunity, some local firms appear to be crossing traditional business borders and entering the area through innovations, in which I expect future growth.  With that, I will conclude my speech and move on to exchanging views with you. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Deepak Mohanty: Economic and financial developments in the north-eastern states Speech by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at Gauhati University, Guwahati, 24 March 2011. *      *      * The assistance provided by Dr. P.K. Nayak is acknowledged. I thank Gauhati University for inviting me to address this distinguished gathering. The North-Eastern States (NES)1, also known as land of seven sisters, are very richly endowed. The North-Eastern region covers 5.5 per cent of the total geographical area of the country and accounts for 3.9 per cent of the national population and 2.7 per cent of all-India net domestic product (NDP). The lushness of its landscape, geographical and ecological diversity and range of communities residing make NES one of the most ethnically and linguistically diverse regions in Asia. Each state in the region has its own distinct culture and tradition. I am indeed very delighted to be here amidst you this morning. A well-functioning financial system is the key to sustainable economic development of a country. Although the Reserve Bank has been actively engaged in the development of the financial sector in the country for a long time, it has stepped up its efforts in recent years to enhance the penetration of the formal financial sector and promote financial inclusion with a view to improving the well-being of our society. Given the special difficulties faced by the North-Eastern region, the Reserve Bank has been undertaking special initiatives for extending the outreach of banking facilities in the region. Against this background, I propose to briefly delineate the economic and financial structure of the region. I shall then highlight various financial inclusion initiatives taken by the Reserve Bank, especially for NES. In conclusion, I shall present some thoughts on policy challenges that lie ahead. Macroeconomic trends Let me begin with some macroeconomic trends. The last decade was characterised by high economic growth at the all-India level. Where do NES stand in this process? They contributed in varying degrees to this uptick in growth. The data on net state domestic product (NSDP) is available on a comparable basis up to 2007–08. Over the 8-year period, 2001–08, the weighted average NSDP growth in NES was lower at 5.2 per cent as compared with 7.1 per cent at the all-India level. There were, however, significant inter-state variations within NES with the growth performances of three states, viz., Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh and Tripura being better than the all-India average (Table 1). The low growth in Assam and Manipur was mainly due to the poor performance of agriculture and industry. While the growth rate in agriculture has been particularly low in Assam and Mizoram, the growth rate of agriculture in Nagaland was high. An important lesson from this is that if the states replicate the best sectoral growth pattern within the region, growth in NES could easily surpass the all-India level. Sectoral analysis reveals that the economic structure of the NES more or less mirrors that of the Indian economy as a whole with the services sector dominating the economic activity. However, the share of industry in GDP was half of that of the Indian economy as a whole (Table 2). The need, therefore, is to place a greater emphasis on promoting the growth of the industrial sector in the region.                                                  1  North-Eastern States comprise Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches   Notwithstanding significant differences in growth rates, the growth in per capita real income during the period 2000–01 to 2007–08 in NES was almost twice as the all-India level, with significant inter-state differences (Table 3).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Income distribution in NES has been more equitable than the all-India level as reflected in the much lower Gini coefficient of the per capita income in NES as compared with the all-India level (Table 4).  Fiscal trends Following a move towards rule-based fiscal consolidation at the Centre in the early 2000s, many fiscal reform measures were also undertaken by the states, including NES. Consequently, NES began to improve their revenue accounts in 2003–04 when most of the states achieved revenue surplus. By 2005–06, all NES had achieved revenue surplus which persisted till 2008–09. Improvement was mainly on account of growth in revenue receipts outstripping growth in revenue expenditure. It may be noted that within revenue receipts, current transfers from the Centre in the form of grants and tax devolution were the key components behind the correction in revenue account achieved by most of the NES. During 2004–09, current transfers accounted for over 80 per cent of total collection, while NES’ own efforts towards better revenue collections contributed to a limited extent. Consequently, the consolidated GFD-GSDP ratio of NES declined significantly during 2005–09 (Table 5).    State finances witnessed considerable deterioration in 2009–10 as is evident from key deficit indicators. Even though there was a moderate impact on States’ own tax revenue and tax devolution from the Centre (as ratio to GSDP) due to overall macroeconomic slowdown observed in the Indian economy in 2009–10, revenue expenditure increased due to higher administrative expenditures arising out of revised pay structure. However, capital outlays also increased with a greater focus on transport, water supply and sanitation, irrigation and flood control, education, sports, art and culture. The fiscal consolidation process, however, 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches was resumed by NES in their 2010–11 budgets. It is important for NES to improve the quality of their expenditure with greater emphasis on capital expenditure for sustaining the fiscal consolidation process. There is also a need for NES to improve their own tax revenue. Financial indicators The formal financial system in India is dominated by banks. NES, however, lag behind other parts of India in terms of development of banking. This is evident from the low banking penetration (higher average population per branch) in NES as compared with the all-India average, though there were significant variations across states in the region with Mizoram and Meghalaya having much better ratios. The credit-deposit (C-D) ratio in NES is much lower at 34 per cent at the end of March 2010 than that of 73 per cent at the all-India level (Table 6). Even as credit expanded at a faster pace than deposits in the last decade, the gap remained very wide.    The credit penetration, as measured by the ratio of bank credit to the NSDP, in NES also remained significantly lower than the all-India level (Chart 1). This raises the question as to whether low credit penetration in NES was due to lack of absorptive capacity in the region. However, this does not seem to be the case as non-formal sources of finance in the region dominate the financing activity in the rural sector. As per the 59th round of National Sample Survey (NSS) data on indebtedness of farmer household in NES, 45 per cent of the finance availed of by the farmers was from the formal financial sector, while the remaining 55 per cent was from the non-formal sector. This was significantly higher than the all-India level with the share of the informal sector at 42 per cent (Chart 2). This shows that there is absorptive capacity and that there is considerable scope for improving banking penetration in NES. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5      
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Financial inclusion measures Financial inclusion is important for bringing the poor and under-privileged sections of society within the banking fold and thereby generating and sustaining equitable growth. Let me now turn to the various measures initiated by the Reserve Bank for promoting financial inclusion. First, the Reserve Bank for long has instituted a mechanism called “priority sector lending” through which credit is channelled to certain preferred sectors, which, inter alia, include small-scale industry, small businesses and agriculture. In the post-reform period, the priority sector has been expanded to include advances to retail trade, educational loans, micro-finance and low-cost housing. This has helped in furthering the cause of financial inclusion. Second, the Union Finance Minister announced in the Budget 2010–11 that every village in the country with over 2000 population must have access to banking services by March 2012. In order to operationalise this process, commercial banks have prepared financial inclusion plans which have been submitted to the Reserve Bank. As brick-and-mortar branches will not be viable in very small centres, the approach is to meet this challenge through the business correspondent (BC) model and by leveraging communication technology. Under this model, banks appoint agents who provide basic banking services at the door-step of a client on behalf of banks. Third, the Reserve Bank has asked banks to open no-frills accounts. These accounts have no or very low minimum balance requirement and have provisions for small loans by way of overdrafts. This is a very convenient account for small depositors, especially in rural areas. Fourth, a major impediment for a common person to open bank account is the “Know Your Customer” (KYC) norm. The norm has been relaxed for small accounts, viz., deposits up to Rs.50,000 and credit up to Rs.1 lakh. A simple introduction by an existing account holder in a bank should be adequate to open an account. In this regard, Aadhar, the Unique Identification Number (UID) Project of the Central Government, which aims at providing a unique ID number for everyone in the country, will help the poor to establish their identity to meet the banks’ KYC norms. Fifth, farmers can get credit from banks conveniently through Kisan Credit Cards (KCCs) and General Purpose Credit Cards (GCCs). Sixth, while several banking facilities are available, a common person may not be aware of them. Hence, financial literacy becomes critically important. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank has initiated a “Project Financial Literacy” with the objective of disseminating information regarding the central bank and general banking concepts to various target groups. Our “Financial Education” website link offers basics of banking, finance and central banking for children of all ages. Our website is also available in 13 languages, including Assamese. Finally, there is also a learning process for the Reserve Bank. We recognise that being responsible for banking, we must be sensitive to the needs of a common person. Accordingly, our Governor, Dr. Subbarao initiated the outreach programme last year as a part of our Platinum Jubilee celebrations. Under the outreach programme, the top management of the Reserve Bank visits at least one village in every state and union territory with state government officials and commercial banks to give focused attention on financial inclusion. This has been highly enriching experience for us to understand the ground realities. Accordingly, we have decided to continue these programmes. I am glad to indicate that we have already conducted outreach camps in Assam and Arunachal Pradesh. During my current visit, outreach camps have been organised in Manipur, Nagaland and Tripura. Special financial inclusion measures for NES While financial inclusion measures are expected to improve the banking facilities in general throughout the country, including NES, I would also like to highlight some of the special financial inclusion measures initiated for NES. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 First, in December 2009, the Reserve Bank relaxed the branch authorisation policy and permitted domestic scheduled commercial banks (other than RRBs)  to open branches in rural, semi-urban and urban centres in NES and Sikkim without having the need to take permission from the Reserve Bank in each case, subject to reporting. Second, to improve banking penetration in the NES, the Reserve Bank requested the state governments and banks to identify centres where there is a need for setting up either full-fledged branches or those offering forex facilities, handling government business or for meeting currency requirements. We have also offered to fund the capital and running costs for five years provided the state government concerned is willing to make available the premises and put in place appropriate security arrangements. Meghalaya was the first State to take advantage of this facility: eight centres were allotted to three public sector banks, following a bidding process in the state. However, the progress towards opening branches has been slow because of lack of proper infrastructure in the identified centres. In Tripura, five centres were allocated to Tripura Gramin Bank in December 2010. I understand that branches are expected to open shortly in two of these centres. Similarly, the work for identification of centres for opening up branches has been completed for Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland and Manipur. Policy challenges Let me now turn to broader macroeconomic policy challenges. Development of NES has been high on the agenda of the Central and the respective state governments. Recognising the special requirements of the region and the need for significant levels of government investment, NES have been recognised as Special Category States and Central Plan assistance to these states is significant. As I indicated, the Reserve Bank has also initiated special measures for spread of banking and promotion of financial inclusion. Nevertheless, to accelerate the pace of growth in NES, I may highlight a few challenges that lie ahead. First, weak market linkages are a major constraint in the development of the region. For this reason, urgent attention needs to be paid to developing roads, air links, telecommunications and other components of transport and communications. Investment in infrastructure could be scaled up through the Public-Private Partnership model. Second, initiatives need to be taken to promote sustainable industrial development compatible with the unique bio-diversity of the region. Agro-based industries, food processing, wood products, traditional textiles and light manufacturing industries can be encouraged to come up in the region. Third, there is a need to increase agricultural productivity and promote diversification into horticulture and floriculture for which the agro-climatic conditions in the region are well- suited. Fourth, a sustainable growth paradigm will not only help further acceleration in growth but will also improve fiscal sustainability by helping to lower the debt-GSDP ratio. Fifth, the high level of literacy and human development levels coupled with bio-diversity provides ample opportunity for development of tourism and exports. Sixth, a deterrent for bank lending is the high level of non-performing assets (NPAs) in the region. This has been, in part, due to unviability of some of the activities financed by banks and lack of adequate engagement with the borrowers. There is, therefore, a need to improve credit culture in which financial education could play a vital role. In addition, banks will have to augment the staff strength in their branches with an emphasis on staff with knowledge of local customs and practices. Given the preponderance of community-based society in NES, group lending could be a successful mode of credit delivery. Hence, there is a need for promotion of self-help groups (SHGs) with greater linkage with banks. In this regard, NABARD has an important role to play, not only in promotion of SHGs, but also in capacity 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches building, along with SIDBI and concerned state government agencies. Another area where there is substantial scope for expansion is low-cost housing. Expansion of housing loan remains poor as mortgages cannot be created in many parts of NES. However, banks can explore innovative structures for housing loans with a greater emphasis on group lending. Seventh, in any plan for financial sector development, the physical presence of a bank branch is important. But the topography of the region, the dispersal of population, transport bottlenecks and law and order conditions in some areas inhibit branch expansion other than in certain commercial centres. Hence, all the stake-holders – banks, state governments and the Reserve Bank – need to work in close co-ordination for increasing banking penetration and promoting financial inclusion in the region. Conclusion To conclude, the North-Eastern Region has immense potential. The need, therefore, is to identify the opportunities and recognise the challenges to work towards a sustainable and inclusive growth of the region with greater penetration of the formal financial sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Caleb M Fundanga: Small-scale cross-border trade and payment services in southern Africa Official opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at a roundtable symposium on small-scale cross-border trade and payment services in southern Africa, Lusaka, 21 March 2011. *      *      * Distinguished Invited Guests  Let me begin by welcoming you to this Roundtable Symposium on Small-Scale Cross-Border Trade and Payment Services in Southern Africa. May I also warmly welcome our colleagues from neighbouring countries who have come to join us in this important event. It is my sincere hope that you shall enjoy your stay in Zambia and that you shall find this roundtable symposium fruitful.  Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, cross-border trade plays an important role in supporting livelihoods, especially those of border communities, thereby buttressing prosperity in the region. Furthermore, by strengthening commercial ties, promoting cultural understanding, and deepening community relationships, cross-border trade helps to nurture harmonious relations amongst countries in the region.  The unique feature of small-scale cross-border trade lies in geographical proximity which minimises transportation costs, thereby allowing traders to take advantage of differences in the supply, demand, and prices of various goods and services available on either side of the border. It is worth noting that most cross-border trade activities are not reported in foreign trade statistics. However, surveys conducted on the subject show that cross-border trade is carried out by individuals or small traders and their families. The volumes traded are small both in value and quantity, with agricultural products and consumer goods being the main traded goods. The traders’ mode of transport in conducting their business is on foot, using bicycles, taking a minibus or a taxi to and from the other side of the border.  Ladies and Gentlemen, cross-border trade not only benefits traders’ lives through incomes but also strengthens local production, and fosters service provision. It also benefits the people involved in activities associated with trading. This entails that cross-border trade is a significant driver of employment and income generation for households that would otherwise have lived in poverty, especially in remote areas where employment is scarce. Furthermore, Ladies and Gentlemen, cross-border trade lowers import prices and widens the range of choice of goods available to consumers, as well as enables exporters to benefit from higher value-addition. Finally, cross border trade has a gender dimension with women being more actively involved.  From the foregoing, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, it is very clear that small-scale cross-border trade plays a very vital role in our economies, particularly in generating income, creating employment and alleviating poverty. However, Ladies and Gentlemen, the small-scale cross-border trade faces a lot of barriers and impediments, including lack of access to financial and payment services such as currency exchange and transmission facilities. Traders from both sides of the border are forced to carry cash and must first convert funds into United States Dollars from their respective countries and then into the domestic currency of the country they are purchasing goods or services from. By so doing, cross-border traders face many risks including theft, exchange losses and other conversion costs.  Ladies and Gentlemen, although there have been some bilateral efforts towards formalising and facilitating small-scale cross-border trade in Southern Africa, these have not been 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches enough. For instance, Zimbabwe signed a memorandum of understanding with Malawi to facilitate informal trade, especially between small and medium-sized enterprises. Mozambique and Zambia also signed a memorandum of understanding to facilitate the repatriation of currencies of the two countries that are accumulated by traders located along the common border areas. It is expected that this memorandum of understanding will be expanded to include Malawi.  The lack of financial and payment services has not only hindered small-scale cross border trade but also led to the establishment and entrenchment of parallel currency markets at the borders. Needless to say, these are associated with vices such as counterfeiting, facilitating illegal trade, as well as enhancing cross-border money laundering activities. Moreover, to us monetary authorities, illegal cross-border local currency circulation creates the potential for complicating the conduct of monetary policy, especially if a significant amount of a country’s domestic currency is being used outside its jurisdiction. The volumes of goods and services traded and amount of currency handled by individual traders may seem small. However, they are collectively significant and have implications for the conduct of monetary policy. For instance, the World Bank estimates small-scale border trade in Southern Africa to be around $17.6 billion. Other studies have estimated that small-scale cross-border trading accounts for about 42% of GDP in Sub-Saharan Africa.  Ladies and gentlemen, it is for this reason that this roundtable symposium has been convened with the following objectives:  1. To stimulate broader interest in the topic of small scale cross border trade;  2. To initiate an inquiry into the design of a World Bank project aimed at fostering small scale trade and innovative cross-border payment services in Southern Africa; and  3. To look at the opportunities for providing cross-border money transmission services that benefit both small-scale trade and remittance transfers.  It is anticipated that this roundtable symposium shall come up with a refined design of the World Bank project to be launched later in 2011 focusing on five countries in Southern Africa, namely: Angola, Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa, and Zambia. A draft copy of the project design has been circulated to you all. The project will aim at enhancing trade through lower transaction costs for trade payments and improved access to financial services for small-scale traders. The goal is to increase small value trade payments through formal channels and transition payments away from cash by improving competition and innovation in the market for trade related payment services. It is also expected that the forum will result in attaining better alignment of project scope with stakeholder needs, and in particular buy-in from both private and public sector stakeholders in each country covered.  Ladies and Gentlemen, this roundtable forum brings together some decision and policy makers, from both the private and public sectors of the countries covered by the project, to a single regional event representing government and central bank officials, trade and payment system experts, international development community, mobile network operators, international money operators, payment service providers, academics and researchers involved in the topics of small-scale cross-border trade and payment services. I am very positive that the symposium shall achieve the stated objectives and wish to encourage you to actively and freely participate in the deliberations.  With these few words, Ladies and Gentlemen, I declare this roundtable symposium open.  Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Andrew G Haldane: Capital discipline Remarks by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director of the Bank of England, based on a speech given at the American Economic Association, Denver, Colorado, 9 January 2011. *      *      * The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the interim Financial Policy Committee. I would like to thank Tamiko Bayliss, Paul Bedford, Samuel Knott, Priya Kothari, Salina Ladha, Vasileios Madouros, Clare Rogowski, Victoria Saporta, Rhiannon Sowerbutts, Marco Spaltro, George Speight, Belinda Tracey, Paul Tucker, Matthew Willison and Peter Zimmerman for comments and contributions. The Basel Committee sets capital standards for international banks. There are now three vintages of these standards: so-called Basel I dating from 1988, Basel II dating from around 2004 and Basel III which was agreed at the end of last year.1 These international capital standards are supported by three pillars. Pillar I defines the regulatory rules, Pillar II provides scope for supervisory discretion, while Pillar III seeks to foster market discipline through disclosure. In countering systemic shocks, three supporting pillars have understandably been felt to be better than one. But the success of international capital standards in forestalling banking distress has been mixed. Basel I regulatory rules were arbitraged due to their risk insensitivity. This gave rise to Basel II with its greater focus on risk calibration. But Basel II buckled under the weight of the recent crisis. Repairs have since been applied through Basel III. Historical experience suggests this is unlikely to be the end of road.  This paper assesses and suggests means of improving the robustness of this regulatory framework. The quest for risk sensitivity in Pillar I rules caused regulatory complexity and opacity to blossom. This may have inhibited the effectiveness of supervisory discretion and market discipline (Section 1). In consequence, Pillar I may have borne too much of the load and Pillars II and III too little. Here I focus on Pillar III.   There may be straightforward ways to rebalance the Basel scales, re-injecting market discipline. Having banks issue a graduated set of contingent convertible (“CoCo”) securities, which are responsive to early signs of market stress, is one possible way of doing so (Sections 2 and 3). That would have the practical effect of reinforcing Pillar I with Pillar III, so delivering a potentially more balanced and robust regulatory edifice.  Getting from here to there may take time. But some modest adjustment to dividend and bonus distribution policies by banks would help (Section 4). Section 5 concludes. The first pillar The recently-agreed Basel III package delivers a material strengthening of regulatory standards. Though the details are complex, the essence of these reforms is easily described: “more of the same – and better”. So there will be more bank capital and in future it will be higher quality. Banks will be required, for the first time in an international accord, to hold liquid assets, and in future will be more resilient. Risk management will be more extensive and in future it will be more robust. And bank supervisors will be more plentiful and in future they will be smarter. That has been the response to virtually every financial crisis of the past fifty years. It has not arrested the crisis cycle – if anything, the incidence of crises appears to have risen.2 It may                                                  1  Goodhart (2011 forthcoming). 2  Bordo et al (2001). 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches not even have slowed this cycle, as the massive costs of this time’s crisis attest. So although the recent Basel III package may be necessary, there must be a real question about whether it will be sufficient to cope with next time’s crisis. History, at least, provides grounds for pessimism.  As a thought experiment, imagine instead we were designing a regulatory framework from scratch. Finance is a classic complex, adaptive system. What properties would a complex, adaptive system such as finance ideally exhibit to best insure about future crises? Simplicity is one. There is a key lesson, here, from the literature on complex systems. Faced with complexity, the temptation is to seek complex control devices. In fact, complex systems typically call for simple control rules. To do otherwise simply compounds system complexity with control complexity.3 Uncertainty would not then divide, it would multiply. Robustness would be a second. This has a particular meaning in the context of complex systems: resilience given ignorance.4 More often, this is called Knightian uncertainty or simply model error. The dynamics of complex systems, such as large banks or interconnected financial webs, are not well understood. That means uncertainty needs to be taken seriously if financial regulatory frameworks are to be robust.  Timeliness would be a third criterion. Complex systems often exhibit a knife-edge property, with discontinuities and tipping points a naturally-recurring feature.5 Those same features have punctuated the present financial crisis. In physics as in finance, once over the cliff-edge there is little chance of full recovery. That underscores the importance of timely, pre-emptive regulatory intervention if financial disaster is to be averted.  (a)  Simplicity How do existing regulatory rules compare against these criteria – simplicity, timeliness, robustness? Take simplicity. By any standard, existing regulatory rules are far from simple. For large banks, they can be highly complex. They have become more so over time given the evolution of the Basel framework. Back in the days of Basel I, calculating a regulatory capital ratio was not especially taxing or time-consuming. It involved little more than half a dozen calculations. These calculations could be conducted on the back of a small envelope by a competent clerk. Possessing envelopes and clerks, banks, regulators and market participants were able to perform those calculations. They were transparent and verifiable. In that way, regulatory rules (Pillar I) provided a solid platform for supervisory discretion by regulators (Pillar II) and market discipline by investors (Pillar III). The Basel pillars were mutually reinforcing. Basel II changed that calculus. In part to avert regulatory arbitrage, there was a quest for greater risk-sensitivity. Regulatory capital rules became more finely calibrated to banks’ underlying portfolio of risks. In practice, that meant two things. First, the number of independent categories of risk assets increased. And second, greater use was made of banks’ own internal models to generate the risk metrics associated with each asset class. The consequences of this regulatory shift for system complexity have been extraordinary.  For large and complex banks, the number of risk categories has exploded. To illustrate, consider the position of a large, representative bank using an advanced internal set of models to calibrate capital. Its number of risk buckets has increased from around seven under Basel I to, on a conservative estimate, over 200,000 under Basel II. To determine the                                                  3  For example, Perrow (2007) and Cliff (2011). 4  Hansen and Sargent (2007). 5  Haldane (2009), Haldane and May (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 regulatory capital ratio of this bank, the number of calculations has risen from single figures to over 200 million. The quant and the computer have displaced the clerk and the envelope. At one level, this is technical progress; it is the appliance of science to risk management. But there are costs. Given such complexity, it has become increasingly difficult for regulators and market participants to vouch for the accuracy of reported capital ratios. They are no longer easily verifiable or transparent. They are as much an article of faith as fact, as much art as science. This weakens both Pillars II and III. For what the market cannot observe, it is unlikely to be able to exercise discipline over. And what the regulator cannot verify, it is unlikely to be able to exercise supervision over. Banks themselves have recently begun to voice just such concerns.  (b)  Robustness A further cost to complexity arises from model error. Model uncertainty, as distinct from risk, is rarely taken into account when interpreting reported capital ratios. But without some idea of uncertainty, it is difficult to know how much confidence to place in reported solvency measures. How large are the confidence intervals investors and regulators ought to place around them?  Calibrating confidence intervals around capital would involve aggregating across myriad assets and multiple models. Rather tellingly, that is too complex a calculation for anyone to have carried out. But by drawing on banks’ own published model output, it is possible to gauge uncertainty around some of the key balance sheet components – for example, the retail credit portfolio, the wholesale credit portfolio and the trading book.  For the retail credit portfolio, consider a simple, single source of model error – calculating the probability of default (PD) for different classes or borrower. Under the advanced model-based approach to calculating retail PDs, each loan is placed in a risk bucket. So there is a degree of intrinsic uncertainty both about where in the risk bucket the true PD lies and indeed about whether it lies in the assigned risk bucket at all. To gauge the importance of these uncertainties, the mortgage portfolios of two large banks were examined and capital calibrated using their reported models. These capital ratios were then simulated under two counterfactual assumptions: (a) that true PDs were uniformly distributed within the risk bucket; (b) that true PDs were higher than recorded PDs by one risk bucket.  The results are illustrated in Charts 1 and 2. Chart 1 looks at the distribution of the reported capital ratio, indexed to 100, assuming model uncertainty only exists within each risk bucket and is symmetric. Even under this assumption the confidence intervals are significant, with the “true” capital ratio lying anywhere between 15% above or below the reported ratio. Once we allow for the possibility of PDs being systematically under-estimated, the degree of uncertainty is greater still. The “true” ratio then lies up to 35% below the reported ratio. That equates to several percentage points of capital. A different way of gauging the effects of model uncertainty is to look at how different banks value essentially identical exposures. For UK banks’ wholesale credit portfolio, the FSA conducted just such an exercise in 2009.6 A hypothetical portfolio was constructed based on 64 externally rated corporate, bank and sovereign exposures. Banks were then asked to use their models to generate PDs and capital for this hypothetical portfolio, which could be compared across banks. The range of reported capital requirements held against this common portfolio was striking. For wholesale exposures to banks, capital requirements differed by a factor of over 100%.                                                  6  Financial Services Authority (2010). 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches For corporate exposures, they differed by a factor of around 150%. And for sovereign exposures, they differed by a factor of up to 280%. Those differences could equate to a confidence interval around reported capital ratios of 2 percentage points or more. A final means of gauging potential model error is to consider past evidence. During the crisis, model error was largest and most egregious in the trading book. Charts 3 and 4 compare UK banks’ pre-crisis capital held against the trading book to trading book losses during the crisis. Losses were up to six times greater than pre-crisis trading book capital (Chart 3). And capital ratios would have needed to be up to 2.5 percentage points higher to accommodate this model risk (Chart 4). A fundamental review of the trading book is underway to address this problem.  This evidence only provides a glimpse at the potential model error problem viewed from three different angles. Yet it suggests that model error-based confidence intervals around reported capital ratios might run to several percentage points. For a bank, that is the difference between life and death. The shift to advanced models for calibrating economic capital has not arrested this trend. More likely, it has intensified it. The quest for precision may have come at the expense of robustness. Hayek titled his 1974 Nobel address “The Pretence of Knowledge”.7 In it, he highlighted the pitfalls of seeking precisely measurable answers to questions about the dynamics of complex systems. Subsequent research on complex systems has confirmed Hayek’s hunch. Policy predicated on over-precision risks catastrophic error. Complexity in risk models may have perpetuated Hayek’s pretence in the minds of risk managers and regulators.  (c)  Timeliness One of the purported benefits of model-based calibration is that it increases the sensitivity of capital requirements to changes in risk. Reported regulatory capital ratios should better reflect risk and thus should in principle offer timely advance warnings of impending bank stress.  The data tell a somewhat different story. To see that, consider the experience of a panel of 33 large international banks during the crisis. This panel conveniently partitions itself into banks subject to government intervention in the form of capital or guarantees (“crisis banks”) and those free from such intervention (“no crisis banks”).  Chart 5 plots the reported Tier 1 capital ratio of these two sets of banks in the run-up to the Lehman Brothers crisis in September 2008. Two observations are striking. First, the reported capital ratios of the two sets of banks are largely indistinguishable. If anything, the crisis banks looked slightly stronger pre-crisis on regulatory solvency measures. Second, regulatory capital ratios offer, on average, little if any advance warning of impending problems. These conclusions are essentially unchanged using the Basel III definitions of capital. This visual evidence can be formalised by constructing some Type I (false positive) and Type II (missed crisis) error estimates for the same 33-bank panel. Assume, by way of illustration only, that if a bank’s Tier 1 capital ratio dips below 8%, this is deemed to signal distress (Table 1). The probability of a Type I error using regulatory capital ratios is 50%, while the probability of a Type II error is around 43%. On those assumptions, this suggests regulatory capital ratios do about as well in predicting crises as a coin toss. They are essentially uninformative about future bank stress. Taken together, this does not paint an altogether encouraging picture. A critic might argue that regulatory capital ratios have become too complex to verify, too error-prone to be reliably                                                  7  Hayek (1974).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 robust and too leaden-footed to enable prompt corrective action. From a first principles perspective, they score poorly as an optimal control device over a complex system such as finance. Resurrecting the third pillar What could be done to strengthen the framework? As a thought experiment, consider dropping risk models and instead relying on the market. Market-based metrics of bank solvency could be based around the market rather than book value of capital. The market prices of banks are known to offer useful supplementary information to that collected by supervisors when assessing bank health.8 And there is also evidence they can offer reliable advance warnings of bank distress.9 To bring these thoughts to life, consider three possible alternative bank solvency ratios based on market rather than accounting measures of capital:  Market-based capital ratio: the ratio of a bank’s market capitalisation to its total assets.  Market-based leverage ratio: the ratio of a bank’s market capitalisation to its total debt.  Tobin’s Q: the ratio of the market value of a bank’s equity to its book value. The first two are essentially market-based variants of regulatory capital measures, the third a well-known corporate valuation metric.10 How do they fare against the first principles of complex, adaptive systems? They clearly offer the advantage of simplicity and transparency. 200 million separate calculations would condense to a simple, single sum. The clerk would make a glorious return and displace the quant. Market-based measures could be observed and verified in real-time by regulators and market participants. That could help in enhancing both supervisory discretion and market discipline. Market-based capital ratios could support all three Pillars, helping to rebalance the Basel scales.  Market-based solvency metrics offer two further advantages. First, they are not reliant on myriad, mis-specified models. They are largely model-free, if not error-free.11 They are robust to model error and ignorance. Second, history suggests that, at least in the latest crisis, they would have given far timelier signals of impending stress, and so a better guide to prompt corrective action, ahead of the crisis cliff-edge being reached.  To illustrate that, Charts 6–8 look at the three market-based measures of solvency for the 33-bank panel, again broken down between “crisis” and “no crisis” banks. There is now clear blue water between the solvency ratios of the crisis and non-crisis banks, with the second materially weaker. In the two years prior to the Lehman Brothers crisis, the average market-based capital ratio was around 5 percentage points lower for crisis than for no crisis banks.  Second, market-based measures of capital offered clear advance signals of impending distress. For example, the market-based capital ratio of crisis banks began to fall in April 2007, well over a year ahead of the Lehmans crisis. To formalise that visual impression, Table 1 shows Type I and II errors for the three market-based capital measures. These now                                                  8  Cannata and Quagliariello (2005), Gunther et al (2001), Krainer and Lopez (2004). 9  Berger et al (2000). 10  Calomiris and Herring (2011) prefer a variant of the first measure. 11  Largely, because even marked-based measures of solvency will rely on disclosures by banks, which will themselves be model-dependent to some degree. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches comfortably outperform a coin toss. Replacing the book value of capital with its market value lowers errors by a half, often much more. Market measures provide both fewer false positives and more reliable advance warnings of future banking distress.  Taken together, then, market-based solvency metrics perform creditably against first principles: they appear to offer the potential for simple, timely and robust control of a complex financial web.  Contractual prompt corrective action But how should these market-based metrics be put to use in the design of a regulatory framework? Market warnings are useless unless they are acted on, either by the market itself or by regulators. It is not too difficult to devise a reconfiguration of banks’ capital structure that would bake-in the benefits of simplicity, robustness and timeliness. This would involve a cocktail of revised regulatory capital standards fortified by market discipline. It might work as follows. Alongside equity, banks would be required to issue a set of contingent convertible instruments – so-called “CoCos”. These instruments have attracted quite a bit of attention recently among academics, policymakers and bankers, though there remains uncertainty about their design.12 In particular, consider CoCos with the following possible design characteristics.   Triggers are based on market-based measures of solvency, as in Charts 6–8.   These triggers are graduated, stretching up banks’ capital structure.13   On triggering, these claims convert from debt into equity. Although novel in some respects, CoCos with these characteristics would be simple to understand. They would be easy to monitor in real time by regulators and investors. And they would alter potentially quite radically incentives, and thus market dynamics, ahead of banking stress becoming too acute. To see why, imagine a bank whose expected future profits, and hence market capitalisation, have slumped. If this erosion of profits is sufficiently material, conversion at the highest trigger occurs. Upon triggering, a chunk of that bank’s debt converts into equity, automatically recapitalising the bank and providing it with an extra equity cushion. This equity infusion ought to help restore market confidence in the bank’s soundness. If the first conversion does not do the trick, or if the profits shock is sufficiently large, there are other rungs in the ladder. Lower triggers provide a graduated safety net. As these triggers are pulled, converting CoCos offer progressively greater stuffing for the cushion. This is a double boon. It confers the benefits of (contractually pre-agreed contingent) equity. But knowledge of the graduated safety net ought also to help stabilise investors’ confidence in the bank. Under this capital structure, banks’ insurance contract would be fundamentally different than at present. Instead of equity being provided at haste under stress, the safety net would extend automatically in advance. And instead of being provided by the state ex post, insurance would come from private creditors ex ante. Timely self-insurance would replace laggardly public insurance. There would be prompt corrective action. But it would operate on autopilot, using a contractual, market-based navigation system.                                                   12  For example, Flannery (2010), Flannery and Perotti (2011), Duffie (2011), Calomiris and Herring (2011).  13  Alternatively, there could be graduated tranches of CoCos operating with a single trigger. The economic impact of these two structures would be very similar.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 This contractual automaticity would provide a shot in the arm to incentives and thus market discipline. First, for the incentives of investors. Knowing that a trigger might be close to being pulled, and their claims converted, CoCo investors are likely to sit up and take notice. If conversion takes place below the prevailing market price, the incentives among existing shareholders are similarly sensitised. Early signs of deteriorating profits or sentiment are likely to result in greater investor activism. Such activism was absent in the run-up to the crisis, in part because there was no early morning wake-up call for investors.  Second, for the incentives of management. If investors are grumpy about their early morning wake-up call, management of the bank are likely to hear their hoarse protests. And anticipating these protests, management are less likely to sail close to the wind or at least will be quicker to tack when fearing a squall. Management, too, would be provided with incentives to remain shipshape.  Third, for the incentives of regulators. In the depths of crisis, as recent experience has shown, the temptation to forbear or bail-out is very strong. It is no surprise that the authorities often opt for the greater certainty of bail-out ex post, whatever their preferences ex ante. This policy time-consistency problem lies at the heart of the current regulatory debate.  Better resolution tools, which would be needed if CoCos are not enough, can lessen the dilemma and are an essential part of the reform programme. They give the authorities extra options such as creditor bail-in through write-downs or debt-for-equity conversions. They provide a statutory backstop, enabling bail-in of private sector creditors. As such, they are a necessary ingredient for restoring market discipline.  CoCos buttress market discipline and help lift the authorities from the horns of the time-consistency dilemma. They augment regulatory discretion at the point of distress with contractual rules well ahead of distress. Capital replenishment is contractual and automatic; it is written and priced ex-ante and delivered without temptation ex-post. Because intervention would be prompt, transparent and rule-based, the scope for regulatory discretion would be constrained. For that reason, the time-consistency problem ought to be reduced, perhaps materially. A contractual belt is added to the resolution braces.  To achieve these benefits, change would be needed to banks’ capital structure. But this reconfiguration would not be especially dramatic. Indeed, it would be as simple as CDE: C(oCos) + D(debt) + E(quity). The layer of bank equity would be augmented with a layer of CoCos, with slices defined by market-based triggers. Banks’ capital would comprise multi-sliced equity, some actual, some contingent. In some respects, this model is not greatly dissimilar to the one recently proposed by the Swiss banking commission.14 In achieving this capital structure, one option would be for regulators to require it, as in Switzerland. But it is possible that banks themselves might find such a capital structure in their own best interests. To see why, consider a standard model of optimal capital choice by a value-maximising firm. The firm faces a trade-off. Debt confers the benefits of tax deductibility, while equity offers the benefits of lower expected bankruptcy costs.15 The trade-off between these two sets of benefits defines an optimal capital ratio for a firm to maximise its expected value (Chart 9).16  Now consider adding CoCos to the mix. They are, in effect, a hybrid of debt and equity whose payoffs depend on the state of nature. When nature is kind and times are good, they offer the upswing (tax-deductibility) benefits of debt. And when nature is cruel and times are bad, they offer the downswing (bankruptcy costs) benefits of equity. They are, in the                                                  14  Commission of Experts for Limiting the Economic Risks Posed by Large Companies (2010). 15  Debt could also provide some incentive benefits in disciplining management (Jensen (1986)). 16  Leland (1994). 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches language of economists, a form of “contingent” contract when the contingency in question is crisis.  As Chart 10 illustrates, the optimal fraction of CoCos in banks’ optimal debt structure is likely to be non-zero. In other words, a CDE capital structure might be a smart option for value-maximising investors and managers, even without the need for regulatory intervention. The social value of such a capital structure might, of course, be greater still – for example, because the social costs of crisis are higher than the private costs. That would justify a regulatory capital backstop.  This capital structure shares the risk-sharing benefits of some other reform proposals. For example, it has similar risk-shifting properties to a mutual fund or limited purpose banking model.17 When required, risk is shared across the capital structure, as in a mutual fund whose equity claims adjust in value. But risk-spreading would only kick-in when it needs to. Banks are banks when nature is kind and mutual funds when it is cruel. They can be butterflies in summer, provided they are hedgehogs in winter. From here to there If such a structure is for the best in most states of the world, why does it not already exist? At least two legitimate concerns have been raised. First, might market-based triggers invite speculative attack by short-sellers? The concern is that CoCo holders may be able to short-sell a bank’s equity to force conversion, then using the proceeds of a CoCo conversion to cover their short position.  There are several practical ways in which the contract design of CoCos could lean against these speculative incentives. Perhaps the simplest would be to base the conversion trigger on a weighted average of equity prices over some prior interval – say, 30 days.18 That would require short-sellers to fund their short positions for a longer period, at a commensurately greater cost. It would also create uncertainty about whether conversion would indeed occur, given the risk of prices bouncing back and the short-seller suffering a loss. Both would act as a speculative disincentive.  A second potential firewall against speculative attack could come from imposing restrictions on the ability of short-sellers to cover their positions with the proceeds of conversion. Restrictions on naked short-selling are applied around the time of seasoned equity offerings in some jurisdictions.19 A rule to prevent the covering of short positions with the proceeds of a CoCo conversion could provide a further disincentive to destabilising short-selling of banks’ equity. A related concern is that CoCos alter the seniority structure of banks’ capital, as holders of CoCos potentially suffer a loss ahead of equity-holders. But provided the price at which CoCos convert to equity is close to the market price, conversion does not transfer value between existing equity-holders and CoCo investors. And provided conversion is into equity it need not imply investor loss. If a market move really is unjustified, prices will correct over time towards fundamentals. The holder of a converted CoCo will then garner the upside. So while CoCos are susceptible to market aberrations, these can in my view be managed. In this respect, market errors are fundamentally different to model errors. Market errors are temporary risk, while model errors are permanent uncertainty. Market error can be managed,                                                  17  For example, Kotlikoff (2010). 18  For example, Flannery (2010). 19  Safieddine and Wilhelm (1996), for example. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 while model error cannot. Put differently, with market-based CoCos the cost of Type I errors may be relatively modest for end-investors. A second key practical issue is whether it is plausible to imagine an investor base for CoCos emerging. Recent signs have been encouraging. Two major international banks have issued CoCos totalling around US$10bn since the start of the year. Credit Suisse recently issued a $2bn CoCo in a public auction, which was reportedly 11-times over-subscribed. Some market commentary suggests the CoCo market could grow to around $1 trillion over the next few years.20  Despite that progress, investor demand for CoCos remains uncertain. Tellingly, none of the CoCos issued so far have had market-based triggers, none have a graduated ladder of triggers and, in my view, none extend very far up banks’ capital structure. In short, the case for a CDE capital structure is, at present, unproven.  But there may be simple, evolutionary ways to catalyse market demand to achieve this capital structure. Perhaps the simplest way to do so would be to require banks to make discretionary distributions to staff and shareholders in CoCos. In this way, an investor base for CoCos would emerge organically and grow in line with banks’ profits. As well as catalysing the CoCo market, this distributive approach would have two further benefits. First, it would boost the resilience of banks by keeping revenues in the business and augmenting banks’ capital base. Given the large dividends and bonuses paid out by banks historically, distributing in CoCos could increase banks’ capital base materially.  Consider UK banks. Imagine that 50% of bonuses had been paid in CoCos rather than cash from 2000 to 2006. By 2007 at the start of the crisis, UK banks’ capital ratios would have been around 1 percentage point higher (Chart 11). Had 50% of dividends in addition been CoCoed, and assuming CoCos counted as Tier 1 capital, capital ratios would have been 3 percentage points higher. That is roughly £70 billion, or around the amount of external capital UK banks raised during the crisis. Second, CoCo payouts potentially better align risk-taking incentives among staff and shareholders than cash or even equity payouts. The crisis demonstrated all too visibly some of the downsides of equity-based remuneration. One is the temptation to gamble for resurrection when poised on the brink, given the gambler’s option embedded in equity. A second is the perverse incentive not to seek external equity because of the dilutive impact it might have on managerial wealth. Both of these adverse side-effects were evident at Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers. Remunerating management in CoCos removes this temptation, in much the same way as would credibly loss-absorbing sub-ordinated debt.21 In peacetime, management is no longer offered the upside of equity, only the downside. The asymmetry of payoffs embedded in peacetime bonus packages – “heads I win, tails society loses” – is neutralised somewhat by paying in CoCos. This better aligns risk for shareholders and staff with the risks for society at large.  There is an old lesson, here, about eating your own cooking. This ought to help discipline the chefs, reducing the temptation to pursue risky recipes in the first place. Encouragingly, banking practice may already be beginning to match the theory. Several banks have recently announced they will in future consider remunerating shareholders and staff in CoCos.                                                   20  Standard & Poor’s (2010). 21  Calomiris (2010) and Gordon (2010).  
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches Conclusion Tackling complex banking through complex regulation is to fight fire with fire. This is unlikely to work in theory. Crisis experience suggests it has not worked in practice. A regulatory framework is needed in which the state is neither omniscient Walrasian auctioneer (shouting out hundreds of millions of risk prices) nor deep-pocketed financier (doling out hundreds of billions of taxpayers’ money). A regulatory Gosplan will work no better for bankers than it did for tractors. The role of regulation is instead to set the overarching rules of the game. In tackling banking stress, that means the framework for banks’ capital structure. As far as possible, that framework should aim to leave the pricing of risk ex-ante, and the consequences of risk ex-post, to the market. The framework outlined here could be one simple, robust and timely way to help achieve that. It is different. But it is far from radical. Nothing could be less radical than returning banks, and banking risk, to the market.  References Berger, A N, Davies, S M and Flannery, M J (2000), “Comparing Market and Supervisory Assessments of Bank Performance: Who Knows What When?”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking Vol.32(2), pages 641–667.  Bordo, M, Eichengreen, B, Klingebiel, D and Martinez-Peria, M S (2001), “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?”, Economic Policy Vol. 16(1), pages 51–82. Calomiris, C W (2010), Beyond Basel and the Dodd-Frank Bill, mimeo, Columbia Business School.  Calomiris, C W., and Herring, R (2011), “Why and How To Design an Effective Contingent Capital Requirement,” Columbia Business School Working Paper, February. Cannata, F and Quagliariello, M (2005), “The Value of Market Information in Banking Supervision: Evidence from Italy”, Journal of Financial Services Research Vol. 27(2), pages 139–162.  Cliff, D (2011), The Flash Crash of May 6th 2010: WTF?, mimeo, University of Bristol.  Commission of Experts for Limiting the Economic Risks Posed by Large Companies, Final Report, available at:  http://www.sif.admin.ch/dokumentation/00514/00519/00592/index.html?lang=en&download=NHzLpZeg7t,lnp6I0NTU042l2Z6ln1ad1IZn4Z2qZpnO2Yuq2Z6gpJCDdIN2hGym162epYbg2c_JjKbNoKSn6A Duffie, D (2011), How Big Banks Fail and What to Do About It, Princeton University Press.  Flannery, M J (2010), “Stabilizing Large Financial Institutions with Contingent Capital Certificates”, Carefin Working Papers No. 4. Flannery, M J and Perotti, E (2011), CoCo Design as a Risk Preventive Tool, VoxEU. Financial Services Authority (2010), Sovereign, Bank and Corporate HPE Feedback, available at: http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/international/sbc_hpe.pdf  Goodhart, C (2011 forthcoming), The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision: A History of the Early Years, 1974 – 1997, Cambridge University Press. Gordon, J N (2010), “Executive Compensation and Corporate Governance in Financial Firms: The Case for Convertible Equity-Based Pay”, Columbia Law School Working Paper Series No. 373.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 Gunther, J W, Levonian, M E and Moore, R E (2001), “Can the Stock Market Tell Bank Supervisors Anything They Don’t Already Know?”, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Economic and Financial Review Second Quarter.  Haldane (2009), Rethinking the Financial Network, available at  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech386.pdf  Haldane & May (2011), “Systemic Risk in Banking Ecosystems”, Nature Vol. 469, pages 351–355.  Hansen, L P and Sargent, T J (2007), Robustness, Princeton University Press.  Hayek (1974), The Pretence of Knowledge, Nobel Prize Lecture, available at: http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economics/laureates/1974/hayek-lecture.html  Jensen, M C (1986), “The agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance and takeovers”, American Economic Review Vol.76(2), pages 323–329.  Kotlikoff, L J (2010), Jimmy Stewart is Dead – Ending the World’s Ongoing Financial Plague with Limited Purpose Banking, John Wiley and Sons.  Krainer, J and Lopez, J A (2004), “Incorporating Equity Market Information into Supervisory Monitoring Models”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking Vol.36(6), pages 1043–1067.  Leland, H (1994), “Corporate debt value, bond covenants and optimal capital structure”, Journal of Finance Vol. 49(4), pages 1213–1252. Perrow, C (2007), “The Next Catastrophe: Reducing Our Vulnerabilities to Natural, Industrial, and Terrorist Disasters”, Princeton University Press. Safieddine, A and Wilhelm, W (1996), “An empirical Investigation of Short-Selling Activity Prior to Seasoned Equity Offerings”, Journal of Finance Vol. 51, pages 729–749.  Standard & Poor’s (2010), Potential $1 Trillion Bank Contingent Capital-Style Issuance Faces Uncertain Investor Interest. 
12 BIS central bankers’ speeches Annex Chart 1: Distribution of capital ratio for the retail mortgage book with model error 0.000.010.020.030.040.050.060.070.080.090.107580859095100105110115120125130Model errorOriginal capital ratio Sources: 2009 Pillar 3 disclosures of Lloyds Banking Group and Royal Bank of Scotland and Bank calculations (a) The model error takes the probability of default (PD) for each given risk bucket of mortgagees as the realisation of a uniformly-distributed random variable across the range of possible PDs within that risk bucket. This maps to a new risk-weighted assets number for the retail mortgage book, and a new capital ratio for this portion of the bank’s book (assuming the initial capital ratio is 100). This error is simulated 5,000 times for each of two banks and the chart shows the resulting distribution.    Chart 2: Distribution of capital ratio for the retail mortgage book with model and mapping errors  Sources: 2009 Pillar 3 disclosures of Lloyds Banking Group and Royal Bank of Scotland and Bank calculations (a) The mapping error maps the PD for each mortgagee to the next higher risk bucket. It compounds with the model error described in Chart 1. This maps to a new risk-weighted assets number for the retail mortgage book, and a new capital ratio for this portion of the bank’s book (assuming the initial capital ratio is 100). This error is simulated 5,000 times for each of two banks and the chart shows the resulting distribution. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 13 Chart 3: Cumulative losses on trading book relative to capital requirements 0246810121416HSBCBarclaysLBGRBSCapital held against trading book exposures (a)Cumulative trading book write-downs (b)£,billions (a) As of end-2007. Capitalcharges against trading book exposures are calculated as the the sum of market risk and counterparty credit risk RWAs,multiplied by 8%.  This might overestimate the amount of capital banks hold against their regulatory trading books as some market risk and counterparty credit risk capital charges relate to positions booked in the banking book.(b) Cumulative between 2007 H2 and 2009 H1.  Includes write-downs due to mark-to-market adjustments where details are disclosed by firms.  Not all these positions will necessarily be included in the regulatory trading book.   Chart 4: Tier 1 capital ratios to absorb trading book losses  8.73%7.42%7.56%9.50%8.86%10.01%8.94%11.02%0.00%2.00%4.00%6.00%8.00%10.00%12.00%HSBCRBSBarclaysLBGOriginalRequired Sources: Published accounts, Capital IQ and Bank calculations (a) The red bars show the Tier 1 capital ratios that would have been required at end-2007 to fully absorb trading book write-downs and leave the bank with the Tier 1 capital ratio that was actually reported (blue bars). 
14 BIS central bankers’ speeches Chart 5: Tier 1 capital ratios for “crisis” and “no crisis” banks 0.0%1.0%2.0%3.0%4.0%5.0%6.0%7.0%8.0%9.0%10.0%May 02Nov 02May 03Nov 03May 04Nov 04May 05Nov 05May 06Nov 06May 07Nov 07May 08Nov 08'No crisis' banks'Crisis' banks8% thresholdLehman failure 15 Sep 08 Sources: Capital IQ and Bank calculations (a) “Crisis” banks are a set of major financial institutions which in autumn 2008 either failed, required government capital or were taken over in distressed circumstances. These are RBS, HBOS, Lloyds TSB, Bradford & Bingley, Alliance & Leicester, Citigroup, Washington Mutual, Wachovia, Merrill Lynch, Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae, Goldman Sachs, ING Group, Dexia and Commerzbank. The chart shows an unweighted average for those institutions in the sample for which data are available on the given day. (b) The “no crisis” institutions are HSBC, Barclays, Wells Fargo, JP Morgan, Santander, BNP Paribas, Deutsche Bank, Crédit Agricole, Société Générale, BBVA, Banco Popular, Banco Sabadell, Unicredit, Banca Popolare di Milano, Royal Bank of Canada, National Australia Bank, Commonwealth Bank of Australia and ANZ Banking Group. The chart shows an unweighted average for those banks in the sample for which data are available on the given day. (c) The dotted black line is a suggested trigger level for contingent capital calibrated by minimising a loss function which takes into account both Type I and Type II errors. Type I error is the probability that conversion occurs despite capital not being required. Type II error is the event that conversion does not occur despite capital being required. The loss function places greater weight on Type II errors. Note that the loss function takes into account the full range of banks, not just the average score for each set.   Chart 6: Market capitalisation to book-value of total assets 0.0%2.0%4.0%6.0%8.0%10.0%12.0%14.0%May 02Nov 02May 03Nov 03May 04Nov 04May 05Nov 05May 06Nov 06May 07Nov 07May 08Nov 08'No crisis' banks'Crisis' banks5% thresholdLehman failure 15 Sep 08 Sources: Capital IQ and Bank calculations (a) 30-day moving average of market capitalisation Other Footnotes as per chart 5 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 15 Chart 7: Market capitalisation to book-value of debt  0.0%2.5%5.0%7.5%10.0%12.5%15.0%May 02Nov 02May 03Nov 03May 04Nov 04May 05Nov 05May 06Nov 06May 07Nov 07May 08Nov 08'No crisis' banks'Crisis' banks5% thresholdLehman failure 15 Sep 08 Sources: Capital IQ and Bank calculations (a) 30-day moving average of market capitalisation Other Footnotes as per chart 5   Chart 8: Market capitalisation to book-value of equity  0.000.501.001.502.002.50May 02Nov 02May 03Nov 03May 04Nov 04May 05Nov 05May 06Nov 06May 07Nov 07May 08Nov 08'No crisis' banks'Crisis' banks1.20 thresholdLehman failure 15 Sep 08 Sources: Capital IQ and Bank calculations (a) 30-day moving average of market capitalisation Other Footnotes as per chart 5  
16 BIS central bankers’ speeches Chart 9: Optimal capital structure – Debt and Equity  Optimal capital structure – D + E   Expected taxes Expected costs of financial distress Optimal leverage ratio Present value of costs Debt/Equity  Source: Bank of England   Chart 10: Optimal capital structure – Debt, Equity and Contingent Capital  Optimal capital structure – C + D + E   Expected bankruptcy costs Expected taxes Optimal portion of convertible debt Present value 0 100% Taxes paid due to existing equity  Source: Bank of England 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 17 Chart 11: Major UK banks’ Tier 1 capital ratio  678910111220002001200220032004200520062007Including bonuses paid as cocosIncluding dividends paid as cocos Actual Tier 1 capital ratio% Sources: Annual accounts and Bank calculations (a) Alliance and Leicester, Banco Santander, Barclays, Bradford & Bingley, HBOS, HSBC, Lloyds TSB, Nationwide, Northern Rock and RBS. (b) Assumes that 50% of bonuses are paid as CoCos and retained. Bonuses are assumed to equal 20% of total staff costs. (c) Contingent capital is assumed to be included in Tier 1 capital. (d) Assumes that 50% of dividends are paid as CoCos and retained.   Chart 12: Cumulative amount of Tier 1 capital for major UK banks 5010015020025030020002001200220032004200520062007Including dividends paid as cocos Including bonuses paid as cocosActual Tier 1 capital£ bn Sources: Annual accounts and Bank calculations Footnotes as per chart 11 
18 BIS central bankers’ speeches Table 1: Type I and Type II errors for Basel Regulatory Ratios and market-based capital measures   Type I Type II Basel Regulatory ratios  50% 43% Market capitalisation to book-value of total assets  21% 5% Market capitalisation to book-value of debt 20% 11% Market capitalisation to book-value of equity 10% 11% Sources: Capital IQ and Bank calculations (a) A Type I error occurs when a bank’s ratio falls below the trigger level (calculated according to a loss function as described in charts 5–8) and capital is not required (defined as that bank not suffering a “crisis” over the next 365 days). The number in this column is the proportion of days when a Type I error occurs. (b) Timely conversion is defined as a bank’s ratio falling below the trigger level no less than one month and no more than one year before a “crisis”. The number in this column is the proportion of “crisis” banks for which timely conversion does not occur (i,e, there is a Type II error) at this trigger level. (c) For each metric, the threshold for a signal of impending distress is as given in Charts 5 to 8.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Spencer Dale: MPC in the dock Speech by Mr Spencer Dale, Executive Director, Monetary Policy, and Chief Economist of the Bank of England, at the National Asset-Liability Management Global Conference, London, 24 March 2011. *      *      * I would like to thank Alina Barnett, Rohan Churm and Michael Hume for their considerable help in preparing this speech. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. The remit of the Monetary Policy Committee is clear: to hit the 2% inflation target. But inflation in February was 4.4% – well above the target. It has been above target for much of the past 5 years. And it is likely to remain so for the next year or so. At the same time, monetary policy remains at extraordinary loose levels. This month marks the second anniversary of Bank Rate being reduced to 0.5%; it’s lowest ever level. And the stock of asset purchases financed by central bank reserves – QE – remains at £200 billion. There is an onus on the Committee to explain how its actions are consistent with its remit. There is a good case for the defence. But we need to continue to make it. It needs to be made if international investors, such as many of you here this morning, are going to continue to have the confidence to invest in the UK. More generally, it needs to be made to preserve the accountability and credibility of the Committee. The MPC is accountable for hitting the inflation target. Developments in the rest of the world certainly affect us. And inflation will not always be close to target. But ultimately UK inflation is our responsibility: it is made and controlled in Threadneedle Street.  The credibility of monetary policy relies on companies and households having confidence that the Committee will keep inflation close to target. After a series of failed monetary frameworks in the 1970s and 80s, the gains in credibility associated with the introduction of inflation targeting and the creation of an independent policy committee greatly improved the functioning of our economy. The task of maintaining low and stable inflation was made substantially easier, and we enjoyed a sustained period of economic stability. We lose those hard-fought gains at our peril. The MPC stands charged on four counts. Why is inflation so high? Why has inflation been so much higher than we expected? Could inflation remain high? And how is the current stance of policy consistent with the inflation outlook? My task today is to make the case for the defence. Why is inflation so high? On the first count – why is inflation so high – the case for the defence has been advanced by a number of my colleagues in recent months and so hopefully will be familiar to many of you.1 Over the past few years, our economy has been hit by a series of large price level shocks – to oil and other commodity prices, to VAT, and to the sterling exchange rate – which have raised companies’ costs and put upward pressure on prices. Together these factors can more than account for the strength of inflation.                                                  1 See for example the speeches by Bean (2011), King (2011), Miles (2011), and Posen (2011). 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Indeed, recent analysis in the Bank’s Inflation Report suggests that these factors can account for a rise in the level of consumer prices since the beginning of 2007 of between  8–12%.2 This dwarfs the extent to which inflation has exceeded the 2% inflation target over the same period. Now, if we really were in a Court of Law, I fear the Judge may be looking down on me at this point with a degree of disdain, suggesting that this sounds like a series of excuses. “Inflation is inflation”, he or she may say, “whatever its cause. Your job is to keep inflation close to target”. I’ve considerable sympathy for this argument: the high and variable rates of inflation seen in recent years have affected the ability of both households and companies to plan their spending and investment decisions with any degree of certainty.  But the remit of the MPC recognises that trying to keep inflation at target in the face of large shocks and disturbances “may cause undesirable volatility in output.”3 I fear that to some this might sound like I’m resorting to technical loop-holes to bolster my defence. But that is not the case. This element of the remit has been central to the operation of monetary policy in recent years. The foremost task of monetary policy over the past few years has been to ensure that the financial crisis did not lead to a prolonged depression. To have offset these price level shocks would have meant presiding over an even deeper recession. I’m not saying that if I had had perfect foresight, I wouldn’t have changed my policy stance at all. But the hurdle for wanting to have had materially tighter policy in the face of the most severe downturn in the post-war period is pretty high. But this argument is hypothetical. As many of you may know, the MPC did not have perfect foresight. Indeed, far from it! Which leads to the second charge against the MPC: why has inflation been so much higher than we expected?  Why has inflation been so much higher than we expected? On the Committee, we always stress that the uncertainty associated with forecasting inflation means that the forecasts – and outturns relative to those forecasts – should be judged in terms of the entire forecast distribution rather than a single point forecast. But even viewed in this way, inflation in recent years has turned out significantly higher than we thought at all likely. Consider, for example, the forecast the Committee made two years ago in February 2009. At that time, the probability the Committee attached to inflation being above 3% in 2010 was less than 5% in each quarter. In the event, CPI inflation was above 3% in every quarter of 2010 and averaged 3.3% (Chart 1). However viewed, there is a prolonged period of unexpectedly high inflation that needs to be explained.  That explanation comes in two halves, with the source of the inflation surprise in 2009 different from that in 2010. In 2009, our surprise largely stemmed from the extent to which the increase in import prices associated with sterling’s depreciation was passed through into higher consumer prices. The                                                  2 See the box on page 34–35 of the February Inflation Report. The box explains how a range of estimates suggest that these factors might have added between 6% – 10.5% to the level of prices between 2007 and the end of 2010. My numbers update this analysis for the recent impact of the January 2011 VAT rise and additional increases in energy and import prices. 3 The relevant clause of the remit states “The framework is based on the recognition that the actual inflation rate will on occasions depart from its target as a result of shocks and disturbances. Attempts to keep inflation at the inflation target in these circumstances may cause undesirable volatility in output.” See http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/open_letter_from_chx_to_boe_22032011.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 MPC’s initial judgement was that over the next few years less than half of the increase in import prices would feed into higher UK consumer prices, with the remainder being absorbed in margins or lower nominal wages. This judgement was based in part on a number of influential studies made in the years prior to sterling’s depreciation which suggested that the degree of exchange rate pass-through in many countries, including the UK, had fallen significantly during the period of Great Moderation. Indeed, a general view had emerged amongst many academics and commentators that pass-through in many major economies had fallen close to zero.4  The MPC’s initial judgement that around 40% or so of the increase in import prices would pass through into consumer prices was at the top end of this emerging view. However, that judgement now looks woefully optimistic compared to the degree of pass-through we think has occurred, which is closer to 100%.5 This error of judgement can more than account for the surprising strength of inflation through 2009 (Chart 2).  However, it accounts for much less of the surprise in 2010, since the extent of additional pass-through has lessened as time has gone on.6 Instead, the 2010 surprise largely stems from the sharp pickup in import price inflation seen through much of last year, driven by the surge in commodity prices. At the time we made the February 2009 forecast, we expected import prices to increase only slightly in 2010. In the event, the prices of oil, food and metals increased by between 20 and 40% during 2010, leading to a further bout of import price inflation.  These higher commodity prices directly affect the prices of the food and energy we consume. But the effects go wider than that. Higher metal prices raise the cost of imported cars. Likewise, cotton prices and the cost of clothes. All told, the unexpected increase in commodity and world trade prices can account for the lion’s share of the surprising strength in inflation in 2010 (Chart 3). So there are two significant factors accounting for the recent extended period of higher than expected inflation.7 In 2009, the surprising strength largely reflects greater than expected pass-through from sterling’s depreciation into consumer prices. There were good reasons for                                                  4 Taylor (2008) argued that the global economy had experienced a reduction in the degree of exchange rate pass-through in recent years. Microeconomic studies attributed this decline to increased globalisation, which increased competition between domestic and foreign firms (Campa and Goldberg (2006)). Macroeconomic studies argued that this was due to monetary policy’s focus on price stability which caused prices to adjust more slowly (Devereux and Engel (2001), Taylor (2000, 2007), Devereux, Engel and Storgaard (2004)). Empirical studies such as Ihrig et al (2006), found that the exchange rate pass-through to consumer prices in the U.K. had fallen from 0.20 before the 1990s to almost zero thereafter; similar effects were found in other G7 countries with the exception of Germany. 5 The February 2011 Inflation Report (Section 4 and the box on pages 34–35) describe estimates which suggest that import price increases since 2007 have added 4% to 6% to the overall price level. This equates to pass-through of between 66% and 100%. I discussed some reasons for why the degree of pass-through may have been larger or at least faster than predicted by earlier studies in a speech last year (Dale 2010). 6 The analysis presented here is based on the forecast made in February 2009. The extent of the surprise stemming from the degree of exchange rate pass-through in subsequent forecasts reduced more quickly than suggested by this analysis since the MPC learnt from this high pass-through and adjusted subsequent projections accordingly. 7 There are of course many other elements of the MPC’s forecasts which have differed from what was projected. For example, previous Bank analysis (see the box on pages 48–49 of the August 2010 Inflation Report) has highlighted the smaller than expected impact from the weakness of demand. Acting in the opposite direction, it appears that consumer-facing companies may have squeezed their margins by more than had been anticipated during 2009/10. The various changes to VAT during this period have also complicated the task of forecasting inflation. However, relative to the February 2009 forecast considered here, changes in VAT did not contribute significantly to the surprising strength of inflation in 2009/10, since the effects of the temporary reduction in VAT in December 2008 were included in that forecast, and the main impact of the more recent increase in VAT did not come through until the first quarter of this year. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches thinking that the degree of pass through may be relatively limited, but by the start of 2010 that judgement was shown to have been wrong and we have incorporated close to full-pass through in forecasts since then. By contrast, the unexpected strength of inflation through much of 2010 largely stems from the surge in commodity prices.  Could inflation remain high? To summarise: there’s no great puzzle as to why inflation has been above target for much of the past few years. Our economy has been subject to a series of large shocks – to oil and other commodity prices, to VAT, and to the sterling exchange rate – which have raised inflation. The scale of these shocks can more than account for the overshoot of inflation relative to target. Moreover, it is possible, albeit with the benefit of hindsight, to explain why inflation in recent years has been higher than we expected.  But that is all in the past. What matters for monetary policy are the prospects for inflation over the next 2 to 3 years. My broad view of the inflation outlook is similar to that described in the February Inflation Report. Inflation will probably rise further in the near-term as recent commodity price increases pass through the supply chain. But further out, inflation is likely to fall back as the temporary impacts of the price level shocks wane and the slack in the economy associated with the deep recession from which we are only gradually recovering continues to pull down on inflation. But the risks and uncertainties associated with the inflation outlook means it is impossible to know with any certainty by how much and over what period inflation will moderate. Indeed, it is quite possible that inflation may be considerably higher or lower than the central view taken in the February Report. This leads to the third item on our charge sheet: could inflation remain high? The simple answer to this question is – I’m afraid – yes. I would highlight two risks in particular. The first is that global price pressures continue to add to domestic inflation. There are a number of potential channels through which this could operate. At first blush, the most natural suspect might appear to be a continuation of the recent rapid increases in the prices of oil and other commodities. As I said, commodity prices have increased sharply over the past year and the strong demand from emerging economies, especially China, which has underpinned much of that rise, looks set to continue.8 But this ignores the fact that one of the reasons why commodity prices increased so much through 2010 was exactly because demand was expected to remain strong.  Indeed, looking ahead, futures prices are broadly flat. Now there are many reasons why commodity prices may not be expected to follow exactly the path implied by futures prices. For example, if investors require a positive risk premium for holding commodities, or because some commodities cannot be easily stored. And further sharp movements in commodity prices are certainly possible. But I wouldn’t expect to see rapid increases in commodities prices of the like seen over the past year unless global demand turned out to be significantly stronger – or supply weaker – than currently anticipated. But inflation at home could also be affected by more general inflationary trends. Average inflation in the largest emerging economies increased from 2.8% to 5.3% last year.9 This in large part reflects rising local and global food prices. But overheating in many emerging                                                  8 Events in Japan and the Middle East and North Africa have also had an important influence on commodity prices in recent weeks. Oil prices have increased reflecting fears of supply disruption and heightened risk premium, but some non-oil commodity prices have fallen in response to concerns about weakening demand. 9 This group covers the BRIC economies plus 22 other emerging and newly industrialised economies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 economies is playing an increasing role. These economies account for a little under 20% of the UK’s imports. So if inflation remains elevated in these countries this could have a material impact on domestic inflation.  Under some circumstances, we may expect the impact of high inflation in overseas’ economies to be offset by a corresponding depreciation in their exchange rates. But where economies operate pegged exchange rate regimes it is far from clear that this can be relied upon, at least in the near term. A third external factor which could add to domestic inflation is if there is further pass-through from the past depreciation of sterling. Our central view is that there has been close to 100% pass through in terms of the direct impact of higher import prices on to consumer prices. But it is hard to be precise about the exact degree of pass-through, and the range of estimates included in the February Inflation Report suggest that pass through to date may be as low as two-thirds. Moreover, it is quite possible that pass-through may exceed 100% if companies making domestically produced goods and services are able to use the increased competitiveness associated with sterling’s depreciation to widen their margins.10 So there are a number of potential channels through which developments abroad may affect domestic inflation.  But to repeat a point I made up front: inflation is home made. If we think that global price pressures are likely to push up on CPI inflation for an extended period, UK monetary policy will need to be set in such a way as to reduce domestically-generated inflation, and so leave room for these external price pressures. And to respond to an argument I have seen made by a number of commentators in recent months. No: raising Bank Rate will not directly dampen global inflation. But it can ensure that it does not lead to high and persistent domestic inflation.  The second upside risk to inflation that I would highlight is if the prolonged period of above target inflation erodes the public’s confidence that the MPC will keep inflation close to target. Inflation has been above target for 49 out of the past 60 months. Over that 5 year period, inflation has averaged 2.8%. Inflation is likely to remain above target for the next year or so. This suggests that by mid 2012, inflation is likely to have been above target for the best part of six and a half years. Yes, it is perfectly possible to explain why inflation has been so high for so long. And yes, there are good reasons why monetary policy did not try to keep inflation closer to target during this period. But just like the Judge looking down on me earlier, to some people, at some point, this may just start to sound like a series of excuses. This risk is heightened by the fact that the MPC has consistently under-predicted inflation during this period. It is much easier to be wise after the event. For many people, the one thing about inflation they know with certainty is by how much their cost of living has increased in recent years. And if they take any signal from that about the path of future inflation, this could have significant implications. Discussions of MPC credibility are often framed in terms of a set of binary arguments. Has the MPC lost its credibility or not? Are inflation expectations anchored or de-anchored? This approach encourages a focus on measures of medium-term inflation expectations. The rate of inflation expected over the next year or so may consistently move around since the MPC does not attempt to bring inflation back to target over very short time horizons. But this                                                  10 In the extreme, the law of one price (LOOP) suggests that, in the absence of transport costs and trade barriers, the price of a given commodity will be the same all over the world.  Even though the LOOP is unlikely to hold perfectly, the mechanisms underpinning LOOP might cause a sterling depreciation to lead to an increase in the prices of some domestically produced goods and services. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches line of argument suggests that the stability of inflation expected 5 or 10 years ahead provides a good metric for judging the credibility of monetary policy.  The evidence on medium and long-term measures of inflation expectations is somewhat mixed. The most recent survey conducted for the Bank by NOP suggests that 5-year ahead inflation expectations increased by 0.4% points over the past year. The corresponding survey measures collected by Citigroup/YouGov and Barclays have risen by similar amounts. But both the Citigroup/YouGov and Barclays measures remain below the levels they reached in 2008. And measures of medium-term inflation expectations derived from financial markets are little changed compared to a year ago. But I’m cautious about how much comfort we can take from the relative stability in these measures for two reasons. First, although some economists may like to think otherwise, most companies and households have far better things to do than spend time formulating detailed expectations of the rate of inflation likely to prevail in 5 or 10 years time. Many may use simple rules of thumb to form views about future inflation, such as “inflation will be equal to the target”.11 Or they may base their expectations on the views they hear expressed by others or they read about in newspapers.12 Importantly, expectations formed in this way may be relatively sticky.13 Rules of thumb are only changed when they perform poorly over a period of time. Expectations based on the views of others may be updated only occasionally. As such, it may be some time before we see the full effects of the extended period of above target inflation fully reflected in inflation expectations. Second, and more fundamentally, I worry that this binary approach to monetary policy credibility – credible or not credible, anchored or de-anchored – misses the key risk to inflation expectations. Despite some of the more lurid newspaper headlines, I don’t believe that many people think that the Monetary Policy Committee has adopted a secret aim to keep inflation above the 2% target indefinitely. Given that, I don’t find it surprising that when asked, many survey respondents have not significantly raised their expectations of inflation in the medium term.  More likely, however, is that some companies and some households may look back at the prolonged period of above target inflation and infer that the Committee has perhaps become more tolerant of deviations of inflation from target. As such, inflation may be expected to return to target more gradually. Rates of inflation expected to prevail in 5 or 10 years may not increase, but inflation expectations 2, 3 and 4-years ahead may well do. This risk is almost impossible to monitor since information on the term structure of inflation expectations, especially for households and companies, is very sparse. But it could have profound implications for the inflation outlook and the performance of our economy. If companies and households expect inflation to return to target quickly they will set their prices and pay demands accordingly. And in so doing, monetary policy has less to do – in terms of varying the level of demand in the economy – to ensure that it does. Inflation credibility is self reinforcing. The credibility gains associated with the move to inflation targeting and an independent policymaking committee in our country led to a reduction in the persistence of inflation. Inflation came back to target more quickly and the cost of it doing so in terms of output volatility was reduced.14 If companies and households begin to expect that                                                  11 Brazier, Harrison, King and Yates (2008). 12 Carroll (2003). 13 Mankiw and Reis (2002). 14 There was a reduction in the persistence of UK inflation without an increase in the volatility of output.  Benati (2006) found that the inflation targeting period has been the most stable macroeconomic period in UK history. Some have argued that this was due to lower and less volatile shocks hitting the UK economy (Benati and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 inflation will be returned to target more slowly that would harm the efficient functioning of our economy. Wage and price setting behaviour could change. The task of keeping inflation close to target would become more costly. Inflation persistence would increase. We need to guard the gains in credibility built up over the past 15 years or so. How is the current stance of policy consistent with the inflation outlook? The existence of these upside risks leads to the fourth and final charge levelled against the MPC. Is the current stance of policy consistent with the inflation outlook?  As I’ve explained, the central view of the Committee – which I share – is that much of the current strength of inflation is driven by a series of price level shocks. Inflation is likely to fall back next year, as the temporary impacts from these factors wane and the persistent slack in our economy continues to pull down on inflation.  That outlook drives the current stance of monetary policy. Policy needs to remain highly accommodative in order to support spending and income and so reduce the risk of inflation significantly undershooting the target in the medium term.  But there is considerable uncertainty about the extent to which inflation is likely to fall and over what time period. That uncertainty maps into differing views as to exactly how accommodative monetary policy needs to be.  On the one hand, there is a risk that the strength and durability of the recovery may disappoint. Our economy still faces considerable headwinds, especially within the household sector, where real incomes have been squeezed and many families may not yet have adjusted fully to the implications of the substantial fiscal consolidation now in train. On the other hand – as I’ve discussed – there is a risk that inflation may remain higher for longer than currently expected. Either because global price pressures continue to add to domestic inflation or because the persistent period of above target inflation starts to become ingrained in wage and price setting behaviour. It is still too early to reach any firm conclusions, but it seems likely that the terrible events in Japan and the political upheaval in the Middle East and North Africa will add to both of these risks. The huge disruption in Japan and the uncertainty associated with events in Libya are likely to dampen global demand, at least in the short run. But the accompanying increases in energy prices are likely to add to domestic inflation. At the MPC meeting two weeks ago I voted to raise Bank Rate to 0.75%. Even with this increase in rates, the stance of monetary policy would remain highly stimulatory. Bank Rate would still be close to an historic low and the stimulus from our programme of quantitative easing would be unaffected. But I judged that removing some of the monetary stimulus was warranted. I would like to tell you that this judgement was driven by “nice” reasons. That I was confident that the recovery would continue apace. That the very low level of Bank rate reached at the depth of the recession was no longer needed. That we were in a position in which monetary policy could begin a gradual process of normalisation. But I’m afraid these nice reasons were not the factors driving my decision. In particular, I’m not at all confident about the strength of the recovery. My central view – similar to that in the February Inflation Report – is that growth is likely to be close to its average historical rate over the next few years. But that is a pretty disappointing outlook given the depth of the                                                                                                                                                       Mumtaz (2007)) while others have argued this was due to better monetary policy (Batini and Nelson (2005), Nelson and Nikolov (2004)). 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches recession from which we are recovering. And there is considerable scope for growth to surprise to the downside, particularly if households retrench further. Rather, my vote to raise rates was driven by a concern that – despite a relatively weak outlook for growth – the risks to the inflation target in the medium-term were to the upside. In particular, the risks from continuing global price pressures and the effects of the prolonged period of above target inflation meant that the level of demand consistent with achieving the inflation target had probably fallen. Nasty reasons rather than nice ones.15  I should stress that I’m not at all certain that this will turn out to have been the right policy decision. A key lesson I learnt from the financial crisis is that economists know a lot less about the economy and how the economy works than many would like to believe. Policymakers need to approach their task with humility and pragmatism. If growth turns out to be materially weaker than I anticipate or other medium-term pressures on inflation ease unexpectedly, I will reverse my decision. But with growth expected to be around its average historical rate, inflation likely to remain above 4% for the rest of this year and Bank Rate at record low levels, some withdrawal of policy stimulus seems sensible. The juxtaposition of high inflation and loose monetary policy means that there is an onus on the MPC to explain its actions. The case for the defence needs to be made. And we have a good story to tell. We can explain why inflation has been above target for much of the past few years. We think we understand – albeit with the benefit of hindsight – why we have been surprised by the strength of inflation. And we have learnt from those episodes. I can’t say that monetary policy will perfectly anticipate every twist and turn of the economy. We will continue to be surprised by events and need to adjust policy accordingly. But I can assure you that the MPC remains as committed and as focused as ever in our determination to hit the inflation target.                                                   15 This distinction between nice and not nice reasons for raising Bank Rate was made in an interview by Charlie Bean with the Western Mail on 1 February 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches References Batini, N, and E. Nelson (2005), “The U.K.’s Rocky Road to Stability”, Working Paper No. 2005–020A, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Bean, C (2011), “The MPC’s policy dilemma”. Speech at ABI’s Economics and Research Conference, London, available at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2011/speech479.pdf Benati, L (2006), “UK monetary regimes and macroeconomic stylised facts”, Bank of England Working Paper, No. 290. Benati, L and Mumtaz, H (2007), “U.S. Evolving Macroeconomic Dynamics: A Structural Investigation,” European Central Bank Working Paper N. 746, April 2007. Brazier, A, Harrison, R, King, M and Yates, T (2008), “The Danger of Inflating Expectations of Macroeconomic Stability: Heuristic Switching in an Overlapping-Generations Monetary Model”, International Journal of Central Banking, June 2008. Campa, J and Goldberg, L (2006), “Distribution margins, imported inputs, and the sensitivity of the CPI to exchange rates”, NBER Working Paper No. 12121. Carroll, C (2003), “Macroeconomic expectations of households and professional forecasters”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 269–98. Dale, S (2010), “Inflation, Inflation, Inflation”. Speech at Cardiff Business School, available at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech448.pdf Devereux, M B and Engel, C (2001), “Endogenous currency of price setting in a dynamic open economy model”, NBER Working Paper No. 8559. Devereux, M B, Engel, C and Storgaard, P (2004), “Endogenous Exchange Rate Pass-through When Nominal Prices are Set in Advance,” Journal of International Economics, 63, 263–291. Ihrig, J, Marazzi, M and Rothenberg, A (2006), “Exchange rate pass-through in the G7 countries”, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 851, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Juvenal, J and Taylor, M (2008), “Threshold Adjustment of Deviations from the Law of One Price”, Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics & Econometrics: Vol. 12: No. 3, Article 8. King, M (2010), Speech given at the Civic Centre, Newcastle, available at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2011/speech471.pdf Mankiw, N G and Reis, R (2002), “Sticky information versus sticky prices: A proposal to replace the new Keynesian Phillips curve”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4): 1295–1328. Miles, D (2011), “Monetary policy in extraordinary times”. Speech to the Centre for Economic Policy Research and London Business School, London, available at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2011/speech475.pdf Nelson, E and Nikolov, K (2004), “Monetary Policy and Stagflation in the UK”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 36(3), 293–318. Posen, A (2011), “The soft tyranny of inflation expectations”. Speech at the Oxonia Distinguished Lecture, Oxford, available at:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2011/speech474.pdf Taylor, J (2000) “Low inflation, pass-through, and the pricing power of firms”, European Economic Review, Vol. 44, pp. 1389–1408. Taylor, J (2007) “Globalisation and monetary policy: missions impossible”, NBER Conference on the International dimensions of monetary policy, Girona, Spain, June. Taylor, J (2008), “The impacts of globalisation on monetary policy”, Banque de France, International Symposium: Globalisation, inflation and monetary policy, March 2008.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Jean-Claude Trichet: Taking stock on financial reform Opening speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Frankfurt Finance Summit, “The future of risk management and regulation: smarter regulation, safer markets”, Frankfurt am Main, 23 March 2011. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen,  I am very pleased to be able to open this conference here at the House of Finance in Frankfurt.  Frankfurt now hosts three European institutions: the European Central Bank (ECB), the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) and the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB).  This city is now the home not only of Europe’s monetary authority, but also of important supranational responsibility for supervisory matters. With the EIOPA and the ESRB, Frankfurt hosts half of the European bodies in the new European System of Financial Supervisors, with the other two European Supervisory Agencies (ESAs) – the European Banking Authority (EBA) and the European Securities and Markets Authority – based in London and Paris respectively.  I have looked with great interest at today’s programme, which is of exceptional quality.  In my opening remarks, I would like to lay out a scheme of the building blocks of the financial reform that is still in progress.  I believe that when we look back in a few years on the financial reform following the global crisis, we will identify three main building blocks:  The first is banking regulation. The global community is making a big step forward here. It has made the right diagnosis and, in the Basel III framework, drawn the appropriate lessons. My friend Nout Wellink is chairing the Basel Committee; I myself have the privilege of chairing the Committee of Governors and Heads of Supervision, which provides guidance to the Basel Committee.  The second building block is regulation of the financial markets. Here, reform must ensure much greater transparency for the various market segments and products, ensure sufficient competition in all markets, and attenuate as much as possible the pro-cyclicality that derives from information asymmetries, structural features such as ratings and market phenomena such as herding.  The third building block is macroprudential oversight. This new discipline focuses on the interactions between the various parts of the financial system and between the financial sector and the real economy. New institutions, including the ESRB and equivalent oversight committees around the world, will pursue the task of identifying sources of systemic risk, issuing early warnings and recommending remedial action.  The birth date of macroprudential oversight in Europe will probably be identified as the start of this year but it was originally conceived in 2009 through the work of Jacques de Larosière and his high-level group, which included my friend Otmar Issing. Eighteen months from policy design to institutional establishment is a remarkable achievement. It was made possible by thorough groundwork as well as excellent transposition by the Commission and very rapid decisions by the European Parliament and the European Council. I feel very honoured to chair this new body, the ESRB. Let me focus on each of these three building blocks in turn, starting with banking. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches I. Banking regulation and Basel III  Basel III, which constitutes the cornerstone of regulatory reform for the banking sector, provides for higher minimum capital requirements, better risk capture, a stricter definition of eligible capital elements with a particular focus on common shares and more transparency.  The revised regulatory framework allows appropriate transition periods for financial institutions to adjust to the new standards, thereby ensuring a smooth phasing-in of the new regulatory requirements without compromising the nascent economic recovery. By 1 January 2015, the minimum capital requirements for common equity Tier 1 and total Tier 1 capital will gradually be raised up to a level of 4.5% and 6.0%, respectively. This gradual phasing-in of minimum requirements will be complemented by an appropriate observation period for the non-risk-based leverage ratio and the liquidity standards. The ESRB, together with the EBA, will play an important role in policy setting and implementation, with the former contributing to ensuring consistent implementation of the policy framework throughout the EU. We are just beginning that process.  In addition to the necessary transposition into national or European law of the Basel III rules, there are two issues that still need to be addressed: systemically important financial institutions; and capturing the so-called shadow banking system within the regulatory framework.  Work is in progress on systemically important financial institutions, in particular in the Financial Stability Board. The main objectives are to reduce the probability of failure of such institutions and, in case a failure occurs, to reduce the impact on the financial system.  In September 2010, the Governors and Heads of Supervision agreed that systemically important financial institutions should have additional loss absorbing capacity. Work is currently underway on how to define institutions that are systemically important, and how to determine the capital surcharges, contingent capital and other elements to limit systemic fallout.  With the shadow banking system, we have to ensure that tighter regulatory rules do not provide incentives for financial institutions to shift their activities to unregulated areas. Oversight of the shadow banking sector needs to be improved. The FSB has already done valuable work – supported by the ECB – on shadow banking. In this context, the ECB is providing the Financial Stability Board (FSB) with flow of funds data on the composition of the financial sector concerning the euro area. The concrete challenges lie in the establishment of a suitable definition of shadow banking and outlining possible regulatory options to address the risks posed by this sector.  Given the background of the crisis, regulatory effort on financial institutions has focused on banking, but there is important work underway also for other financial institutions, such as the further specification of the capital adequacy regime for insurance companies (“solvency II”).  II. Market regulation Let me turn to the second building block, namely regulation of financial markets. This area is as challenging and as complex as banking.  The main observation we have to draw from the crisis is that the risks in market returns were not mainly exogenous, coming from the stochastic variation in the real economy. They came from financial risk itself. The financial structures that we thought were in place to assess, absorb and neutralise risk were either dysfunctional or worked to magnify volatility.  Key factors in creating this risk were opaque financial structures, particularly vulnerability to contagion and domino effects, and pro-cyclicality in financial markets. The lack of transparency in many financial instruments meant that some market players could exploit – for their own, private benefit – information that was not generally available.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Pro-cyclicality acts as a formidable accelerator of financial trends. Two important factors that drive such amplification are distorted incentives and herd behaviour.  The role of distortions in economic incentives is probably better known as it had traditionally been widely appreciated even within neo-classical modelling. By comparison, herd behaviour as a driver of pro-cyclical patterns in financial markets still needs a thorough explanation.  It is difficult to rationalise herd behaviour. There are two possible explanations. One is the significance of a market player’s evaluation of his or her performance relative to the rest of the market. This is reminiscent of Keynes’ famous beauty contest analogy. To be successful in this environment, individual participants do not form their own opinions, but follow the general mood prevailing among market participants. Everybody seeks to ride the wave created by general sentiment, hoping to step off before the general sentiment turns.  The second explanation is that global markets are in fact less atomistic than we think. Indeed, despite globalisation, increasing market concentration was already a long-term trend before the crisis. Derivatives activity in the US banking system, for example, is dominated by a small group of large institutions. And, of course, the market for credit ratings is famously dominated by three signatures, which act as standard-setters for an enormous volume of transactions.  Many regulatory initiatives are underway to remedy these issues, including work on OTC derivatives, ratings agencies and alternative investment vehicles. But addressing these challenges could also be supported by reorienting significant resources in research. In particular, I would welcome an enrichment of thinking in economics and finance, by including new approaches that do not necessarily rely only on the notions of equilibrium, universal rationality and efficiency.  Inspiration from other fields, such as the natural sciences, may be particularly pertinent. I am thinking for example of market movements from stability to instability, from tranquillity to turbulence. In physics such phenomena are described as phase transitions. When some factors exceed a critical level, a system behaves qualitatively differently from a situation when the factors stay below this level.  Let me now turn to the third building block of regulatory reform, macroprudential supervision.  III. Macroprudential oversight  As my earlier remarks have suggested, the financial crisis has been revealing in many respects. It has revealed the fallout from the failure of large financial institutions. It has revealed the fragility of the financial system to features and trends that cut across institutions, markets and infrastructures. And it has illustrated the amplitude of the consequences of the adverse feedback loop between the financial system and the real economy. All these three elements are key features of systemic risk: first, contagion; second, the build-up of financial imbalances and unsustainable trends within and across the financial system; and third, the close links with the real economy and the potential for strong feedback effects.  The crisis has revealed the fundamental importance of systemic risk. Of the three elements I have mentioned, contagion and the link to the real economy are the least novel in the current episode. The most unexpected element has been the rigour with which systemic risk has been triggered by the collective behaviour of financial institutions and the ways in which they interact in financial markets.  The main new avenue to explore is therefore to improve our understanding of interconnectedness in the financial system, both via the direct links between financial institutions and the indirect ones created in financial markets. Everybody now sees that major risks can emerge from within the financial system itself. It was not the real economy that threw the financial system into disarray, but the reverse.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Endogenous risks – risks that emerge from within the financial sector – can have many causes. They may arise, for example, because large parts of the system rely on the same sources of funding, or because they have similar exposures – to rising financial imbalances, to currency mismatches and to widespread mis-pricing of risk.  We have also seen that turbulence can arise from relatively modest initial shocks. The system is so interconnected that what looks stable can turn out to be “meta-stable”, which means potentially highly instable. Snow on mountain slopes can be meta-stable, looking pristine and tranquil yet turning into an avalanche after only a minor disturbance.  For all these reasons, we have established a new framework of macroprudential supervision as have our counterparts elsewhere, including in the United States with the new Financial Stability Oversight Council. In the case of Europe, there is still one more reason for macroprudential oversight, and that is the single European market.  Cross-border and cross-sectoral financial integration within the EU is fostered by competition, freedom of establishment and the free flow of capital. The single financial market is a crucial component of the overall single market project, and macroprudential supervision should enhance the resilience of this market.  So how exactly will the new discipline of macroprudential oversight be conducted? Financial stability is not an issue exclusively for central banks. Micro-prudential supervisors have a key role, because stable institutions are an essential and necessary condition for achieving financial stability. This is why the ESAs and national supervisors together with the central banks are members of the ESRB and why the ESRB and the ESAs form the European System of Financial Supervisors. The ESRB’s main tasks are threefold: to identify and prioritise systemic risks; to issue early warnings when significant systemic risks emerge; and to issue policy recommendations for remedial action in response to the risks it identifies.  The ESRB will not focus on individual institutions, individual countries or individual macroeconomic issues – it will take a strong horizontal focus, across countries, across sectors and across the boundaries between the financial sphere and the real economy. Interlinkages and spillovers should be key terms in its analysis.  To achieve these tasks, the ESRB is drawing on information from many sources, including strong analytical input from its members; intelligence gathered from financial system participants; and the data necessary to understand the nature of interlinkages that define the financial system. ESRB analysis must be broad-based covering potentially any aspect of the EU’s financial system – markets, institutions and infrastructure.  The ESRB is being established at a time when the concerns of markets and policy-makers about short-term vulnerabilities seem to prevail over perceptions of medium- and longer-term risks. This confronts the ESRB, as well as other macroprudential bodies around the world, with specific challenges. The ESRB needs to consider what activities to initiate, well before a fully-fledged macroprudential policy framework is developed in the medium term. At the same time, it must develop this policy framework, for which no template exists and for which the analytical background captures only parts of the tasks. In the medium term, the ESRB and the macroprudential authorities of the 27 EU countries will need operational policy frameworks with specific instruments. The ESRB is ready to support – at a technical level – the work that European institutions have started to design the implementation of countercyclical capital buffers. Other macroprudential instruments are also desirable. Work on these issues has been initiated. For example, new rules on margins and collateral should counteract the fluctuations of the cycle. The specific capital requirements for risk-weighted assets might also be adjusted over the cycle. When these macroprudential instruments are established, possibly around the middle of this decade, the authorities will finally have tools to mitigate the pro-cyclical behaviour of financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 players. Authorities will set part of the regulatory requirements not against the solvency or liquidity situations of single institutions, but taking a view of the macroprudential cycle. Other instruments will be needed to address interconnectedness, including the most complex and innovative elements of market functioning. One specific focus of authorities is to ensure that efficient and secure central counterparties are created to reduce risks in OTC markets.  Concentration risks produced by increasingly large financial institutions in trading and post-trading will also need to be addressed. Finally, authorities will need new regulatory instruments to keep pace with the impact of new technologies – including high frequency trading, algorithmic trading and the new universal trading platforms, which are gaining ground very rapidly. Last week, the ESRB selected the members of its Advisory Scientific Committee to provide advice on analytical issues. We have also established the Advisory Technical Committee, which assembles experts from all central banks. The institutional set-up is completed and the ESRB will now focus on its substantive tasks, of which we will have a substantive review in June this year. Combining a focus on short-term risks with the medium- and longer-term perspective will be the major challenge. Conclusion Let me conclude. I believe we are now about halfway through the comprehensive reforms that the crisis has called for. We have achieved a blueprint of more stringent bank regulations that includes more loss-absorbing capital, better risk coverage and limitations for undue leverage. Countercyclical capital buffers are meant to lower pro-cyclicality.  The oversight of financial institutions as well as markets and market infrastructure are being strengthened, and the organisational structure of financial supervision is being overhauled. But much remains to be done. The most important aspect is the implementation of these reforms. Moreover, the issue of systemically important financial institutions requires further reflection, and oversight of the proper functioning of financial markets in a way that avoids undue volatility, excessive influence of dominant players and oligopolistic market structures, while reinforcing transparency, needs to be addressed resolutely.  Such understanding would be enhanced by greater focus in academic research on analysis of the intricate interactions in complex financial systems.  The appropriate benchmark for the financial system is whether it is providing appropriate financing to the real economy in a stable and sustainable way. Thereby, and thereby only, will it make a valuable contribution to our economy.  Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Ben S Bernanke: Community banking in a period of recovery and change Speech by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Independent Community Bankers of America National Convention, San Diego, California, 23 March 2011. *      *      * It’s a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak once again before the Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA). This is the sixth consecutive year that I’ve met with you at this event, and the themes of my remarks over the years tell a story not only about the financial and economic upheaval that we have all experienced, but also about some of the very difficult issues that continue to confront both bankers and policymakers today. Back in 2006, less than two months after I started as Chairman, I spoke to you about the strong performance of community banks as well as about some important longer-term challenges. In subsequent years, my remarks touched on the need to strengthen regulation and supervision of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, approaches to reducing preventable mortgage foreclosures, community banking and the financial crisis, and then last year, the need to address the problem of financial institutions that are “too big to fail.” My themes today are the vital role that community banks need to play in the economic recovery, the value that the Federal Reserve places on insights from community banks, and the evolving regulatory environment.  Community banks and the economic recovery To me, the title of the 2009 ICBA annual report, Empowering Main Street, is a concise and accurate description of the critical role that community banks play in the U.S. economy. Community bankers live and work where they do business, and their institutions have deep roots, sometimes established over several generations. They know their customers and the local economy. Relationship banking is therefore at the core of community banking. The largest banks typically rely heavily on statistical models to assess borrowers’ capital, collateral, and capacity to repay, and those approaches can add value, but banks whose headquarters and key decisionmakers are hundreds or thousands of miles away inevitably lack the in-depth local knowledge that community banks use to assess character and conditions when making credit decisions. This advantage for community banks is fundamental to their effectiveness and cannot be matched by models or algorithms, no matter how sophisticated. The IBM computer program Watson may play a mean game of Jeopardy, but I would not trust it to judge the creditworthiness of a fledgling local business or to build longstanding personal relationships with customers and borrowers.  Given the important role that community banks play in their local economies, we at the Federal Reserve are keenly interested in their health and their collective future. Local communities, ranging from small towns to urban neighborhoods, are the foundation of the U.S. economy and communities need community banks to help them grow and prosper. As I’m sure you are all too aware, the financial crisis and its aftermath have hit some community banks especially hard, and those institutions will continue to need time to repair their balance sheets. Although we are not yet where we would like to be, the good news is that many community banks are recovering and reporting stronger performance.  Indeed, despite some of the worst economic conditions since the Great Depression and their own strained balance sheets, community banks have already been doing their part to meet the credit needs of their customers, notably including small business customers. We have been spending a lot of time at the Federal Reserve trying to understand and promote lending to small businesses, and one of the interesting things we have found is that while small business lending contracted overall from mid-2008 through 2010, this contraction was not 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches uniform. In fact, a majority of the smallest banks (in this case, those with assets of $250 million or less) actually increased their small business lending during this period. And while banks with assets between $250 million and $1 billion showed a slight decline in small business lending over this period, the contraction was not nearly as sharp as it was for the largest banks. This hard evidence underscores the important benefits of relationship banking, particularly in periods of unusual economic and financial stress.  Community banks and the Federal Reserve You may recall that in my remarks to this group last year, I noted that the decentralized structure of the Federal Reserve System, with 12 Reserve Banks and 24 branches located in cities across the country, was designed to ensure that local insights and information would be incorporated in the deliberations of both the Board and the Federal Open Market Committee. During the debates leading up to the passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, we emphasized that our supervisory responsibility for state-chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System and bank holding companies of all sizes not only provides valuable economic information at the grass-roots level that would be very difficult to replace, it also gives us a fuller picture of the nation’s financial system. At the same time, the range of expertise that the Federal Reserve develops in making monetary policy and in its engagement with the financial system allows us to bring unique insights and value-added to our supervisory activities. Fortunately, the Congress decided to preserve the Federal Reserve’s existing supervisory authority over smaller as well as larger banking organizations. It also broadened the Federal Reserve’s connections to Main Street by adding hundreds of thrift holding companies to the institutions we supervise. We are delighted that, through our supervision, our gathering of economic intelligence, and the activities of our community affairs departments around the country, we will be able to remain fully engaged with grass-roots America.  The Federal Reserve has undertaken several recent initiatives to enhance our interactions with community banks and ensure that we fully take their perspectives and unique characteristics into account in our policymaking. First, for many years, the Board has had a committee of Governors that provides oversight on bank supervisory and regulatory matters. Although many of this committee’s efforts in the wake of the financial crisis have understandably been focused on the largest and most complex banking organizations, the Board believes that it is important to sharpen our focus on smaller banking organizations as well. As a result, we recently established a special supervision subcommittee that focuses on community banks and smaller regional institutions. This subcommittee is chaired by a former longtime community banker, Governor Betsy Duke, and also includes a former state banking commissioner, Governor Sarah Bloom Raskin.  The subcommittee provides leadership and oversight on a variety of matters related specifically to our supervision of community and smaller regional banks.1 In particular, the subcommittee is reviewing new policy proposals through the lens of the effect those proposals could have on smaller institutions, both in terms of safety and soundness and potential regulatory burden. Among other things, the subcommittee also monitors the Federal Reserve’s working relationship with state banking supervisors, which is particularly important because we share with them supervisory responsibility for state member banks.  We have also undertaken an initiative to solicit feedback from community banks on a more regular basis. In October, the Board announced that it would form a Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council to provide insight and information on the economy, lending                                                  1 For supervisory purposes, the Federal Reserve generally considers banking organizations with assets of $10 billion or less to be community banking organizations and those with assets between $10 billion and $50 billion to be regional banking organizations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 conditions, and other issues of interest to community banks.2 To make this council as representative as possible, each of the 12 Reserve Banks now has its own local advisory council comprising representatives from banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions; one member from each local council serves on the national council that will meet with the Board twice a year in Washington. Local meetings have already begun, and the first meeting of the national council with the Board will take place soon. Personally, I am looking forward to hearing more from community bankers about issues ranging from their local economies to regulatory reform.  Community banks and regulatory reform As you know, a key challenge for community banks in the years ahead will be to adapt to the changing regulatory environment, particularly the regulatory reforms contained in the Dodd-Frank Act, as well as the changes that will be associated with the Basel III reforms. We are certainly aware of and appreciate the concerns that community banks have about these regulatory changes, and, as I have just described, we have stepped up our efforts to understand those concerns and to respond to them as appropriate. I think it is worth emphasizing that the changes we will be seeing in the financial regulatory architecture are principally directed at our largest and most complex financial firms, including nonbanks. Consequently, one benefit of the reforms should be the creation of a more level playing field for financial institutions of all sizes.  Focusing reform on our largest, most complex financial firms makes sense. The recent financial crisis highlighted the fact that some financial firms had grown so large, leveraged, and interconnected that their failure could pose a threat to overall financial stability. The sudden collapses of major financial firms were among the most destabilizing events of the crisis. The crisis also demonstrated the inadequacy of the existing framework for supervising, regulating, and otherwise constraining the risks of major financial firms as well as of the toolkit the government had at the time to manage their failure.  As I discussed with you at last year’s meeting, a major thrust of the Dodd-Frank Act is addressing the too-big-to-fail problem and mitigating the threat to financial stability posed by systemically important financial firms. The too-big-to-fail problem is a pernicious one that has a number of substantial harmful effects. Critically, it reduces the incentives of shareholders, creditors, and counterparties of such firms to discipline excessive risk-taking. And it produces competitive distortions by enabling firms with large systemic footprints to fund themselves more cheaply than other firms because of the implicit subsidy of too-big-to-fail status. This competitive distortion is not only unfair to smaller firms and damaging to competition today, but it also spurs further growth by the largest firms and more consolidation and concentration in the financial industry. A financial system dominated by too-big-to-fail firms cannot be a healthy financial system.  The act addresses the too-big-to-fail problem with a multi-pronged approach. Under it, we are developing more-stringent prudential standards for banking firms with assets greater than $50 billion and all nonbank financial firms designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council. These more-stringent standards will include stronger capital and leverage requirements, liquidity requirements, and single-counterparty credit limits, as well as requirements to periodically produce resolution plans and conduct stress tests. Our goal is to produce a well-integrated set of rules that meaningfully reduces the probability of failure of our largest, most complex financial firms and that minimizes the losses to the financial system and the economy if such a firm should fail. In doing so, we aim to force these firms to take into account the costs that they impose on the broader financial                                                  2 This group replaces the former Thrift Institution Advisory Council, which provided the Board with useful information from the perspective of thrift institutions and credit unions. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches system, soak up the implicit subsidy these firms enjoy due to market perceptions of their systemic importance, and give the firms regulatory incentives to shrink their systemic footprint.  Complementing these efforts, the Federal Reserve has been working for some time with other regulatory agencies and central banks around the world to design and implement a stronger set of prudential requirements for large, internationally active banking firms. These efforts include the agreements reached in December on the major elements of the new Basel III prudential framework for large, globally active banks. Basel III should make the financial system more stable and reduce the likelihood of future financial crises by requiring large banks to hold more and better-quality capital and more-robust liquidity buffers. A more stable financial system will benefit all banking institutions and, of course, our economy as a whole. We are working to adopt the Basel III framework in the United States in a timely manner.  A central issue that we and the other banking agencies face in implementing Basel III in the United States is deciding how these capital rules will be applied for banks that are not systemic or internationally active. We recognize the importance of striking the right balance between promoting safety and soundness throughout the banking system and keeping the compliance costs for smaller banking firms as low as possible. Also, to minimize the impact of the new capital rules on credit availability while the global economy is still recovering, we and our international colleagues have agreed to allow long transition periods for the implementation of the new standards.  In addition to stricter regulation and supervision of large financial firms, the Dodd-Frank Act places new checks on the growth by acquisition of our major financial firms. It expands current restraints on acquisitions by bank holding companies to include a broader range of acquired firms (not just banks) and a broader range of liabilities (not just deposits). This expansion reflects a financial system that has changed in important ways since 1994, when the Congress first adopted concentration limits for banks and bank holding companies.  The act also imposes new restrictions on the capital markets activities of banking firms – restrictions that will disproportionately affect the structure and profitability of the largest banking firms. For example, the so-called Volcker rule will restrict the ability of banking firms to engage in proprietary trading of securities and derivatives and to invest in or sponsor private investment funds.  Among the most important aspects of act are the measures that it authorizes to reduce the financial and economic effects of the failure of large firms. A clear lesson of the past few years is that the government must not be forced to choose between bailing out a systemically important firm and having it fail in a disorderly and disruptive manner. Instead, we need the tools to resolve a failing firm in a manner that preserves market discipline – by ensuring that shareholders and creditors incur losses and that culpable managers are replaced – and that at the same time cushions the broader financial system from the possibly destabilizing effects of the firm’s collapse. Of course, such a framework has been in place for banks for several decades now, as you know. The Dodd-Frank Act creates an analogous framework for systemically important nonbank financial firms, including bank holding companies. Resolving a large, multinational financial firm safely will likely always be a difficult challenge, and a great deal of work remains to be done to make these new authorities fully effective. Ultimately, though, these changes will mitigate moral hazard in our financial system by reducing expectations of government support by the creditors and counterparties of large firms. Taken together, the measures I have described should give us a financial system that is safer, more efficient, and more equitable.  In short, two key objectives of financial regulatory reform are, first, addressing the problems that emerged in the largest, most complex financial firms during the crisis and, second, creating a better balance with respect to regulation and oversight between banks and nonbank financial firms. The Federal Reserve believes that these are the right goals for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 reform. We are committed to working with the other U.S. financial regulatory agencies to implement the act and related reforms in a manner that both achieves the law’s key objectives and appropriately takes into account the risk profiles and business models of smaller banking firms, including community banks.  Before I conclude my remarks, let me say a few words about the transfer of thrift holding company supervisory authority to the Federal Reserve. We have been working closely with the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to make this transfer as smooth as possible, and progress so far has been good. The Federal Reserve believes that any company that controls a depository institution should be held to appropriate prudential standards, including those for capital, liquidity, and risk management. As such, we intend to create an oversight regime for thrift holding companies that is consistent with, and is as rigorous as, the supervisory regime we apply to bank holding companies. That said, we appreciate that thrift and bank holding companies differ in important ways, play different roles in our economy, and will remain governed by different statutes. We will be mindful of these differences and of the unique characteristics of the thrift industry as we develop our supervisory approach to thrift holding companies.  Conclusion My colleague, Governor Duke, recently told our examiners that “community bankers are creative, committed, stubborn, and resilient.” I know she won’t mind my repeating that sentiment here, and I’m sure most of the community bankers in this room would wear those words as a badge of honor. Community banks face substantial challenges in the months and years to come, including still-difficult economic conditions, continued uncertainties in real estate and other key markets, and a changing regulatory environment. But community banks have faced difficult times before, and the industry has remained vibrant and resilient. I am confident that community banking will successfully navigate these new challenges as well. Thank you for what you do every day to meet the needs of your communities and to help our economy grow stronger.    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Andrew Sentance: Let it grow – how monetary policy can support sustainable economic growth Speech by Mr Andrew Sentance, External Member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England, at the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) East of England Annual Lunch, Horringer, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, 22 March 2011. All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches. *      *      * I would like to thank Tomasz Wieladek and Adrian Chiu for research assistance and I am also grateful for helpful comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I am delighted to have the opportunity to address this year’s CBI East of England annual lunch. In my time as a member of the Monetary Policy Committee, I have particularly appreciated the opportunity to talk to businesses and business groups around the UK. As an economist with strong roots in the business world, I place great weight on the input that the MPC receives from the business community, which we get from a wide variety of sources – including business surveys and the reports from the Bank’s Agents. But there is no substitute for visiting individual companies and meeting business groups to gauge economic sentiment at the grass roots level around the country. It is a great strength of the MPC that regional visits are a key part of the activities of all members of the Committee. And in the four and a half years I have spent as a member of the Committee, I estimate that I have visited around 140 individual businesses and talked to around 100 business groups – across England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.1 There are two reasons why I am particularly pleased to speak at today’s lunch. First of all, the East of England is my home region as I live in Essex and have done so for over a quarter of a century now. Second, I am always delighted to speak on a CBI platform as the seven and a half years that I spent as a CBI economist in the late 1980s and the early 1990s was a very important and formative period in my career. I have a great respect for the work of the CBI which remains the pre-eminent business organisation in the UK.  That period I spent working in the CBI’s Economics Department about twenty years ago was also a period of major economic turbulence in the UK. I joined the CBI in September 1986, just as the “Lawson Boom” was getting underway. And I was the CBI’s Director of Economic Affairs from 1989 until the end of 1993 as boom turned to bust and the UK economy went through the last major recession before the global financial crisis of 2008/9. We also went through a great deal of upheaval on the policy front – with a major surge in inflation in the 1980s, joining the ERM in 1990 and then leaving it two years later, and also having to deal with a very large public sector deficit in the wake of the early 1990s recession. Perhaps when I was appointed to the MPC in 2006, twenty years after I joined the CBI, alarm bells should have been ringing in the business community. Both my periods of involvement with national economic policy-making have coincided with periods of major economic turbulence in the UK economy! Maybe you can take some comfort from the fact that my term on the MPC finishes at the end of May – which should usher in a calmer period for the UK economy and policy-making if past experience is any guide! From a personal point-of-view, however, this has been a fascinating period to be involved with UK economic policy-making. In my view, the actions taken by the MPC from the autumn of 2008 and through 2009 played a key role in stabilising the UK economy in the face of the                                                  1  MPC members typically undertake 2-day regional visits which include around 4 in-depth discussions with individual companies and 3 meetings with groups of business executives. Since I joined the Committee in October 2006, I have undertaken 35 regional visits of this sort. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches negative and destructive forces created by the global financial crisis. But now that we have passed the worst phase of that crisis, a reassessment of policy is needed. I have been arguing for some time that we should be gradually removing some of the monetary stimulus provided in the depths of the recession by raising interest rates to reflect the improvement in the economy at home and abroad and to counter the rather worrying tendency of inflation to run significantly above the 2% target set by the government. In recent months, however, there have been concerns about the sustainability of the UK economic recovery which might seem to weaken this case for higher interest rates. The GDP data for the final quarter of last year were disappointing, even allowing for the impact of the snow, and there are worries about the impact of fiscal tightening as it begins to have an impact through public spending restraint and higher VAT. There are also concerns about volatility on the international scene, with political instability in the Middle East and North Africa and the effects of the earthquake and tsunami on Japan, the world’s third largest economy. In today’s speech I want to discuss the growth of the UK economy over the current recovery and how it should be reflected in the MPC’s decisions on monetary policy. I will aim to cover three topics: first, the progress of the economic recovery to date; second, the prospects for UK economic growth looking ahead over the next couple of years; and third, and most crucially, the role of monetary policy in supporting sustainable economic growth in the UK economy over the economic cycle. The current recovery – progress to date Economic recoveries are normally uneven – particularly in their early stages – and we should not be surprised to see significant fluctuations in the GDP growth rate from quarter to quarter. We have seen this in previous recoveries, with the quarterly rises in GDP fluctuating from zero to 1.5% in the first three years of the 1980s recovery and from –0.2% to 1.4% in the equivalent period when the UK economy was recovering in the early 1990s.2 In this context, the performance of the UK economy over the recovery so far does not look unusual. Before the snow arrived at the end of the year, we had four quarters of economic growth in which the rise in GDP fluctuated from 0.3% to 1.0%. In fact, until the snow-affected fourth quarter, the growth of the UK economy over the first year of this recovery was stronger than in the equivalent period of the early 1980s and early 1990s recoveries. As Chart 1 shows, UK GDP grew by 2.5% in the year following the trough of output in the third quarter of 2009, compared with 2.0% growth following the trough in the early 1980s and a rise of just 0.5% in GDP in 1991/92.3 Manufacturing industry has performed particularly strongly, benefiting from the global recovery and a competitive pound, and the recent annual growth of manufacturing output has been the strongest recorded since 1994.                                                  2  Initial estimates of GDP growth made in the 1980s and 1990s were even more volatile, with quarterly GDP changes fluctuating from –1.8% to +2.3% in the first three years of the 1980s recovery and from –0.8% to +1.2% in the early phase of the 1990s recovery. 3  Growth was stronger in the first year of sustained recovery in the second half of 1992 and the first half of 1993, but this was later in the cycle (ie longer after the cyclical peak) than the other periods shown in Chart 1. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Chart 1 – Early recoveries compared Annual percentage growth in the four quarters after cycle trough 0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0GDPManufacturingServices1980s (81Q1-82Q1)1990s (91Q3-92Q3)Current (09Q3-10Q3) Source: ONS  However, confidence in the progress of the recovery has been affected by the most recent GDP release which showed a fall in output in the final quarter of last year. We know that growth in December was heavily affected by the snowy weather but there are also concerns that the economy may have slowed for other reasons. We would have to wait until April for the next quarter’s GDP data, but even when this arrives it will be a very provisional estimate. So it makes sense to look at other data sources to gauge the pace of recovery – notably the employment figures and business survey information, which also have the benefit of being less subject to data revision. The employment data broadly support the view that the underlying momentum of growth has remained healthy despite the impact of December’s weather on activity levels. Unlike the early 1980s and the early 1990s, when unemployment continued to rise in the early phases of the recovery and the jobless rate rose to over 10%, we have seen a much earlier turnaround in employment in this recovery. Employment picked up in the first half of last year and has risen by nearly 300,000 since last winter.4 More recently, jobs growth has eased off with falling public sector employment offsetting increases in the private sector. But the official Labour Force Survey unemployment rate has remained at around 8% or just below since the recovery started in the second half of 2009. Indeed, the most recent figure we have for unemployment – the claimant count number for February – indicates the lowest jobless total on that measure for almost two years.                                                  4  The total number in employment (aged 16+) increased by 296,000 between the three months Nov 2009–January 2010 and Nov 2010 to Jan 2011, according to the latest labour Force Survey. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Chart 2 – Employment intentions*  Bank of England Agents’ scores -5-4-3-2-10123200020012002200320042005200620072008200920102011ManufacturingServices *: Employment intention scores reflect firms’ expected changes in workforce size over the next 6 months. Source: Bank of England  Vacancy levels are also holding up well and employment surveys – such as the Bank of England’s Agents’ survey also show a reasonably positive picture for employment intentions, as Chart 2 shows. Business surveys from the early months of this year are also consistent with a continuing economic recovery. In the manufacturing sector, all the major business surveys published in the early months of this year – from the CBI, the British Chambers of Commerce, and purchasing managers – are showing record or near-record responses for output and orders, consistent with the strong growth reported by the official output figures. Indeed, the latest CBI Monthly Trends Enquiry of manufacturers, released today, shows one of the strongest responses for expected output growth that we have seen in the past two decades. But – sadly – manufacturing industry is now a small proportion of the UK economy. The overall level of economic activity in the UK is dominated by the services sector and here the picture is more mixed. However, a good survey barometer of the services sector is probably provided by the purchasing managers’ index which is published every month. The latest survey shows that after a dip in December, services activity returned to growth in the early months of this year (see Chart 3). The rate of growth in the services sector indicated by recent business surveys is not as strong as we saw in the period before the recession. But that should not be a surprise. The services sector is more heavily dependent on domestic consumer demand than manufacturing, and therefore the impact of higher VAT and other imported price rises may be more noticeable in the short-term. It is also worth noting that services growth was particularly strong from the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s, growing much faster than manufacturing and other sectors of the UK economy.5 With the economy rebalancing and the manufacturing sector now performing more strongly, we should not expect services growth to return to the strong rate seen before the global financial crisis.                                                   5  The output of the UK services sector rose at an annual rate of 3.8% between 1995 and 2007, compared with 2.9% average growth across the economy as a whole over this period. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Chart 3 – CIPS survey activity balances Index of activity (above 50 indicates expansion) 3035404550556065200020012002200320042005200620072008200920102011ManufacturingServicesExpansionContraction Source: The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply  UK economic growth prospects  Looking ahead to this year and next, current forecasts for economic growth are relatively subdued at present. The latest CBI forecast, for example, predicts growth of 1.8% this year and 2.3% next year and these figures are very close to the current Consensus Forecasts of growth for this year and next – 1.9% in 2011 and 2.1% in 2012. Most forecasters expect the manufacturing sector to continue to perform strongly, supported by strong growth across the world economy. Chart 4 – UK and world economic growth Annual percentage change in real GDP -6-4-20246198919911993199519971999200120032005200720092011UKWorld (UK trade-weighted) Note: 2011 growth rate for the UK are consensus forecasts; those for the world are IMF forecasts. Source: ONS, IMF World Economic Outlook, Consensus Economics 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches While the impact of the recent Japanese earthquake and tsunami is very tragic and we are likely to see continued political turbulence in Middle East and North Africa, I would expect these developments to have only short-term effects on global growth. The economies of Asia and other emerging markets are likely to continue to provide strong momentum to global growth, and the gradual recovery which is emerging in the United States and continental Europe should continue to gather momentum. As Chart 4 shows, the growth of the UK economy follows quite closely the trade-weighted average of our major trading partners – and the IMF and other economic forecasters are projecting the continuation of relatively strong growth across the world economy this year and next. Business investment should also be a positive force for growth over the next couple of years. The latest CBI Industrial Trends Survey showed the strongest investment intentions in manufacturing industry since 1997 and the Bank of England Agents’ reports also indicate healthy investment intentions (see Chart 5), in both the manufacturing and services sectors. Many companies are dusting off investment plans that they put on hold in 2008 as the economy moved into recession, and the latest GDP figures show a 10% rise in business investment has already taken place over the past year. Chart 5 – Investment intentions* Bank of England Agents’ scores -5-4-3-2-101234200020012002200320042005200620072008200920102011ManufacturingServices *: Investment intention scores reflect firms’ expected expenditure over the next 12 months. Source: Bank of England  So if the world economy is growing healthily and investment is rebounding, why is UK economic growth expected to be so disappointing? The answer lies in the outlook for public and private consumption. It is not surprising that public sector spending will act as a dampener on the growth of the UK economy as the government rebalances its finances. We experienced a similar phenomenon in the mid-1990s as the economy recovered from the early nineties recession. But in that episode, private consumption was more resilient, increasing at an annual rate of 3% a year in the five years 1993–97. Most forecasters are currently much more downbeat on private consumption, and a similar view underpins the Bank of England’s Inflation Report forecast. An important contributor to the weakness of private consumption – particularly this year – is the squeeze on household incomes from high inflation. Indeed, in money terms, household consumer spending rose by over 5% last year – the strongest nominal consumption growth 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 since 2000. But the squeeze from rising prices limited the real growth to less than 1%. With consumer price inflation remaining high, this pattern is likely to continue through this year. Most forecasters are assuming that there will be limited upward pressure on wages from high inflation in the short-term, partly because of the downward influence of relatively high unemployment and partly because the rise in inflation is expected to be temporary. The latest consensus forecast is for average earnings growth to pick up to 3% by 2012 from the current underlying rate of increase of 2.3%. However, Income Data Services are already reporting that pay settlements have moved up to 2.8% in the private sector, pushed up by a number of pay deals linked to the Retail Prices Index. In my judgement, there are upside risks to both inflation and consumption growth from a stronger rebound in wage growth as the recovery proceeds. This is one of the reasons – though not the only one – why I believe that the current Inflation Report forecast that inflation will fall back to the 2% target is relatively optimistic. The behaviour of wages and consumption will therefore be an important influence on the outlook for both growth and inflation over the next couple of years, and this is clearly an area that the Monetary Policy Committee is monitoring closely. With imported price pressures and VAT adding to inflation in the short-term, we should not be surprised to see a squeeze on real incomes and relatively subdued consumer spending in the first half of this year. But if wage increases start to pick up more than current forecasts suggest in response to persistently high headline inflation, we are likely to see some combination of stronger consumption growth and higher medium term inflation. This scenario, which I see as quite likely, would reinforce the case for raising UK interest rates to head off inflationary pressures. Economic growth and UK monetary policy The UK’s monetary policy framework is focussed on the objective of price stability, which is currently defined in terms of a 2% target for CPI inflation. There are good reasons why we have made the achievement of price stability the centrepiece of monetary policy here in the UK, and why many other countries follow the same approach. While monetary policy can affect the growth rate of the economy in the short term, over the medium to long term, economic growth is driven by supply side factors – enterprise, innovation, investment and skills. Attempts to boost growth solely by loose monetary policy policies – which we experienced in the 1970s and the late 1980s – ended up creating greater economic instability and almost certainly hampered longer-term growth prospects. The best contribution that monetary policy can make to supporting the underlying forces of growth is therefore by fostering a climate of stability – primarily in terms of the level of prices but also by seeking to promote a relatively stable demand climate and by avoiding potentially destabilising lurches in policy. As I have already noted, the need to stabilise the UK economy in the face of a massive global financial shock in late 2008 and early 2009 fully justified the large cuts in Bank Rate and the injections of Quantitative Easing that the MPC made at that time. But now the economy is growing again and inflation is running persistently above the 2% target, such a large degree of monetary stimulus is no longer appropriate and is in danger of creating more instability in growth and inflation, rather than stabilising the economy as monetary policy should.  One justification which is frequently used for maintaining current monetary policy settings is the “output gap” model of the inflation process. According to this view of the world, stabilising growth and keeping inflation on target are two sides of the same coin. Weak growth builds up a margin of spare capacity which then pushes down on inflation, whereas strong growth is more likely to be associated with above capacity working and a build-up of inflationary pressures. The UK economy appeared to conform to this model for the first decade of the MPC, but recently it has broken down and is no longer acting as a reliable guide to policy-setting. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches In a speech last month, I set out the reasons why this might be the case.6 First, the relationship between spare capacity and inflationary pressures may be much more complex than the simple model suggests – particularly in the services sector which now dominates the UK economy. Second, the very accommodative policies we pursued in the depths of the recession allowed companies to pass through cost increases and may have encouraged companies to believe they have more pricing power than in the past. We have seen further evidence of this today in the very strong price expectations which are continuing to be registered by manufacturers in the CBI survey. And, third, the UK is a very open international economy. Global price pressures and the value of the pound appear to be having a greater impact on our inflation rate than the domestic margin of spare capacity. There are other criticisms which can be made of the “output gap” view of the world. Measures of the “output gap” are frequently revised, partly because of GDP data revisions and partly because of changes in our view of where the trend or capacity level of output truly lies. For both these reasons, the “output gap” is notoriously difficult to measure in real time.7 Indeed, there have been quite significant revisions to the GDP profile of the early 1990s recession from the initial estimates. And we have already seen some revision to the GDP data through this recession and recovery – for example the rise in 2009 fourth quarter GDP growth has been revised up from a provisional estimate of 0.1% to 0.5% in the space of just twelve months. For all these reasons, I believe we need to be particularly wary of basing monetary policy at present on fine judgements about the current and future growth of the economy. The MPC’s remit is clearly couched in terms of keeping consumer price inflation on target and we have a responsibility to take action when we see the sort of significant upside deviations we have experienced, not just recently, but over a number of years now.  Most of the evidence suggests that recovery is underway and it is likely to continue, even though the pace of growth is somewhat uncertain. There are upside risks to the growth outlook as well as downside concerns. The world economy is growing strongly and this is a major factor underlying current inflationary pressures from global energy and commodity prices. And a stronger response of wage growth to current high headline inflation could support stronger growth of consumption than most forecasters currently expect. We have entered a period of UK monetary policy-making when the judgements made by the MPC are much less straightforward than they appeared to be before the financial crisis. The global climate is now more inflationary and it seems unlikely that the margin of spare capacity in the UK economy will prevent current inflationary pressures from becoming embedded, without monetary policy being tightened. We have heard the news today that CPI inflation has risen again – to 4.4% – and it could easily rise above 5% later this year. Once businesses and individuals come to expect higher inflation – and there are increasing signs that they are beginning to do so – these expectations will be much harder to dislodge.  In this environment, with inflation running very considerably above its target level and set to rise further, failure to take timely monetary policy action risks a more abrupt and destabilising rise in interest rates in the future. That is surely something which the businesses represented here today would not want to see. And that could be a much bigger threat to future economic growth than the gradual increases in interest rates which I have been arguing for since the middle of last year.                                                  6  See Sentance (2011). 7  This is a point repeatedly made by Orphanides. See his recent comments in Orphanides (2011), for example. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 References Orphanides, A. (2011) “The role of central banks – lessons from the crisis” Panel remarks at the VI International Symposium of the Banque de France on 4 March 2011. Sentance, A. (2011) “The UK’s Inflation Problem: Selling England by the Pound?” Speech at to the IEA State of the Economy Conference on 17 February 2011. 
Michael Mambo Mukete: Role of the Bank of Namibia in consumer protection issues Speech by Mr Michael Mambo Mukete, Assistant Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the launch of Namibia Consumer Trust, Windhoek, 15 March 2011. *      *      * Director of Ceremonies, and the Executive Director of Namibia Trust – Mr Michael Gawaseb,  The Chairperson of Namibia Consumer Trust – Mr Sandi Tjarondo,  The Board of Trustees of Consumer Rights Trust,  Distinguished Invited Guests,  Members of the Media,  Ladies and Gentlemen,  It is my great pleasure to be here today to witness the launch of Namibia Consumer Trust. My research indicates that this Trust is the first of its kind set up to advocate for the rights of consumers in Namibia. The launch comes at the most opportune time when many Namibians are finding themselves without appropriate avenues to find redress when their rights are infringed and often feel powerless to stand up against giants in the business and the financial sector. It is with this view in mind that the Bank of Namibia regards this initiative as a welcomed development at a time when concerted efforts are made to assess the regulatory landscape for consumer protection measures. This is because there are dozens pieces of laws developed many decades ago, and most of them surely have outlived their usefulness. It will therefore take much determined effort and coordination not only from the audience in this room, but also across sectoral regulators and Government Institutions to address the inefficacies in our existing laws. It is worth noting that the Law Reform And Development Commission has already issued public invitation to this effect and I wish to urge you all to participate in this indispensable exercise.  Director of ceremonies, Ladies and gentlemen  Allow me to ask a very rhetoric question, why should Financial Regulators be concerned about the right of consumers of financial services?  Lack of information – or “information asymmetry” between consumers and Financial Services Providers places customers at a disadvantage. Consumer protection therefore seeks to level the playing field between suppliers and consumers of financial services. Financial services are in fact often complicated, while often involving large amounts of money for individuals. It is true that the need for consumer protection is not unique to the financial area. Nevertheless, there is a considerable difference in degree compared with most other areas, partly because it is often difficult even with hindsight to assess the quality of the financial services.  In the Namibian case, the challenge we are facing is not only to protect the existing customers, but we need to put more effort in bringing the estimated 51% of the population excluded from the mainstream of financial services. It is against that background, that the Bank of Namibia has recognized the need to advocate for financial inclusion as one of its new key strategic focus. Director of Ceremonies, empirical research reveals that financial exclusion allied phenomenon are amongst others; lack of financial education, lack of consumer protection and therefore, financial discrimination; and the lack of suitable products and services. My speech today will focus mainly on consumer protection as the Ministry of Finance is going to present our collective strategy on financial literacy.  BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
Director of Ceremonies, Ladies and Gentlemen,  Let me inform you of the role of the Bank of Namibia on consumer protection issues arising from financial services providers falling within its purview. There are many pieces of legislations directly administered by the Bank, which have a bearing on consumer protection. I will highlight them later in my speech when I introduce some of our initiatives and strategies aimed specifically to consumer of banking services. These laws allow the Bank, to among others, act as the prudential regulator and supervisor of commercial banks to ensure that customers’ deposits and investments of are safe. Concomitantly, the Bank ensures that through its banking licensing process only “fit and proper” persons are permitted to own and manage banking institutions to prevent potential depositors to loose their money from scrupulous persons.  Director of Ceremonies, I am equally honoured to express myself on some of the current and future initiatives pursued by the Bank of Namibia in the area of consumer protection. These include the recent enactment of the Banking Institutions Amendment Act of 2010, which enables the Bank to recommend to the Minister of Finance to issue regulations on unfair terms in contracts between commercial banks and their customers. By its very nature, banking services often require that customers enter into agreements with banks. Sometimes unaware of their rights and without having been afforded an opportunity to study and agree to certain contractual terms and conditions, customers in their desperation for services sign these contracts, which in the end bind them for extended periods. These contracts are at present considered binding on customers, irrespective of how onerous, unreasonable or unexpected such terms might be.  As a banking regulator, the Bank of Namibia has an interest in encouraging standards of good banking practices whereby commercial banks act fairly and reasonably in relation to their customers. It is against this background that in addition to a possible regulation on unfair terms, the Bank is busy developing Code of Good Banking Practice. The Code shall set out the banking industry’s key commitments and obligations to customers on standards of practice, disclosure and principles of conduct in relation to banking services. Director of Ceremonies, in terms of the best practices, the Code shall provide that contract between the commercial banks and customers shall have a clear, plain and simple terms, for the understanding of which no special knowledge is required.  A very good example to draw from is when President Obama signed the new Credit Card Bill of Rights into law, he challenged the industry to create a simple, easy to understand credit card agreement that you “don’t need a law degree or a magnifying glass to understand.” This means eliminating provisions and confusing terminology used by lawyers for reasons of tradition or habit, replaces the legalistic with plain-language, and introduces information design to enhance readability and comprehension. It is thus the intention of the Bank that contracts should be simple, short, and preferable designed to fit on one or two pages.  The other key aspect of this Code will be to enforce good lending practices by banks to avoid over-indebtedness. Banks will, therefore, be expected to act in the best interest of its customers by ensuring that they Know and Understand the customer’s needs, only offer them products and services that are suitable to such needs, and provide them with information to enable them to make informed choices.  The Code will further require banks to have in place effective complaints handling procedures and appropriate timelines within which complaints should be dealt with. This also means that banks will be directed to be the first “port-of-call” to offer redress for customers, by having dedicated complaints desks to handle customer grievances.  At this juncture I wish to inform you that the Bank of Namibia, together with the Industry, will issue the said Draft Code of Good Banking Practice, during the course of this year for public comments. Therefore, Director of Ceremonies, I humbly request the audience present in this room to spend time and do justice to all consumer protection initiatives, which we 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 all agree are close to our hearts by providing extensive comments to the Bank on the Draft Consultative Paper.  Director of Ceremonies, Ladies and Gentlemen, The other initiative being pursued by both the Bank of Namibia and our sister Regulator, the Namibia Financial Institutions Supervisory Authority, is the establishment of Financial Services Ombuds Office, in terms of the Draft Financial Institutions and Markets Bill. This Office will be financed and resourced by the two institutions. It is expected to serve as an additional mechanism for redress for consumers who are aggrieved by their financial service providers.  Director of ceremonies, Ladies and Gentlemen In another attempt to protect the consumers, the Bank of Namibia wish to use this unique occasion to once again warn the consumers against the persistent mushrooming of pyramid schemes and related schemes. These types of entities have started to proliferate in Namibia and ordinary citizens are continuously lured with unbelievable testimonies of opportunities on how to get themselves out of poverty. The downside is however, that entire families, households and even pensioners are targeted and may loose their hard earned cash and suffer at the hands of these schemes. In our efforts to protect consumer and the general public, the Banking Institutions Amendment Act of 2010 made the participation and operation of such schemes a criminal offence.  Before I conclude, Director of Ceremonies, kindly permit me the opportunity to inform the audience that in 2010, the Payment System Management Amendment Act was promulgated giving the Bank the mandate and authority to regulate bank fees and charges where necessary. Thus, the Act enables the Bank of Namibia to set standards to protect consumers from being exploited through exorbitant fees and charges.  Chronologically, I am sure the audience will agree that the starting point should be cash deposit fees which are main barriers for the majority of people wanting to open or maintain accounts with commercial banks. Accordingly, it is the Bank of Namibia’s intention to focus on cash deposits fees for individuals and SMEs in 2011.The standard will also call for a compulsory introduction of a low-cost basic retail bank account, which should be treated as a public utility rather than a money making product for commercial banks. It is worth mentioning that some of the commercial banks already have in place a similar account. All these efforts, Ladies and Gentlemen, have built-in mechanisms geared towards enforcing consumer protection.  In conclusion, Director of Ceremonies, this initiative by Namibia Consumer Trust certainly has the potential to become the vehicle for large scale consumer protection initiatives. The Bank of Namibia is pleased to be associated with the launch of this initiative today. We are committed to maintaining and enhancing market confidence in a strong, fair and progressive way, but we cannot do this alone. Regulation is a complex balancing act and it is only through collaboration with other regulators, the industry and consumers that we can make it work for the financial system as a whole.  The Bank believes that a strong relationship with the Consumer Trust will enhance the important role you will play in influencing policy and strategic outcomes. My final message in this context is, therefore, an invitation to consider how we can support each other and develop stronger relationships, communicating with consumers together at a grassroots level to ensure that they are in a position to make informed and confident financial decisions.  I am sure it was long and difficult road to get where you are today, and the launch will certainly not remove all obstacles on the road ahead. I therefore wish to urge you to continue working hard towards your objectives of protecting and educating consumers in Namibia of their rights in all sectors of the economy.  Director of Ceremonies, Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for your kind attention. 
Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Living with capital flows – a delicate balancing act Speech by Mr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the 5th Annual Euromoney Thailand Investment Forum, Living with capital flows: a delicate balancing act, Bangkok, 22 March 2011. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, It’s an honor to speak before you today in the 5th Annual Euromoney Thailand Investment Forum. Since yesterday, you must have already heard many interesting discussions about Thailand’s prospects. Here, I would like to reaffirm that Thailand is indeed on a recovery path. Over a longer horizon, the prospects of ASEAN integration and the rise of Asia are also offering causes for optimism. As international investors, you naturally would want to participate in Thailand’s exciting prospects. Before putting more money into Thailand, however, I suspect that you would want to understand our macro-policy environment. Our recovery has been gaining momentum, and the central bank has been echoing more vigilance regarding inflationary pressures. Meanwhile, the global environment suggests that more capital is likely to flow into our economy. In this complex situation, I believe that you might want to know what the central bank’s view and stance are. Since the majority of you are in the capital markets, the focus of my talk today will be related to capital inflows. Capital inflows have always been and will continue to be welcomed into Thailand. Indeed, capital inflows have been vital for Thailand’s development. For the past 30 years, capital inflows have helped finance our country’s productive capacities and thus helped raise the standard of living for millions of Thais. Going forward, more capital is expected to flow into the region for at least two reasons, namely, the growth differential between emerging Asia and advanced economies and the changing nature of global liquidity.  On the first reason, the strong growth momentum in Asia is likely to draw in more capital. This factor is especially strong as advanced economies continue to cope with legacies from the crisis. In contrast, Asia has survived the global crisis relatively well. Recent numbers show that Asia’s growth during the past year has been driven by both external and internal demand. For this year, the momentum is expected to continue, while the rapid growth of the middle class in large Asian economies such as China and India makes the prospect of intra-regional demand even more hopeful over the longer horizon. Another development worth noting is the changing nature of global liquidity, in particular, the increase in fluidity that is likely to push capital flow into emerging Asia more easily but could also lead to easier capital flow reversals when conditions change. This rise in fluidity of global liquidity seems to have its roots, at least in part, in the macro policies of advanced economies. Specifically, large fiscal debts and quantitative easing in advanced economies help contribute to the rising fluidity. First, large fiscal burdens in many advanced economies have altered the risk profile of the supposedly risk-free assets such as their government securities. As the line between traditionally risk-free and riskier assets becomes blurred, investors would be more willing to search for yields and switch back and forth between assets more easily. Second, although the money used by advanced economies’ central banks to purchase securities has ended up mainly in the banking system for the time being, quantitative easing does help raise investors’ risk appetite. On the one hand, QE is likely to make the BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
recovery of advanced economies a bit firmer through improved consumer and business sentiment. With that, investors’ risk-appetite has risen, driving investors to riskier assets, including commodities and emerging market securities. On the other hand, QE drives down yields in advanced economies. The combination of rising risk-appetite and low yields in advanced economies pushes investors to search for higher yields elsewhere and thus makes commodities and emerging market securities more attractive. Of course, we must note here that despite the altered risk profiles, government securities of advanced economies are likely to remain the ultimate safe haven assets. As such, portions of capital flows could reverse themselves very easily when risk appetite wanes. Experiences have shown that the so-called “risk aversion” episode could coincide with large withdrawals of funds from emerging markets back to advanced economies. These fluctuations in capital flows could potentially pose important challenges for emerging markets. While capital inflows are generally beneficial, they are by no means cost-free. Potentially, large inflows of capital can lead to exchange rate overshooting, hurting some segments of the real sector that may have trouble adjusting. Moreover, they could seep into speculative activities and drive up asset prices. Especially vulnerable are the real estate and equity markets. As these markets heat up, more capital inflows often find their ways in, creating potential bubbles. Invariably as the bubbles burst, balance sheets of firms, individuals, banks as well as the government will be affected. The burst of these bubbles, when coupled with capital outflows, could have devastating effects. The Asian crisis over a decade ago is a good reminder for us. Currently, the Bank of Thailand has a set of tools at its disposal to help the economy deal effectively with capital inflows. These tools include (1) the flexible exchange rate and foreign exchange market intervention, (2) macro-prudential measures, and (3) capital account regulations. Together, these tools are indeed powerful, and a careful coordination is required when using them. Let me briefly elaborate on the use of each. In our framework, a flexible exchange rate is a core tool, since it can act as an automatic stabilizer towards capital inflows in general. As capital pours in, especially if driven by favorable growth potential of the economy, a flexible exchange rate can act as an automatic stabilizer that would help lessen the chance of overheating and dampen pressures on other asset prices which otherwise might turn into a bubble. Exchange rate adjustments in the face of large capital inflows, however, are not without costs. An excessively rapid appreciation of the currency could be disruptive to the real economy, since there often are constraints in the adjustments of the real economy, from labor market frictions to pricing behaviors.  Here we have a challenge and need to balance well. In general, we would allow the currency to appreciate to the extent that the movements are broadly consistent with the economic fundamentals and that they would not cause undue disruptions in the real sector. Let me note here that I think the Thai economy, over the years, has become more capable in coping with exchange rate movements. We see more risk protection via financial market instruments on the part of the private sector. Exporters, in particular, have been able to diversify in terms of product lines and market destinations.  Nevertheless, from time to time there is still a need to dampen the pressures on the exchange rate, and central banks often resort to exchange rate intervention. While such intervention could help contain excess exchange rate volatility, its focus is at the end of the process. In other word, FX intervention is a “passive” mechanism in dealing with capital inflows. By the time of intervention, capital would have already flowed into the economy. Imbalances could have already built up. Furthermore, if market expectations of upside currency gains persist, it could invite even more capital inflows, along with greater pressures on the exchange rate and higher chances of imbalance buildups in the future. For the real economy, it may delay some of the necessary adjustments. Finally, FX intervention is not costless. We have to fund the intervention with local interest rates that are higher than what we would earn from our international reserves. 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Experiences have also shown that, even after a large appreciation of the currency, capital inflows could still seep in and fuel speculative activities in markets such as real estate and equity. To help deal with specific pockets of the economy showing signs of potential bubbles, macro-prudential measures could be used. A recent example is the risk-weights adjustment related to the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio of loans made to property purchases.  While macro-prudential measures aim to help lessen the effects of capital that has already flowed into the economy, capital account regulations can be used to deal directly with the size and type of incoming and outgoing flows. With an aim of creating more balanced capital flows, the Bank of Thailand has continued to liberalize our capital outflows, while on the inflow side we at times resort to tighter regulations when the situation deems necessary. Implementing a capital account regulation, or less of it, requires a delicate balancing act. For outflow liberalization, on the one hand allowing more Thai resident outflows is beneficial as it helps lessen upward pressure on the currency as well as improve the investment profile of the Thai private sector toward a more diversified and possibly more efficient one. On the other hand, if risk assessment capacity of local investors remains low, too rapid outflow liberalization could make the country’s balance sheet more vulnerable rather than more robust. A balancing act is even more difficult when applying re-regulation on capital inflows. A measure that is too mild would lack effectiveness, while too drastic a measure would be too costly. For one thing, its distortionary effects would be large; for another, increased policy uncertainty could turn away productive investors and raise the country’s risk premium. Aware of these undesirable side effects of controls, we would limit their use to only when absolutely necessary and only on a temporary basis.  On the use of interest rate policy, some may view the policy interest rate as another tool to deal with capital flows, and there have been public debates whether the recent hikes in the policy interest rate by the Bank of Thailand were consistent with our thinking on recent capital flow developments. Specifically, many have argued that the hikes would actually induce more capital inflows that add pressures on the currency. On this issue, let me say the following. Under inflation targeting, the policy interest rate is used primarily to help maintain price stability to achieve long-term balanced growth of the domestic economy. Designating the policy rate to another role, like managing capital flows, would then confuse its primary role, especially when the risk of overheating together with a surge in capital inflows presents policymakers with a dilemma. Thus, our interest rate policy is not meant to deal directly with capital flows. Its side effect on capital flows is, however, not to be ignored. A fine balancing act is also needed when it comes to making interest rate decision given this dilemma. Perceivably, large interest rate differential may be a push factor for capital flows. However, given relatively small interest rate differentials between Thailand and major economies, we view that a gradual increase in the policy rate should not in and of itself be a cause of further inflows. In fact, we have empirically found that other factors such as growth differential and global risk appetite and liquidity are far more important than interest rate differential in explaining the recent surge of capital inflows to the country. On the other hand, given the pickup in global and domestic demand recovery, the risk of inflation has recently materialized and posed increasing threat to domestic price stability. With all these considerations, we deem that the recent interest rate normalization was necessary and was consistent under our inflation targeting, while its impact on further capital inflows should be minimal. So let me recap our challenge. Capital inflows are beneficial but they are not cost-free. To help deal with capital inflows and their effects on the macro economy, we have the flexible exchange rate, macro-prudential measures, and various forms of capital account regulations as our tools, while the policy rate is preserved for its primary objective of domestic price stability. Each of the tools has its own advantages and disadvantages. To deal with this challenge, as you may already notice, a balanced use of tools is needed, and that balance could very well evolve over time. BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Ladies and Gentlemen, To live successfully with capital flows will require not only the central bank to do its work properly. For all of us at this Forum, I believe that we can make it easier for Thailand to cope with capital flows, at least partly, through capital market development. An efficient capital market is like a good irrigation system that helps channel flows into productive uses. Such a market, with enough breadth, could also become a shock-absorber towards capital inflows, quantity-wise, and would be a complement to the flexible exchange rate that acts as a “price-wise” shock absorber. A market that has a wide variety of products and instruments, varied types of investors, as well as competitive services will likely be more stable by itself and benefit us all. An efficient capital market is thus one we should aim to strive for.  I hope that I have so far convinced you that living with capital inflows is not easy and will require efforts from the public as well as private sector. Indeed, to successfully live with capital flows is a delicate task, as the title of this speech suggests. On my part, what I want to assure you is that we at the Bank of Thailand are aware of the interrelated issues and always take them into account when making a policy. Tough choices, however, will always have to be made. We will try our best to balance between different stakeholders’ needs. For you, as investors, we take to the point that you value policy transparency, and we aim to provide you as such, in addition to macro-stability which is our overriding mandate. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Mario Draghi: The euro – from the past to the future Address by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial Stability Board, at the Catholic University of the Sacred Heart (Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore), Milan, 21 March 2011. *      *      * The euro: an idea that goes back a long way  The idea of a single currency, in place of a congeries of local or national monies, did not gain much ground in modern Europe until the second half of the nineteenth century. Why was that? It would be natural to think that a universal currency is a timeless aspiration: to extend the traditional functions and therefore the advantages of money in the widest geographical sphere.  A possible explanation is the redistributive use that money had been put to over the centuries: in classical antiquity and then in the Middle Ages, adjusting the currency  – increasing or reducing the gold or silver content of metal coins – was often a way for the prince to appropriate resources; striking coins was an attribute of sovereignty. It took a long time to reach the point, in the nineteenth century, when the value of a monetary unit was defined solely by the quantity of precious metal it contained; paper money was declared convertible into metal; money had been “depoliticized”.  Thinking up monetary unions then became a possible exercise, as long as the candidates had the same standard: gold, silver or bimetallic; it was sufficient to agree on the fineness, the weight and the denomination of the coins to be put into circulation. A union of this kind, the Latin Monetary Union, inaugurated in 1865, brought together Italy, France, Switzerland, Belgium and Greece, but it had a difficult life and broke up, as a practical matter, at the beginning of the next century. The monetary unions realized within federal states – the Swiss and the German ones – fared better.  But the use of the currency for redistributing wealth did not come to an end. Despite the establishment and consolidation of technical institutions – the central banks – delegated to manage the issuance and circulation of money, the currency reverted, at least in wartime, to being an instrument of state financing. The transition to paper money facilitated this process. During the First World War, the Governor of the Bank of Italy, Bonaldo Stringher, noted that the Bank of Italy “has given a stimulus to banknote production equal to that received by the machine shops producing bullets”.1 In the 1920s and 1930s, marked by the Great Depression, the monetary instrument was returned, with the contribution of Keynes, to the toolkit of economic policy. The potential of this instrument prompted the central banks and the governments that controlled them to make ample use of it to manage the economic cycle but also as a means of more or less openly supporting the public finances. The height of this era was reached in the 1970s, a decade of high inflation. In Europe the Bundesbank basically protected the German economy from these excesses. There ensued a reconsideration of the role of the central banks and the objectives and instruments of monetary policy, whose findings would be used extensively in the period that followed right up to today.  In the 1950s the ruinous effects of the Second World War spurred a revival of interest in integration among the European economies, which would simultaneously be a means of promoting growth and ensuring peace. The creation of the European Common Market accompanied the period of the fastest economic growth ever experienced on the Continent.                                                  1  Banca d’Italia, Adunanza generale ordinaria degli azionisti, year 1918, p. 49 (only in Italian). 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches To buttress these results and, almost in a utopian spirit in the midst of international monetary disorder, plans were made for the single currency.  The 1970 Werner Report was the first official plan for European monetary union and, while it was never implemented, it paved the way twenty years later for the Delors Report, which, basing itself on the still limited experience of monetary cooperation realized in the meantime (the “snake” of the 1970s and the European Monetary System of the 1980s), planned the creation of the euro. This was made possible by an altered cultural climate, which viewed the independence of the central banks and price stability as the fundamental values upon which to base a sound currency.  The plan was propelled by personalities from a generation that harboured the memory of the ruins of war: Andreotti, Ciampi, Delors, Giscard d’Estaing, Kohl, Mitterrand and Schmidt, who were flanked by figures from the next generation, like Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa.  The Maastricht Treaty of 1992 created the institutions of modern monetary Europe, establishing the passage of monetary sovereignty to the European System of Central Banks. The System’s objective was defined clearly and with legislation having constitutional status  – taking a leaf from the German experience – as maintaining price stability, a value that became the common heritage of all citizens of the area. From this followed the basic principle that governments must not interfere in monetary policy; monetary financing of states was prohibited.  The euro has been with us since 1999 and, as an actually circulating currency, since 2002.  To achieve this outcome, in many countries major political obstacles had to be surmounted. In Italy, it was necessary to overcome society’s inurement to devaluations and inflation. There was no lack of academic scepticism, including from the other side of the Atlantic. There were doubts about the European economies ever being able to constitute an optimal currency area in Mundell’s terms.  The European monetary construction works. The euro is not in question.  The first twelve years of the euro  Today the euro is the second most important currency in the world: it accounts for 27 per cent of global currency reserves; before the Union, the currencies replaced by the euro together accounted for 18 per cent.  Between 1998 and 2010 the total value of imports and exports of goods within the euro area rose from 27 to 32 per cent of GDP. The greater volume of internal trade was not at the expense of that with the rest of the world, which recorded an even sharper increase, from 25 to 33 per cent, driven by the expansion of the emerging economies, more and more open to world trade.  Integrated infrastructures were created for payments in the area: for wholesale and retail payments and, in the near future, for the settlement of securities transactions. Between 1999 and 2008 the average daily volume of cross-border payments between euro-area countries via TARGET increased by almost 250 per cent; the average total volume of transactions, which includes domestic payments, grew by more than 120 per cent – more than four times greater than the growth recorded by the equivalent infrastructure in the United States.  Price stability is inscribed in the conduct of economic agents, even in countries which were previously the most inflationary, enhancing the legacy of the best traditions of the participating central banks. In the twelve years of the euro, annual inflation in the area has averaged just under 2 per cent, fully in line with the definition of price stability adopted by the Governing Council of the European Central Bank (ECB). It has fallen by more than one half compared with the previous two decades; the reduction was greater than that seen in the United States in the same period. In Italy, the average annual increase in consumer prices 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 was five percentage points lower than in the twenty-year period preceding the introduction of the euro.  Today exogenous price shocks have modest repercussions on the euro-area economies: the increases in oil prices between 2007 and 2008 were comparable, in real terms, to those at the end of the 1970s, but they generated a one-off rise in consumer prices of less than two percentage points, which did not take hold in inflation, in contrast to what happened in the past in several countries in the area. According to our estimates, the inflationary effect in Italy of a shock of this kind has been reduced to one tenth of what it was in the 1970s. Of course, structural changes in production processes have played a part, but the credibility earned by monetary policy and the resulting changes in price and wage setting have played a crucial role.  Price stability and low risk premiums lead to low nominal and real interest rates, thereby fostering economic growth. From the introduction of the euro to today, the real three-month interest rate in Italy has averaged 1 per cent, four percentage points lower than in the previous decade; the average nominal rate on bank loans for house purchases and that on short-term loans to non-financial firms have averaged 4.5 and 5.5 per cent respectively, compared with 11.3 and 12.6 per cent in the ten previous years. It is surely not the monetary conditions that are responsible for the growth difficulties of the Italian economy.  Again with reference to the twelve years of the euro, annual expenditure for interest payments on Italy’s public debt averaged 5.3 per cent of GDP, against 11.5 per cent in the first half of the 1990s and 7.5 per cent in the 1980s. It is still the case today that, despite strong pressures on the government securities markets of some of the countries of the area, the yields on Italian ten-year securities are in line with the averages recorded in the last decade.  The response of euro-area monetary policy to the global crisis of the last three years was rapid and decisive. Inflation expectations held firm even at the height of the crisis, allowing us to take action to keep the markets working, support lending and avert the collapse of the economy. Money market rates were reduced to close to zero; exceptional liquidity creation measures were adopted.  Without the Union, simply coordinating national decisions would not have produced such rapid and effective results. Some countries, including our own, could have been overcome by the crisis.  But the credibility we have earned will not necessarily last for ever; we have to remain vigilant in safeguarding price stability. The culture of stability must also be extended to other fields: to fiscal policy, to structural reform where weaknesses have emerged in the European construction, as they did clearly during the recent sovereign debt crisis.  The sovereign debt crisis of some euro-area countries  The strains spread outwards from Greece, where they had been generated by the disorder of that country’s public finances, and hit the Irish and Portuguese government securities markets last spring. Spanish and Italian government bonds have also seen their yield spreads widen with respect to the corresponding German securities.  The response of the European institutions and governments has followed a rough path.  The financial support plan for Greece, agreed at the beginning of May 2010 by the euro-area countries with the European Commission and the IMF, did not eliminate the tensions, which, on the contrary, spread to the stock, bond and interbank markets.  To contain the contagion risk posed to other countries, several days later the EU Council instituted a financial stabilization arrangement under which the countries of the area could get a loan at analogous conditions to those applied by the IMF in similar circumstances. It 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches was decided that the bulk of the resources would come from the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), a new body authorized to fund itself on the market by issuing securities guaranteed by the countries of the euro area. In the same days a number of countries adopted or announced drastic plans for the consolidation of public finances.  In the same month of May 2010, the Governing Council of the ECB came to the conclusion that the tensions in the markets were compromising the monetary policy transmission mechanism. It launched the Securities Markets Programme of purchases of public securities issued by euro-area countries with a view to supporting market segments hit especially hard by the crisis; and it confirmed its commitment to supply abundant liquidity to the system. This did not imply the monetary financing of sovereign states or the creation of liquidity; the interventions were temporary and sterilized.  This set of measures stemmed the tensions, which nevertheless began to intensify again during the summer and even more in the final part of the year, once more affecting not only Greek bonds but those of Portugal and especially of Ireland, which had issued a government guarantee for all bank liabilities. At the end of November the EU finance ministers approved a plan of financial support for Ireland.  This measure too helped to allay but did not eliminate the tensions, in a context of elevated uncertainty in the markets regarding the prospects of stabilization in the countries hit by the crisis and the possible interconnections between sovereign risks and the vulnerability of some banking systems.  The crisis originates from imbalances that in some countries concern the public finances, in others the banking system. Overcoming the difficulties first requires drastic, resolute national measures.  The stance of monetary policy has been expansionary for a long time: since May 2009 the Eurosystem’s reference interest rate has held at 1 per cent, an exceptionally low level; real short-term rates have remained negative by a wide margin even after the start of the cyclical recovery. The emergence of inflationary pressure calls for a careful evaluation of the timetable and manner in which to proceed with a normalization of monetary conditions. A deterioration of expectations must be prevented, to keep the impulse originating from international prices from being transmitted to domestic prices and wages and thereby influencing inflation beyond the short term. As President Trichet recalled on the occasion of the meeting at the beginning of March, the Governing Council of the ECB remains prepared to act in a firm and timely manner to ensure that these risks do not materialize.  We are following the tragic events in Japan with the closest and most heartfelt attention. The exchange rate interventions agreed on 18 March by the finance ministers and central bank governors of the G7 countries are intended to prevent excessive volatility of exchange rates from having adverse effects on economic and financial stability.  A construction to be strengthened  The sovereign debt crisis has brought to light at least two factors of fragility in European construction.  In the first place, the rules did not avert imprudent fiscal policies in some countries, which were either unable or unwilling to exploit the positive phases of the economic cycle in order to consolidate their public finances. Each country was given a specific medium-term objective for the budget position, agreed at European level: a position in balance or surplus, depending on its specific sensitivity to the economic cycle and to interest rates; the objective was subject to review in the light of long-term factors such as population ageing and the debt level. In addition, the countries whose public debt exceeded 60 per cent of GDP had to reduce it “at a satisfactory pace”. When the global crisis came, many countries were still far from achieving those objectives.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Second, the system of multilateral surveillance did not prevent pronounced macroeconomic imbalances: productivity differentials, current account deficits, excessive private sector borrowing. In 2009, the deficit on the current account of the balance of payments amounted to 10 per cent in Greece and 7.5 per cent in Portugal. In Ireland, Portugal and Spain, the financial debt of households and firms amounted to between one and a half and two times the euro-area average of 170 per cent of GDP (in Italy it was equal to 130 per cent). In Ireland, the largest national banks had balance-sheet assets totalling more than five times GDP; the collapse of property prices and the recession caused them huge losses.  Imbalances of this kind ultimately have repercussions on the public finances, even in countries where these are initially in order. In the Irish case, the public resources spent on supporting the banks came to more than 20 per cent of GDP.  Last autumn the European Commission and the working group led by European Council President Herman Van Rompuy put forward proposals concerning both aspects: how to make the Stability and Growth Pact more cogent; how to extend surveillance to macroeconomic developments.  It was proposed that the Pact be strengthened for the prevention of fiscal imbalances, by intensifying monitoring and introducing timely monetary sanctions, and for their adjustment, by providing in particular for the possibility of initiating the excessive-deficit procedure not only when the deficit exceeds 3 per cent of GDP but also when the reduction in the debt towards the 60 per cent ceiling is deemed unsatisfactory.  In the macroeconomic field, a system of monitoring imbalances having potentially significant implications for the euro area’s financial stability was envisaged, with quantitative indicators and critical thresholds based on which the European Council may issue recommendations to the country concerned and, in the most serious cases, apply financial sanctions.  Lastly, it was recommended that the EFSF be replaced from 2013 onwards by a permanent mechanism of financial support, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). Only the countries considered to be solvent would have access to financing, which would be conditional in any case on their adopting serious adjustment plans; the others would be asked to negotiate a debt restructuring plan with private creditors by which to return to a situation of solvency.  On 15 March the EU finance ministers agreed a “general approach” that fully implements the recommendations of the Commission and of the Van Rompuy working group. In particular, they approved the proposal to introduce a numerical rule – one twentieth of the debt-to-GDP ratio in excess of the 60 per cent ceiling – for the annual reduction of the debt.  Several days earlier the Heads of State and Government of the euro area had increased the effective lending capacity of the EFSF to €440 billion and set that of the future ESM at €500 billion; they also decided that in exceptional circumstances both the Fund and the Mechanism could purchase euro-area countries’ government securities on the primary market.  The pact for the euro, with all these measures, widens the focus of attention to include macroeconomic imbalances, strengthens budget discipline in the area, and improves the mechanism of support for countries that get into financial difficulty. This was a necessary step to avoid dangerously sapping the Community spirit that is the lifeblood of the euro.  The measures are based on correct principles. The technical and negotiating effort involved has been substantial; the results are encouraging but not yet sufficient. Discussion of the pact will continue in policymaking fora; deficiencies or points that are hazy can be corrected. Fiscal policy surveillance needs to rely on more automatic procedures that limit the politicization of public accounting as far as possible and avert possible collusive conduct between countries. Several other aspects of this complex reform of European governance still require attention and work. It is necessary, for example, to determine with precision all 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches the “relevant factors” to be considered in assessing the adequacy of the pace of public debt reduction; to identify the set of indicators serving to signal a situation of macroeconomic imbalance and the related critical thresholds; and to establish the criteria for evaluating a country’s solvency.  Concerning structural policies to boost potential output and competitiveness, the pact, for the time being, relies on procedures based on peer pressure, which in the case of the Lisbon strategy have not worked. The commitment of the national governments remains central.  We must not forget a golden rule: increasing the economy’s growth potential and consolidating the public budget are national priorities first of all. Governments should pursue them even independently of the European rules, for the good of their peoples, and should do so with special commitment in the countries farthest from these objectives.  Italy’s situation  Between 2008 and 2009, with the global crisis in full swing, Italy’s budget deficit rose from 2.7 to 5.4 per cent of GDP; discretionary policies did not contribute to the increase.2 The deficit of the euro area as a whole more than tripled, rising to 6.3 per cent. In 2010 the deficit declined to 4.6 per cent in Italy, while in the euro area it remained unchanged according to European Commission estimates. The Government’s management of the accounts was facilitated by the fact that the solidity of the Italian banking system did not require significant aid to be charged to the public budget.  Italy’s public debt, already very high, rose again. Its management was prudent; the average residual maturity was lengthened progressively, notwithstanding a context that remained uncertain and volatile.  The financial condition of firms and households is solid on the whole. Savers’ propensity to invest in high-risk financial instruments is low; debt is limited, although it is concentrated in variable-rate liabilities, which are inherently riskier.  The Italian economy’s problem – it is well worth recalling – is the structural difficulty of growth. The arduous task of economic policy is to change this situation while at the same time reducing the ratio of public debt to GDP. To rebuild a solid primary surplus rapidly and not to elude the need to take measures that structurally support growth: this is the challenge.  Raising the tax rates is out of the question: it would jeopardize the objective of growth and penalize honest taxpayers unbearably; indeed, the rates ought to be gradually lowered as headway is made in reducing tax evasion and avoidance. The only option is to control spending, but with a selective approach that distinguishes between what fosters growth and what impedes it. Wise political choices must necessarily be based on a detailed assessment of the effects, including the macroeconomic effects, of every expenditure item.  The more attentive multilateral surveillance of the sustainability of public budgets envisaged by the new pact is not to be feared; it can help us. The reforms already carried out, especially the pension reform, put us among the countries that require a smaller correction of budget balances to ensure long-run stability.  The new European rule for debt reduction would not be a much tighter constraint for us than the one already imposed by the existing rule on structural budget balance. It is estimated that                                                  2  See Britta Hamburg, Sandro Momigliano, Bernhard Manzke and Stefano Siviero, “The Reaction of Fiscal Policy to the Crisis in Italy and Germany: Are They Really Polar Cases in the European Context”, forthcoming in Fiscal Policy: Lessons from the Crisis, proceedings of the Twelfth Workshop on Public Finances, Perugia, 25–27 March 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 achieving structural budget balance would also ensure, ipso facto, compliance with the rule on debt under favourable scenarios of economic growth.3 *   *   * Seventeen sovereign countries that share a single currency form a reality without precedent in history. The euro is a bold intellectual construction, a courageous and farsighted political project. It was, and remains, a prerequisite for economic wellbeing.  The President of the Republic, in his address to Parliament on 17 March, called European integration “an extraordinary historical invention in which Italy has successfully played a leading role since the 1950s.”  One hundred and fifty years ago we Italians undertook an equally important construction: our country’s monetary unification, which would then consolidate the political unification just attained.  These two historical events are joined in an ideal continuity. For us, the present and the future of the euro are also the continuation of our own long history.                                                  3  See Ignazio Visco, “La governance economica europea: riforma e implicazioni”, Remarks delivered at the University of l’Aquila for the twentieth anniversary of the Economics Faculty, 8 March 2011 (only in Italian). 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Reforming EMU – time for bold decisions Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the conference of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament “What future for the euro?”, Frankfurt, 18 March 2011. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen,  honourable members of the European Parliament,  It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak at your conference this afternoon. We meet at a time of multiple challenges for our world. For more than three and a half years now, we have been focused on the challenges to our economies and our societies by the unfolding financial crisis. But the tragic events in Japan over the past week remind us of even greater threats. The potential impact of the earthquake and its aftermath on both the Japanese economy and the world economy is something we will be thinking about deeply in the coming days and discussing with our friends at the Bank of Japan. For the moment, my heartfelt thoughts are with the people of Japan, whose lives and whose livelihoods have seen such havoc. Your conference today asks “what future for the euro?” In addressing that question, I would first like to speak about the achievements of the past, before focusing on the challenges ahead for Europe’s economic and monetary union (EMU). I would like to reiterate and explain the need for what I have called a “quantum leap” in the economic governance of Europe. And I would like to outline what that means in practice and what more needs to be done to make that quantum leap a reality. 1. Achievements of the euro  First, let me take a brief look back at the history of the euro. Having had the privilege of serving as a member of the European Central Bank’s (ECB) Governing Council since the launch of the euro and as the ECB’s President for the past seven years, I can report that we have achieved a great deal. All Europeans should take pride in these achievements. The key to understanding the current challenges is to recall that the specific construction of our modern economic and monetary union rests on two separate economic and monetary pillars. Under the monetary pillar, there is only Europe: the single currency, the single monetary policy and the single central banking system – with the ECB at its core.  The economic pillar is decentralised, with responsibility for fiscal and economic policies in the hands of individual countries. These policies should be steered by overall rules and coordinated to ensure that national economic policies are fully compatible with the fact that we have a single currency without being part of a political federation. When it is working properly, this structure balances the independence of nations and their economic interdependence that is at the heart of EMU.  It should represent an approach where sovereignty is shared, meaning that it is neither exclusively national nor exclusively European.  When EMU was first established, many people asked how monetary union could function effectively in a Europe of sovereign states.  The answer is that it can function effectively with an appropriate economic union.  BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
2. The “M” in EMU Let me discuss the two pillars in a little more detail, first the “M” in EMU. In monetary policy terms, the ECB has a clear assignment: to deliver price stability. According to our primary mandate, our definition of price stability means an inflation rate below but close to 2% over the medium term. And over the 12 years since the launch of EMU, the average annual inflation rate in the euro area has been 1.97%. This is the best result of a major central bank in the euro area over the last 50 years.  For Germany, the inflation rate has been even lower than the average since the euro was launched. From 1999 to 2010, inflation averaged 1.5% per year.  And we achieved this during challenging times, not just in the period since August 2007. Over the years, we have had to cope with the bursting of the dot com bubble, the aftermath of the events of 11 September 2001, the jump in oil prices to $145 per barrel, rising prices of food and commodities, and then of course the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression.  Yet throughout these very different economic shocks – which could have been either inflationary or deflationary – citizens in the euro area have remained confident in our commitment. Proof of this is that medium- to long-term inflation expectations have been firmly anchored in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability. Observers and financial markets are also expecting in the years to come that price stability will be maintained. For the next five years, professional forecasters currently foresee an inflation of precisely 2%.  These achievements have not come at the expense of employment. On the contrary, since Economic and Monetary Union began, employment in the euro area has risen by over 14 million, compared with about 8 million in the United States.  And these achievements have not come at the expense of growth either. Adjusted for population growth differences, growth in the euro area has been almost the same as in the United States over the past decade, at about 1% per year in terms of GDP per capita growth. 3. The “E” in EMU Let me turn to the economic pillar, the E of EMU.  Here, we need fundamental reforms.  Economic union is a fundamental counterpart to monetary union. A single market with a single currency calls for a very solid framework for handling the collegial governance of national fiscal policies and macroeconomic policies.  I recall the 1989 Delors report that stated: “an Economic and Monetary Union could only operate on the basis of mutually consistent and sound behaviour by governments and other economic agents in all member countries. (…) Uncoordinated and divergent national budgetary policies would undermine monetary stability and generate imbalances in the real and financial sectors of the community.” The need for better coordination is recognised by the citizens of Europe, particularly those in the euro area. The recent Eurobarometer survey has shown that, on average, more than four out of five euro area citizens are in favour of greater policy coordination between countries to overcome the crisis.  This is very important: citizens want a stronger coordination of economic and fiscal policies among the countries of the euro area. European integration has led the people of Europe to appreciate the value of cooperation, especially in difficult times. 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
So what does more coordination require? At its core, it means strengthening the economic governance of Europe, a project to which I know that the European Parliament is fully committed. Let me share with you our view at the ECB on what progress has been made and what remains to be done. 4. The ECB’s position on reforming economic governance The ECB has recently published its legal opinion on the economic governance proposals. In a separate publication on our website, we have highlighted 10 points where we have called for more ambitious steps. We believe that we must draw not just some, but all appropriate lessons from the crisis.  In essence, the thrust of our message is as follows.  More automatic and speedy procedures, a broader range of enforcement tools and more ambitious policy requirements are all urgently required at euro area level. But these will not be sufficient if they are not solidly anchored at national level: the gap between the EU and national level must be closed. An effective way of achieving this would be to swiftly implement strong national budgetary frameworks in the Member States. Earlier this week, the Ecofin Council took some steps forward. In particular, the Council accepted the introduction of an annual fiscal expenditure benchmark and a numerical benchmark (the 1/20th rule) for debt reduction.  The fact that the Council “expects to, as a rule, follow the recommendations of the Commission, or explain its position in writing” – is a step in the right direction. It would be a big step if there were assurances that it would be implemented in a strict and rules-based manner.  As regards the anchoring of the objectives of EU fiscal coordination in national budgetary frameworks, it is of the essence that the directive is transposed into national law as faithfully as possible, and no later than by the end of 2012. It would be helpful if the Eurogroup could issue a formal statement to that effect. The Ecofin Council also agrees with a framework for the prevention and correction of excessive macroeconomic imbalances, including an early warning mechanism and eventual sanctions in the case of euro area countries. The ECB welcomes the intention to channel any fines collected to the crisis resolution fund.  Nevertheless, in our view, still more ambition on governance is warranted.  5. The need for greater ambition in governance reform Let me briefly highlight the main points and explain why we find them so important. You will see that my remarks are very specific. This is because we are at a point where it is time for decisions, and the matter before us is complex. Parliament has received about 2000 amendments on the six legal texts. Therefore, specificity in recommendations is essential.  Let me summarise them under four headings. First, all surveillance procedures have to be faster and more automatic, including the new macroeconomic surveillance framework.  We have seen more than ever the importance of a timely correction of fiscal imbalances. Therefore, we cannot wait months or even a year until policies are corrected. In the meantime, spillovers would hurt other Member States.  BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 
In the past, the Council has often suspended the procedures of the Stability and Growth Pact, thereby weakening its credibility. This must not happen again. The newly agreed “comply or explain” principle under fiscal surveillance still leaves too much room for discretion. Moreover, it does not cover the new macroeconomic surveillance framework.  Beyond this, the ECB believes that the use of reverse majority voting could be extended further across the various surveillance provisions – not just the two regulations on financial sanctions for euro area countries.  Second, the enforcement tools also need to be more effective. For example, the new macroeconomic surveillance framework needs to provide clear incentives by envisaging financial sanctions already after the first instance of non-compliance. Discretion to reduce or suspend financial sanctions – either on grounds of exceptional economic circumstances or in response to a reasoned request by a Member State – strongly reduces the effectiveness and sets the wrong incentives. This should not be permitted: it will help nobody.  Third, the policy requirements should be more ambitious to match the current reality of the euro area. The new macroeconomic surveillance framework, as amended by the Council, does not yet provide a clear focus on the euro area countries with large current account deficits, significant losses of competitiveness and high levels of public and private debt, as well as any other vulnerabilities challenging our economic and monetary union. As regards fiscal surveillance, ambitious benchmarks are needed when establishing an excessive deficit. The scope for considering “any relevant factors” in case of an excessive deficit should be clearly reduced. The adjustment path towards a country’s medium-term budgetary objective also needs more ambition. In this context, the annual improvement in the structural balance should be significantly higher than 0.5% of GDP when a country’s government debt exceeds the reference value of 60% of GDP, otherwise there are fiscal sustainability risks.  Fourth and finally, it is also crucial to guarantee the quality and independence of fiscal and economic analysis. We propose the establishment of an EU advisory body of recognised competence. It goes without saying that remaining weaknesses in the collection and reporting of data have to be addressed immediately and rigorously. These are my main areas of recommendation.  It is clear that implementation of the new governance framework will have a significant impact on national policies, which will call for enhanced democratic legitimacy. A key issue will be to anchor the forthcoming reforms firmly at national level by means of strong budgetary frameworks.  For euro area countries, independent national fiscal policy institutions should be mandatory. Clear borrowing frameworks should also be considered. I welcome the euro area countries’ commitment of 11 March to transpose the EU fiscal rules into national legislation and including for sub-national levels.  The ECB and, I believe, also the citizens of Europe count on the European Parliament to drive these changes forward. We are mandated as European institutions to take a broader perspective. We are independent of specific national circumstances. And we are here to think long-term, as do our citizens.  Let me borrow the words of Willy Brandt, speaking as the first Head of Government of a member state of the European Communities to address the plenary of the European Parliamentary Assembly, back in 1973. “This is where the political will should, at long last, carry the day over the many national administrative egoisms, which may be justified individually, but all in all can no longer be tolerated. Having gone so much astray in the past years, we must now achieve a better harmonization of our economic policies. New decisions 4 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 are needed which place more precise obligation on us, and bind Member States more closely.” 6. The quantum leap If the European Parliament were to go further in this direction, it would provide a true “quantum leap” in the rules that regulate how countries make their national economic policies. Countries need clear rules to guide policy-making, and sanctions if they stray from a sustainable path. For those still hesitating whether to go that far, let me recall what happened some years ago: after a period generally acknowledged as a period of economic fair weather, governments decided to weaken the Stability and Growth Pact in 2004 and 2005.  This initiative was led by the euro area’s largest economies. The ECB voiced its “grave concerns” at the time. Governments had not used the more benign years to put their fiscal houses in order. I now see that many acknowledge that the weakening of the Pact was a serious misjudgement. The crisis has given us an opportunity. It has made plain the flaws in the Stability and Growth Pact that allowed countries’ fiscal policies to become a problem – not just for themselves, but for everyone else within the monetary union.  We now have an obligation to fix the flaws. All of them.  We now have to lay the ground for policies towards sustainable and balanced growth. It is only such growth that will contribute to lasting job creation and social harmony.  7. Conclusion Let me draw to a conclusion. As I have indicated, the history of the euro is something in which all Europeans can take pride. I have every confidence that the future of the euro will be one in which we can equally take pride. But to get to that point, several improvements need to be made to our economic union.  As I have indicated, progress is being made. Yet we need to draw all the lessons from the current situation to complete the work on Europe’s economic and monetary union. We must ensure that the well-functioning monetary union is complemented by an equally well-functioning economic union.  All of this should be done to achieve the common goal: a union of individual freedom and collective respect; a union of responsibility and cooperation; and a union of stability and prosperity. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Durmuş Yilmaz: Expectations in global economy Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the Leaders of Change Summit, Istanbul, 15 March 2011. *      *      * Distinguished Guests, It is a great pleasure to speak here at the Leaders of Change Summit that has gathered politicians, decision makers, journalists, economists and bureaucrats who have played prominent roles in their fields and inspired societies across the world.  Today, I will share my thoughts regarding the outlook of the global economy and the challenges faced by the emerging market economies in the aftermath of the crisis. Then, I will discuss the role of central banks in this new era. Finally, I will conclude my remarks with the experience of the Turkish economy and the response of the monetary policy.  Distinguished Guests, More than two years after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the dust over international financial system seems somewhat abated. Unprecedented measures taken by central banks and fiscal authorities have put financial markets back on a relatively steady course by late 2009. As economic activity has started to gain pace, risk perceptions gradually improved, notwithstanding heightened sovereign risk in the Euro area, concerns over housing and labor markets in the United States, uncertainty regarding the health of financial institutions in advanced economies, huge influx of capital flows and associated risks in emerging market economies, and last but not least, questions surrounding the pace of demand rotation in the global economy. A long list of lessons on financial stability has emerged, though how to put them in practice is subject to an intense debate. The cooperation at a global scale is the key to solve current problems and addressing the future ones, but to maintain the spirit of cooperation among nations is getting more challenging as the memory of the crisis starts to fade away.  Outlook for emerging market economies As we all know, capital flows to emerging market economies have intensified recently thanks to better growth prospects, interest rate differentials, and relative stability of financial institutions in these countries that proved their strength and flexibility to extreme shocks. As liquidity in the global financial system increases thanks to rapid expansion of high powered money in major currency countries, central banks of small open economies face the risk of losing control over monetary conditions. Policy rate hikes to contain inflationary pressures and restrain credit expansion are likely to lead further widening in interest rate differentials, thereby fueling even more capital inflows, more borrowing, higher asset prices and inflation. As a result, emerging market economies today face a growing risk of asset bubbles, excessive borrowing and inflationary pressures – all of which are threatening the financial stability. The problems facing countries with current account deficits are much challenging than the surplus ones, since they have to deal with both financial stability problems arising from the strength of capital flows and the risk of sudden stops.  Assessing whether capital flows to emerging market economies are permanent or transitory is a challenging task. The current wave of capital inflows reflects both global push factors (including ample liquidity and low interest rates across advanced economies) as well as country-specific pull factors (including buoyant growth prospects, relatively sound fiscal positions, and decreasing country risk perceptions). Over the medium term the pull factors 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches are likely to remain complacent, as relative to advanced economies, emerging markets are expected to grow faster, which would put upward pressure on interest and exchange rates, perpetuating their attractiveness for international capital. Although it is far from certain whether quantitative easing in several advanced economies would persist in the medium term, monetary authorities in these countries are likely to maintain their accommodative stance in the near future as well. All in all, the current outlook suggests that capital flows to emerging market economies may be a permanent phenomenon, while its magnitude is subject to change in risk perceptions.  While tools to manage large capital inflows are well known, the appropriate policy mix depends on country-specific circumstances. Fiscal policy, monetary policy, exchange rate policy, foreign exchange market intervention, macro-prudential tools, and capital controls could be used to cope with the inflows, but each of them entails some tradeoffs, which are likely to be quite costly for emerging deficit countries in particular. Some countries have opted for various forms of capital control, although their effectiveness needs to be evaluated based on the objective of imposing them at the first place. Some studies find that capital controls have some compositional effect and could alter the maturity of new investments. So far as reducing the volume of flows, the empirical evidence is inconclusive. Unless the authorities have full control over capital accounts, partial restrictions are unlikely to offset the impact of flows, prevent appreciation of local currency and provide more space for independent monetary policy.  In principle, flow of capital from advance economies to emerging ones and appreciation of the currencies of the latter over time is a mutually beneficial secular trend, as long as it is supported by strong fundamentals, better growth prospects, and high productivity differentials. Rather than fighting against this trend through over restrictive capital controls or excessive reserve accumulation, there is strong legitimacy in using macro-prudential policies to mitigate the adverse effects of volatility in capital flows, especially those with speculative nature, over financial stability. Several emerging economies have started implementing such measures to limit the credit growth and asset price bubbles. These measures include raising reserve requirement ratios, requiring higher income- and deposit-to-loan ratios, tightening capital adequacy requirements and liquidity ratios, introducing transaction taxes, fees etc. The adequacy of such measures has yet to be seen, but the swift and proactive response of policy makers is a positive step forward, as the most recent events have clearly demonstrated that it is likely to cost less to undertake preventive measures prior to a crisis than to clean up in its aftermath.  Of course, economic conditions and institutions differ across countries. An effective macro prudential tool in one country might not work in another country. Therefore, policy makers need to take country specific factors into account in designing their own framework. It is also imperative for the academic community and international organizations to focus on this issue and develop a set of concrete policy tools that national authorities, at their own discretion, can use to identify, assess and manage systemic risks. Financial stability and central banks The critical importance of financial stability from a central bank’s perspective is not new. Smooth functioning of the financial system and payment mechanism has been a concern of central banks since their foundation. In fact, that is the reason they are called as “the bank of banks” or “the lender of last resort” for financial institutions. However, over time as the financial system gets more complicated and expanded exponentially, its supervision and regulation has been partially transferred to other institutions. The challenge faced by central banks is to establish a framework that combines both price and financial stability as primary mandates and identify the policy instruments to target both, even at times they seem to conflict with each other.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Central banks have typically calibrated short-term interest rates as their primary policy instrument to determine their monetary stance. Since policy rates are too blunt instruments that affect the entire economy, using them to achieve both of these targets may lead to unintended consequences. The level of interest rate required to ensure price stability can differ from an interest rate needed to preserve financial stability. For example, during boom periods driven by productivity and financial innovation shocks, a low policy rate would suffice to contain inflation; yet the very same level of interest rate may still lead to accumulation of financial risks. Moreover, during boom periods, emerging markets typically attract large capital inflows even with reasonably low level of interest rates. In such periods, the external and internal equilibrium requires different interest rates and monetary policy has to use more than one instrument. The “Tinbergen Rule” suggests that one instrument could be employed to achieve only one target, which in our case is conventionally recognized as price stability. There is clearly a need for a second set of policy tools. This second instrument, in my opinion, may be in the form of macro prudential tools that directly address financial activities.  Should all authority and responsibility related to financial stability be centralized and vested in central banks? On the one hand, the benefit of vesting the decision making power and responsibility under one institution, which happens to be the central bank, is clear: no coordination problem, more effective communication under one voice, and swift response to emergencies. There are also downsides to such approach. The distinction between “goal independence” and “instrument independence” lies at the foundation of what we call central bank independence today. If central banks assume all regulatory and supervisory activities regarding the financial system and becomes the only authority responsible for its oversight, the instruments needed to achieve that goal may reach to a point where the principles of democracy necessitates a much closer coordination and cooperation with the government, blurring the central bank’s independence. Expanding the role of central banks in the economy has the potential to create a strong and out of the ordinary entity in a democracy that emphasizes accountability and the responsibility of elected officials.  Central banks played a vital role in maintaining financial stability in the past and they are likely to do so in the future. The optimal use of policy rates and macro-prudential tools to achieve both the price and financial stability would define the criteria for assessing the success of central banks in the post crisis era. During the crisis, new monetary tools have been explored by the central banks. Now, in addition to continuing to explore such monetary policy tools, policy makers would have to elaborate on the uses of regulatory rules for limiting the risks threatening financial stability and designing the optimal institutional structure for that purpose that finds the perfect balance between the risk of losing central bank independence and the risk of creating coordination problems (between the central bank and the regulatory and supervisory agency). Financial stability in Turkey and the monetary policy In the second part of my speech, let me turn to financial stability in Turkey and the monetary policy we have started to implement in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. Turkey used to be among emerging economies with high volatility and particularly sensitive to global risk perceptions throughout the 1990s and early 2000s. However, this time the headwinds from the global crisis has remained relatively subdued thanks to the resilience of the financial system and prudent macro policies. Of course, the growth rate of the economy has dropped sharply, but neither price nor financial stability has been seriously jeopardized. In fact, Turkey was one of the few emerging countries that ended up with higher credit rating than pre-crisis level. A combination of several factors made the difference, but lack of excessive borrowing turned out to be the key. Unlike its peers, the leverage ratios in Turkey stayed at moderate levels 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches during the period of excess global liquidity, thanks to prudent policies of the Banking Regulatory and Supervision Agency and the Central Bank of Turkey. In fact most of those policies implemented in Turkey since 2002 are incorporated into the Basel III principles, such as countercyclical buffers (banks in Turkey are not permitted to expand unless their ratio is at least four percentage points above the legal minimum) and liquidity ratios (both in local and foreign currency). Debt level of the public sector was also reduced significantly thanks to a quite ambitious fiscal discipline. The real strength of the economy, however, came from the management of foreign exchange risks, which is the most critical aspect of a small, open economy. Thanks to prudent regulations and oversight, the overall FX position of the Turkish banking sector was balanced. Households carried a long position in FX, limiting their exposure to curreny shocks. Although the corporate sector carried a significant FX position, their debt was mainly in long term.  All these factors contributed to the resilience of the Turkish economy to the global crisis, which in turn provided ample space to the Central Bank of Turkey to implement front-loaded and aggressive monetary easing without compromising price stability objective. No rescue package was needed to support the banking system. Thus, the government was able to enact modest but still quite effective counter-cyclical fiscal policies in the midst of global turmoil. Since early 2010, due to anemic growth in external demand, current account balance has been deteriorating rapidly, whereas core inflation remains subdued and output gap persists. Recent surge in capital flows toward emerging markets, including Turkey, has the potential to exacerbate the divergence between the pace of recovery in the domestic and external demand. If this pattern of growth coexists with rapid credit expansion and deterioration in the current account balance, it may lead to financial stability concerns. These developments make it essential to effectively utilize policy instruments other than policy rates. Consequently, in today’s challenging financial environment, which is likely to persist in the foreseeable future, the Central Bank of Turkey underscored four basic principles upon which the monetary policies would be built to maintain financial stability. The first one is to discourage excessive leverage and keeping the debt ratios of banks and the corporate sector at modest levels. The second principle is extending the duration of borrowing for private and public sector, as well as household deposits. The third principle is strengthening the FX position of both the public and private sector, which is usually the Achilles’ heel for emerging economies with sizable current account deficit. The fourth principle is better management of foreign currency risk by the corporate sector through instruments like the Turkish Derivative Exchange.  In November 2010, we have started quantitative tightening to deal with rapidly increasing macro imbalances driven by short term capital inflows and acceleration in credit growth. To that end we have raised required reserve ratios to control the rapid credit expansion by restricting the supply of loanable funds. Another issue we considered is lengthening the maturity of capital inflows. This is important for improving the quality of capital account, limiting maturity mismatches, and avoiding exchange rate misalignments. To this end, we lowered the policy rate and widened the corridor between overnight borrowing and lending rates so as to create some extra volatility in the short-term interest rates.  Although it looks quite complicated at first sight, the framework we adopt in spirit is not significantly different from the conventional inflation targeting framework. The only difference is that, previously our policy instrument was the one week repo rate, but now our instrument is a “policy mix”—which consists of a combination of short term interest rates, reserve requirement ratios and interest corridor. We seek to use these instruments in right combination in order to cope with both inflation and macro-financial risks. The monetary policy stance in this framework is not only determined by the path of policy rates, but as a mixture of all policy instruments outlined above. Just like the conventional inflation targeting framework, the policy is forward looking and contingent on the economic outlook. The exact 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 setting of the policy mix depends on the factors affecting price stability and financial stability. Although it is too early to assess the success of these policies, initial impact so far seems promising. Conclusion The recent crisis put front and center the rising economic power of emerging countries. It has also demonstrated the vulnerabilities within the global system, especially across financial markets. Financial stability becomes a major concern for policy makers, which has the potential to reshape the monetary policy framework of central banks. Significant steps have been undertaken, but significant progress is still needed to tackle global imbalances. That involves not only revisiting economic policies, but also economic and institutional infrastructure that shapes them. As the quest for a new global order continues both in theoretical and practical levels; the predictability, balance and sustainability of the new global order will depend on the cooperative and coordinated efforts to establish a well-represented infrastructure. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Miroslav Singer: The Czech Republic outside EMU – a success story born from painful lessons. A Czech view on resolving the euro crisis Speech by Mr Miroslav Singer, Governor of the Czech National Bank, as part of the OMFIF (Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum) Golden Series on World Money, Reform Club, London, 28 June 2011. *      *      * A horrible end is better than endless horror.  Lieber ein Ende mit Schrecken als ein Schrecken ohne Ende. Ferdinand Von Schill  (1776–1808) Ladies and Gentlemen, As we all know, the eurozone is facing serious problems at the present time. It is my opinion that there are important lessons to be learned from the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s. The Czech policy authorities learned these lessons – often the  hard way – first of all after the split of Czechoslovakia 1993, and again during the financial and currency crisis that hit the Czech Republic later in the same decade. In my speech today I will recall these lessons and examine how they can be applied in order to minimise the costs of resolving the eurozone debt crisis. Before going any further, however, I’d like to draw your attention to four basic – and surprising, perhaps even shocking – facts about the Czech Republic. First of all, it may come as a shock to some of you to learn that the Czech Republic is not an Eastern European country. In fact, its capital, Prague, lies more than 90 miles west of Vienna. In the words of a famous Londoner – the actor Michael Caine – “Not a lot of people know that”.  What is more, the Czech economy is further west than you might think not just geographically, but also economically. This brings me to shocking fact number two. Despite tepid real growth averaging 3%, the Czech economy has grown by 10% on average in recent years thanks to appreciation of its exchange rate. Therefore, the Czech economy has multiplied in size more than 4.5 times since 1993 in nominal terms in euros. Consequently, it could have bought on average more than 7% p.a. of the core European countries’ real GDP over the last 18 years. And now for shocking fact number three. Despite, or maybe thanks to, our first-hand experience with financial crisis (bad loans exceeded 40% of GDP in the late 1990s), no bailout has been needed and no taxpayers’ money has been used to save any Czech financial firm in the latest turmoil. Finally, and a good deal less shockingly I’m pleased to say, the Czech National Bank has been not only the central bank, but also the integrated supervisor of the Czech financial industry since 2006. This set-up gives us many advantages in terms of dealing with the financial crisis and maintaining financial stability at national level, and it hopefully also enhances our understanding of the current events in the eurozone. I’d now like to remind you of some important events which, I feel, provide us with important lessons and guidance for dealing with the current crisis. The first of these was the collapse of the Bretton Woods system at the beginning of the 1970s. The key lesson from this event was the so-called Impossible Trinity, namely that it is impossible to have a fixed exchange rate, free capital flows and independent monetary policy all at the same time.  Cracks started to appear in the Bretton Woods system in the 1960s as a result of globalisation of the financial system and enormous growth in cross-border capital flows. This process was accelerated by the expansive fiscal policy of the USA, which fostered monetary expansion, a loss of competitiveness of US producers and growth in the US trade deficit. As 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches soon as the rising demand for dollars exchangeable for gold encountered the limited stock of US gold reserves, the credibility of the US dollar foundered. This loss of credibility undermined the very foundations on which the global monetary system was built. The fall of the Bretton Woods system teaches us that a fixed exchange rate requires a consistent macroeconomic framework and corresponding coordination of all aspects of monetary policy. Various adjustments to this set-up might reduce some partial imbalances, but if the cause of the problem is not tackled head on, the effects of such adjustments will be short-lived and it will only be a matter of time before the whole system comes crashing down.  Now let’s move forward in time some 20 years, to the split of the Czechoslovak currency following the dissolution of Czechoslovakia in 1993. For many years, fiscal transfers had masked the significantly inferior performance of Slovak economy relative to its Czech neighbour to the west. This performance gap was further widened by the closing-off of the Slovak armament industry from the federal centre at the beginning of the 1990s. After the country split in two, the stated goal of keeping a common currency came under market pressures as Czech and Slovak entities transferred their deposits to Czech banks and capital flowed out of both countries. As a result, this goal was abandoned in less than two months and an independent Czech crown – or koruna – was introduced. I should add that the CNB had its plan B and had been running preparations for the currency split since the second half of 1992. Consequently, after it had decided to act, it was able to act fast. So, what lessons can we learn from this event? The lack of political will to preserve the federal Czechoslovak state had quickly recognisable consequences for the common currency. As a result, the costs of the event were relatively low and order was quickly restored in both new currency markets. Despite the U-turn in decision-makers’ communication, the situation had been easy to read by markets, citizens and economic agents in general.  A few years later, the Czech economy was hit by a severe currency and financial crisis. Until 1996, the Czech Republic maintained a fixed exchange rate regime and generally stabilisation-oriented (restrictive) macroeconomic policies. However, entry to the OECD and related capital flow liberalisation created an Impossible Triangle. This led to twin deficits and attempts to “half-free” the exchange rate regime similar to those made in the Bretton Woods case. Additional factors such as data errors and an insufficiently credible first reform package only exacerbated the problems. Serious worries of the Czech National Bank about its credibility and reputation contributed to its mistakes. A change of government made acts of government less predictable. The defence of the exchange rate was ended by the central bank without the knowledge of the government. This caused a wide rift to open up between these two authorities. A general lack of coordination of macroeconomic policies, and possibly too restrictive monetary policies, culminated in a severe financial crisis. The outcome was a very costly event that could, with the benefit of hindsight, be judged as avoidable to a significant extent. General U-turns made by policy authorities contributed to these high costs. Even for the majority of market players, many of the decisions taken at the time were difficult to predict, read and adjust to. The chief conclusion from these two Czech-made episodes of turmoil is that predictable actions produce lower-cost outcomes than unpredictable ones. This time the CNB had no plan B, so after the fixed regime was abandoned, it took several months to prepare the first coherent monetary policy framework after the end of the fixed exchange regime. All of which brings me to the current parlous situation of the eurozone. Let me start with a few observations. The eurozone’s mechanisms have supported economic divergence rather than convergence. The rules are not only wrong, they are manifestly and idly ignored regardless of their quality. To see this, consider for example that the eurozone’s debt exceeds the Maastricht debt criterion by one-half, and its deficit exceeds the deficit criterion by a factor of almost two. Only three eurozone countries – Finland, Luxembourg and  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Estonia – fulfil the Maastricht criteria. The belief that eurozone membership has disciplining consequences after joining has been proved unsubstantiated. As in the case of the Czech crisis of the 1990s, political and economic policy authorities have made numerous U-turns at state and EU level during the crisis. There have been volte-face, for example, on bank bailouts and the necessity for them, on the need to relax monetary policy in Europe, on the state of the EU financial sector, on the no-state-bailout clause, and on the sufficiency of the current Greek package. In addition, several false myths have been propagated, for example on the consequences of Greek bankruptcy for the German and French banking sectors and on the need for the ECB and central banks to have positive equity. In fact, numerous central banks have negative equity yet have no problems operating if they are credible enough. The real capital of a central bank is its credibility and reputation, not a figure on its balance-sheet. Credibility and reputation are virtues that thrive on consistent and credible policies and communication. Another myth is that the eurozone cannot survive a Greek default. Why not? Is it insolvent? Are there significant trade dimensions between Greece and the eurozone? According to available DTCC data – which is incomplete but very probably covers the majority of cross-border transactions – even CDS that are now so often mentioned should not present a systemic problem for the European financial system. Note that CDS on Greek debt are higher than a year ago, but the euro is stronger than at the peak of last summer’s Greek crisis. The markets do not appear to think that Greece is that fundamental to the survival of the eurozone. Finally, it is implied that if we solve the debt problem, Greece and Portugal are saved. They are not. Competitiveness is the real issue for these countries. No economy can survive and thrive unless it is competitive. The upshot of the recent U-turns is that the markets are completely confused and do not see any predictable outcome to adjust to. They see no will to allow Greece to leave the eurozone and depreciate, but they also see no willingness to support the country sufficiently. The solution to the crisis has already been made unavoidably costly due to past incredible and unclear communication. There are two possibly costly but credible ways to restore competitiveness. The first is a solution within the framework of the eurozone. This would involve restructuring the debt and imposing and rigorously enforcing fiscal discipline. But the structural reforms are hardly enough to restore competitiveness within a short enough period of time in such a scenario. In addition, tens of billions of euros in aid would have to flow from the strong eurozone economies to the weak ones to restore competitiveness. Such generous aid would very probably have to be conditional on the distribution of the aid not being managed by the Greek authorities. The ECB would provide liquidity support – and assurances of such support – to the Greek banking sector. I believe that given the relatively small size of Greece – and even, if need be, of Greece and Portugal – both those actions are within the realm of the politically feasible. The second way out of the crisis is the “classic” IMF prescription, that is to say, fiscal discipline, debt restructuring and currency devaluation. Note that to make such a scenario easier some aid is also very desirable at least in the form of support for the drachma from the ECB and/or European authorities (among others) to avoid an overshooting after the exit from the eurozone. Note that we are currently seeing a rather disorderly effort along the lines of the first scenario of keeping the current eurozone together. In the same spirit we could see an orderly exit from the eurozone, if there is the political will. In short, to minimise the costs, either scenario needs to be carried out in an orderly way, while disorderly implementation results in dramatically increased costs in both cases. Therefore, instead of the current muddling through, one of these two ways should be chosen and clearly communicated to markets, voters and others. Otherwise, we risk a further loss of credibility for everyone involved in Europe and very likely for the IMF as well. Further continuation of the current uncertainty will 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches continue to cause significant economic costs for the EU and Europe in particular. At present, the risk of an event pushing Greece (and/or others?) into unexpected default is shooting up. That would surely be the most costly outcome, at least in the short term. We need to avoid a repeat of the 1997 Russian default, where Russia received a programme of aid, everyone expected it to work, but the needs turned out to be much bigger two months later. There is also a very rapidly increasing risk of citizens running on Greek banks as well as a rocketing risk of some other EU/eurozone country’s voters producing an outcome that will, in addition to other more likely and more profound consequences, further complicate finding a solution to the technical issues, i.e. how to structure the debt restructuring. To conclude, this is a crisis whose causes lie in eurozone institutions, which we were assured were created – together with the eurozone itself – to prevent crises. Without further close involvement of eurozone institutions, including the ECB and eurozone member states, it will most probably result in a disorderly meltdown of at least some European economies. On many levels, including the level of European institutions, the crisis was caused by incoherent and/or insincere communication, which increased the uncertainty of market participants in the broad sense. Our country’s history tells us that a generally predicted loss of a currency fix has much lower costs (including political ones) than an unexpected one. If eurozone countries and EU institutions opt for “safe” Greek membership in the eurozone, they must present a solution that is broad, generous and general enough to convince the markets of its credibility. This solution had better come fast, though, as muddling through has significant economic costs and increases the risks dramatically. In the meantime, the authorities should at least avoid communication that increases the risk of a run on banks and of angering the voters of fiscally sounder eurozone states. Last but not the least, a plan B would be highly desirable. Let me end by stressing that any disorderly outcome clearly goes against all the interests of the Czech Republic and its economy. There is now no possibility of a happy (i.e. relatively costless) end. But we should end the uncertainty. After all, muddling through the current crisis is clearly occupying European decision-makers to an extent that is preventing them from solving the issues important for the core and crucial parts of the eurozone and EU – for example, how to change this part of the world, which is currently sliding down the global relative benchmarks quite fast, in a way that will enable Europe to regain its past ability to compete globally. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Jean-Claude Trichet: Completing Economic and Monetary Union Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Gala Dinner of the State of the European Union conference “Revitalising the European Dream: A Corporate View”, Brussels, 28 June 2011. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen,  Thank you for inviting me to this conference. The theme to which it is dedicated is especially relevant today, when we have to draw all the lessons from the worst financial crisis since World War II.  These days, “Europe” and the benefits it brings have come to be taken for granted. Thanks to the success of European integration, the threat of war has become a memory of the past for many Europeans, in particular the younger generation.  This makes it all the more urgent to develop a renewed vision of the kind of Europe we want and indeed need – a vision that is easily understood and shared amongst EU citizens.  Each generation needs to affirm its commitment to Europe.  As Pierre Werner once observed, “it is necessary that even those born well after the 1950s and 1960s realise that the European Union has not come about by chance, but that it is based on the fundamental necessities of life amongst the peoples of Europe”1. Thankfully, these “fundamental necessities of life” – especially in the economic sphere – still seem to be felt and understood by the people in Europe. When asked, in the Eurobarometer surveys, which issues the European institutions should focus on in the coming years, Europeans believe that priority should be given to economic and monetary policy (37% in the EU and 41% in the euro area).  More than three out of four Europeans (78%) agree that measures to reduce the public deficit and debt in their country cannot be delayed.  More than three quarters of respondents (77%) consider that stronger coordination of economic and financial policies, as well as closer supervision of financial institutions would be effective in combating the crisis. The idea of initiating reforms to benefit future generations attracts equally strong support.  Revitalising Europe Revitalising Europe means bringing the reality of today’s Europe, of its institutions and policies, closer to these wishes and concerns of the EU citizens.  A Europe of stability and responsibility where the burdens of today’s adjustments are not shifted onto future generations.  An open and flexible Europe fostering education, entrepreneurship and innovation, with ample employment opportunities and a high standard of living.  A Europe that fully brings its economic and political weight to bear in an ever more globalised economy.                                                   1 «Il est nécessaire que même ceux qui sont nés bien après les années 50 et 60 se rendent compte que l’Union européenne n’est pas un coup du hasard, qu’elle se fonde sur des nécessités fondamentales de la vie entre les peuples de l’Europe » (On 11 December 1997, on the eve of the Luxembourg European Council). 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches There is a good basis for all of this – we can indeed take pride in our past achievements. Having served as a member of the Governing Council of the ECB since the launch of the euro and as its President for almost eight years now, let me say that we have accomplished a lot: For example, companies in the euro area do not have to worry about price stability – I will come back later on this issue – and possible devaluations in the countries of their main trading partners. They face lower transaction and hedging costs. There is more price transparency and more ample access to finance, in general.  Since the start of the euro, employment in the euro area has risen by over 14 million, compared with about 8 million in the United States. Adjusted for population growth differences, growth per capita in the euro area has been almost the same as in the United States over the past decade, at about 1% per year in terms of GDP per capita growth.  Trade among euro area countries has also risen strongly. The value of exports and imports of goods within the euro area increased from about one quarter of GDP in 1998 to one third of GDP in 2007, with trade within euro area countries representing about a half of the total euro area trade. Economic and Monetary Union The key to understanding the current challenges in the euro area is the specific construction of Economic and Monetary Union.  The coexistence of an achieved monetary union – the single currency, the single monetary policy and the Eurosystem with the ECB at its helm – and of a largely decentralised economic pillar.  Indeed, Member States are responsible for their fiscal and economic policies, but are called to treat them as a matter of common concern. Those policies are subject to a European governance framework to ensure that they are fully compatible with the requirements of a single currency.  Our governance framework largely relied on the self-discipline of national governments, with hard constraints at the EU level only in those few cases where hard rules were supposed to apply.  We had assumed that countries had sufficient incentives to “keep their house in order” and thereby contribute to the common good of the euro area. An overly narrow interpretation of the principle of subsidiarity also shielded national economic policies from what was seen as undue European interference.  The experience of the first twelve years of EMU suggests that the limits of de facto soft policy coordination have largely been exhausted, with the interdependencies inside a monetary union calling for a stronger euro area dimension.  Let me now take a closer look at the two EMU pillars separately. The “M” of the EMU The “M” of the EMU, or the monetary pillar, has performed well.  The ECB has a clear assignment: to deliver price stability, which is defined as an annual inflation rate below but close to 2% over the medium term. And over the 12 years since the launch of EMU, the average annual inflation rate in the euro area has been 1.97%. This is the best result of a major central bank in the euro area for any such period of 12 years, over the last 50 years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 We achieved this during challenging times. Over the years, we have had to cope with the bursting of the dot-com bubble, the aftermath of the events of 11September 2001, the jump in oil prices to $147 per barrel in 2008, rising prices of food and commodities, and then of course the worst financial and economic crisis since the Great Depression. Yet throughout these very different economic shocks – which could have had either inflationary or deflationary consequences – citizens and market participants in the euro area have remained confident in our commitment. Inflation expectations have been firmly anchored in line with our definition of price stability. The “E” of the EMU It is the “E” of the EMU, where progress is needed.  Already the 1989 Delors report stated that “an Economic and Monetary Union could only operate on the basis of mutually consistent and sound behaviour by governments and other economic agents in all member countries. (…) Uncoordinated and divergent national budgetary policies would undermine monetary stability and generate imbalances in the real and financial sectors of the community.” What does this mean in practice?  It means improving economic governance. It means strengthening the rules to prevent unsound policies.  And it means to prohibit individual countries from pursuing policies that can harm themselves and the euro area as a whole.  For this reason, I have called, in the name of the Governing Council, on the Commission, the Council and the European Parliament to be very ambitious in reinforcing economic governance in the euro area.  We have called for a “quantum leap” in governance, for a substantially deepened economic union.  Essential reforms In the short-term, we have to tackle the most urgent issues by implementing the structural adjustment programmes that are currently underway.  The new economic governance framework that is currently being negotiated needs to be agreed and implemented in full and without delay.  We must get the institutional framework for the medium-term right.  The two EU co-legislators and the Commission have been negotiating the new economic governance package during the preceding weeks.  The European Parliament has confirmed its position at last Thursday’s plenary vote. The ECB particularly welcomes the strong message that is sent as regards the fact that the Stability and Growth Pact’s procedures have to be made more automatic. Our past experience in applying the Pact, especially after weakening of its core provisions in 2005, have amply demonstrated that a reform of these procedures has to be a sine qua non of a determined response to the current crisis. In this context, the Governing Council of the ECB regrets that the European Council did not decide to espouse the European Parliament’s views on this issue at the end of last week. This is an issue of key importance for the ECB. We consider that an essential progress in decision-making procedures in the Council is to make them more automatic.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches The extension of reverse qualified majority voting to the preventive arm of the Pact, which the European Parliament rightly insists on, is not about a perceived loss of sovereignty. It is a mechanism that would allow all Member States to protect themselves better from the harmful effects of unsound fiscal policies.  Since the very beginning of the discussions on the reform of economic governance in May 2010, the ECB has asked for greater automatism in the decision-making procedures to limit the room for discretion. This is a major component of the “quantum leap” that we have called for.  Had the Council had less room for manoeuvre in suspending or halting fiscal surveillance procedures in the years preceding the crisis, some of the euro area countries would not be facing as severe a sovereign debt crisis today.  However, this was not the entire story – surveillance instruments were lacking altogether as regards the build-up of competitiveness losses and of macroeconomic imbalances, which have made any solution to fiscal problems even more challenging.  Therefore, the ECB has also called for a fully-fledged surveillance procedure for competitiveness indicators and for macroeconomic imbalances. As a matter of fact, we have been pointing to the risks associated with competitiveness losses since 2005 and insisting on peer review and mutual oversight. The new procedure needs to be focused on the countries with large competitiveness losses and high indebtedness, since it is those countries that pose a potential threat to the functioning of EMU. In the short term, all parties have to take their responsibilities and agree on an ambitious governance package with two pillars – surveillance of fiscal policies and surveillance of macroeconomic policies, sending out a clear message to strengthen the economic policy framework that has been dented during the crisis. We urge a swift and ambitious completion of the legislative procedure to bring about certainty on this new framework. An additional element of stronger economic policy coordination for competitiveness and convergence surveillance in the euro area is the newly agreed Euro Plus Pact. The ECB supports the four goals of this Pact, namely to foster competitiveness and employment, to contribute to the sustainability of public finances and to reinforce financial stability. But we have also insisted that the Euro Plus Pact must be more than declarations. It must be followed up with concrete action. The ECB therefore welcomes the fact that the European Council last week called on the participating Member States to make their reform commitments more concrete, including specific timelines, to enable easier measurement of progress and benchmarking.  Single market Furthermore, let us not forget that the euro area of the 17 countries is participating actively in the larger Single Market of the 27 member countries of the European Union. The Single Market forms an integral part of the wider Europe 2020 strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. The governance framework of this strategy underpins the wider surveillance efforts of the economic pillar of EMU. The first experience as part of the so-called European Semester is approaching its final stages, with the European Council’s endorsement of the proposed recommendations for individual Member States last week. The EU Single market offers a unique businesses environment with direct access to over 500 million potential business partners, employees and consumers with relatively high purchasing power. The Single Market has not been at the centre of the EU political priorities for quite some time and there have even been protectionist tendencies.  I, therefore, strongly support the initiatives aimed at re-launching the Single Market to address the prevailing structural challenges faced by the EU economy. The Single Market is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 at the core of the Union’s growth agenda. A widening and deepening of the Single Market should be viewed as an opportunity to raise the “speed limit” of the economy, which is highly warranted in the aftermath of the impact the financial crisis had on the European economy.  Moreover, completion of the Single Market is an essential ingredient of the required quantum leap towards a deeper economic union that is commensurate with the degree of economic integration and interdependency already achieved through monetary union. EMU has led to a strengthening of trade integration and competition within the Single Market by enhancing market access, reducing the costs of cross-border activities and increasing price transparency.  At the same time, a well-functioning Single Market is pivotal for the smooth functioning of EMU. It allows for swift and market-based adjustment in case of shocks and facilitates the correction of economic imbalances. A well functioning Single Market also requires proper design and implementation of financial sector policies. In this respect, the establishment of a new EU supervisory architecture to introduce genuine macro-prudential supervision and to strengthen the micro-prudential oversight at the EU level was a prerequisite for enhanced financial stability arrangements.  The establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board and the European Supervisory Authorities is an important milestone in providing the appropriate incentives to avoid excessive risk taking in the financial sector and to promote a level playing field in support of beneficial financial integration within the monetary union. Establishment of an EU framework for crisis management is an important complementary element of the new supervisory framework that still needs to be put in place.  Conclusion This is a large agenda already. What more would be needed for EMU in the longer term? I have sketched out in my speech in Aachen earlier this month some elements that in my view would warrant consideration in the design of a longer-term vision for Europe. Developing these elements in more detail would, however, be the topic of another speech. Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Duvvuri Subbarao: India and the global financial crisis what have we learnt? Text of the K R Narayanan Oration by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the South Asia Research Centre of the Australian National University, Canberra, 23 June 2011. *      *      * Thank you for inviting me to deliver the 2011 K R Narayanan Oration. It is an honour to which I attach a lot of value. President Narayanan Late President Narayanan was a distinguished diplomat, a reputed parliamentarian, a capable minister and above all an erudite scholar. Born at the very bottom of India’s social pyramid, he rose on to occupy the highest office in the country with no assets other than hard work, integrity and humility. ‘A working President’, as he described himself, he never allowed dogma to overwhelm his beliefs and convictions. President Narayanan was in office from 1997 to 2002, a time when globalization, as we are experiencing it in the current times, was taking root. At the banquet he hosted for the visiting US President Bill Clinton in New Delhi in March 2000, President Narayanan remarked:  “Mr. President, we do recognise and welcome the fact that the world has been moving inevitably towards a one-world... But, for us, globalization does not mean the end of history and geography, and of the lively and exciting diversities of the world.” This was a thoughtful remark. As much as globalization may be inevitable, history and geography need not be destiny. If we learn the lessons of experience, we will not repeat the same mistakes. This indeed is the topic for my oration, and my tribute to late President Narayanan – to seek the lessons of the crisis that we have just gone through so that we can make this a better world of all of us. Is this time different? By all accounts the 2008/09 crisis has been the deepest financial crisis of our times. It has taken a devastating toll on global output and welfare. Arguably, the fundamental causes of all financial crises are the same – global imbalances, loose monetary policy and high levels of leverage driven by “irrational exuberance”. In that respect this crisis has been no different. Where this crisis has been different, however, is in its manifestation. Most recent crises had occurred in individual emerging economies or regions, and they were, at their core, traditional retail banking or currency crises. The countries in trouble could be rescued by multilateral interventions; besides, the advanced countries provided a buffer for trade and financial support. In contrast, this crisis originated in the most advanced economy, the United States, and hit at the very core of the global financial system. With virtually no buffers to fall back on, the crisis rapidly engulfed the whole world. Much to their dismay, emerging market economies too were soon pulled into the whirlpool. How was India hit by the crisis? India was no exception. We too were affected by the crisis. Output growth which averaged 9.5 per cent per annum during the three year period 2005/08 dropped to 6.8 per cent in the crisis year of 2008/09. Exports which grew at 25 per cent during 2005/08 decelerated to 12.2 per cent in the crisis year (2008/09) and declined by 2.2 per cent in 2009/10. In the pre-crisis years, we had capital flows far in excess of our current account deficit. In contrast, 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches during the crisis year, net capital flows were significantly short of the current account deficit and this put downward pressure on the rupee. The exchange rate depreciated from ` 39.37 per dollar in January 2008 to ` 51.23 per dollar in March 2009.  Notwithstanding our sound banking system and relatively robust financial markets, India felt the tremors of the tectonic shocks in the global financial system. The first round effects came through the finance channel by way of sudden stop and then reversal of capital flows consequent upon the global deleveraging process. This jolted our foreign exchange markets as well as our equity markets. Almost simultaneously, our credit markets came under pressure as corporates, finding that their external sources of funding had dried up, turned to domestic bank and non-bank sources for credit. By far the most contagious route for crisis transmission was the confidence channel. For weeks after the Lehman collapse in mid-September 2008, everyday there was news of yet another storied institution crashing. In this global scenario of uncertainty, the lack of confidence in advanced country markets transmitted as hiccups to our markets too. The net result was that all our financial markets – equity, debt, money and foreign exchange markets – came under varying degrees of pressure. Finally, the transmission of the crisis through the real channel was quite straightforward as the global recession that followed the financial crash resulted in a sharp decline in export demand for our goods and services. Why was India hit by the crisis? There was dismay in India that we too were affected by the crisis, and this dismay arose mainly on two counts. First, the exposure of our banks to toxic sub-prime assets was marginal and their off balance sheet activities were limited, and so, the argument went, we should not have been affected by a financial sector crisis that originated from these causes. Second, India’s growth is driven by domestic demand and a drop in external demand, it was contended, should have caused no more than a small dent in output growth. Yet the crisis hit us, and did so more ferociously than we thought possible. The reason for this is globalization: India is more integrated into the global system than we tend to acknowledge. Let me illustrate that point with some broadbrush numbers. India’s two way trade (merchandize exports plus imports), as a proportion of GDP, more than doubled over the past decade: from 19.6 per cent in 1998/99, the year of the Asian crisis, to 40.7 per cent in 2008/09. Note that global trade declined by 11 per cent in 2009 as a result of the crisis in contrast to a robust average growth of 8.6 per cent during the previous few years 2004/07. Such a sharp collapse in world trade had an impact on our export demand demonstrating that our trade integration was quite deep. If our trade integration was deep, our financial integration was even deeper. A measure of financial integration is the ratio of total external transactions (gross current account flows plus gross capital account flows) to GDP. This ratio had more than doubled from 44 per cent in 1998/99 to 112 per cent in 2008/09 evidencing the depth of India’s financial integration. In sum, the reason India was affected by the crisis, despite mitigating factors, is its deepened trade and financial integration with the world.  Managing globalization What the experience of the crisis demonstrated clearly was the power of globalization. Globalization is a double edged sword; it opens up incredible opportunities but also poses immense challenges. India surely benefitted from opening up to the world but had also incurred costs on that count. The challenge for India, and indeed for all Emerging Market Economies (EMEs), is really to minimize the costs and maximize the benefits of globalization. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Lessons of crisis A lot is being written about how this crisis has been too important to waste, how we should learn the lessons of the crisis and apply them in a Schumpeterian creative destruction mode. Some people have, however, questioned the wisdom of drawing lessons even before the crisis is fully behind us. When Zhou Enlai, former Chinese Prime Minister, was asked what he thought of the French Revolution, he said it was too early to say. Historians who take a long view may agree with Zhou Enlai but practical policy makers do not enjoy that luxury. So, let me use the opportunity of this platform to draw out eight big picture lessons of the crisis. Lesson 1: in a globalizing world, decoupling does not work The crisis challenged many of our beliefs, and among the casualties is the decoupling hypothesis. The decoupling hypothesis, which was intellectually fashionable before the crisis, held that even if advanced economies went into a downturn, EMEs would not be affected because of their improved macroeconomic management, robust external reserves and healthy banking sectors. Yet the crisis affected all EMEs, admittedly to different extents, bringing into question the validity of the decoupling hypothesis. Some analysts argue against such an outright dismissal of the decoupling hypothesis and suggest a more nuanced evaluation. Recent IMF research1 in fact illustrates that the transmission of distress from advanced economies to EMEs took place in three distinct phases. The first phase runs from the time early signs of the crisis appeared in mid-2007 till the Lehman collapse in September 2008. During this period, the growth performance of EMEs outshone that of advanced economies indicating decoupling. The second phase, starting with the Lehman collapse till the first quarter of 2009 was one of “recoupling” when advanced economies pulled EMEs too into the downturn. The third phase started in the second quarter of 2009 when EMEs started recovering from the crisis ahead of advanced economies suggesting a shift once again to decoupling. So, have EMEs decoupled from the advanced economies? The answer has necessarily to be nuanced. A useful way to visualize decoupling in the wake of the crisis is to distinguish between “trend” and “cycle” decoupling. “Trend” decoupling is reflected by the widening gap between the trend rates of growth of EMEs and of advanced economies. This is evidently owing to the growing weight of domestic factors, mainly consumption, in the EMEs’ growth process. However, given that there is still significant integration between the two groups of countries, cycles are still coupled. From a “lessons” perspective, what this means is that EMEs should focus on strengthening domestic drivers of demand and instituting automatic stabilizers to buffer themselves against cyclical shocks from advanced economies. Lesson 2: global imbalances need to be redressed for the sake of global stability No crisis as complex as this has a simple or a single cause. In popular perception, the collapse of Lehman Brothers in mid-September 2008 will remain marked as the trigger of the crisis. At one level that may well be true. Indeed, I can visualize future text books in finance dividing the world into “before Lehman” and “after Lehman”. But if we probe deeper, we will learn that at the heart of the crisis were two root causes – the build up of global imbalances and developments in the financial markets over the last two decades. And received wisdom today is that these two root causes are interconnected, and that financial market developments were in a sense driven by the global imbalances.                                                  1 Llaudes, Ricardo, Ferhan Salman, and Mali Chivakul, “The Impact of the Great Recession on Emerging Markets”. IMF Working Paper 237, October 2010. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Global macro imbalances got built up because of the large savings and current account surpluses in China and much of Asia in wake of the East Asian Crisis a decade ago. These were mirrored by large increases in leveraged consumption and current account deficits in the US. In short, Asia produced and America consumed. Between the US consumption boom and the Asian savings glut, there is a raging debate on what was the cause and what was the effect. Regardless, the bottom line is that one was simply the mirror of the other and the two share a symbiotic relationship. And how did these imbalances build up? The answer lies in globalization – globalization of trade, of labour and of finance. The world witnessed a phenomenal expansion in global trade over the last three decades; global trade as a proportion of global GDP increased from 34 per cent in 1980 to 51 per cent in 2007, just before the crisis hit us.2 Globalization of finance was even more prolific, especially over the last decade. For the world taken together, the ratio of foreign assets and foreign liabilities to GDP rose from 133 per cent in 1994 to over 300 per cent in 2008.3 The impact of globalization of labour was by far more striking. Emerging Asia added nearly three billion to the world’s pool of labour as it integrated with the rest of the world over the last two decades thus hugely improving its comparative advantage. Together, the three dimensions of globalization – trade, finance and labour – helped emerging Asia multiply by a factor its exports to the advanced economies. The result was large and persistent current account surpluses in the Asian economies and corresponding current account deficits in the importing advanced economies. The chain of causation from these imbalances to the financial crisis is interesting although not obvious. As Asia accumulated savings and simultaneously maintained competitive exchange rates, the savings turned into central bank reserves. Central banks, in turn, invested these savings not in any large, diversified portfolio but in government bonds of the advanced economies. This in turn drove down risk free real interest rates to historically low levels triggering phenomenal credit expansion and dropping of the guard on credit standards, erosion of credit quality and search for yield, all of which combined to brew the crisis to its explosive dimensions. It is argued that if the US Fed had refused to supply the incipient demand for liquidity in the late 1990s and early 2000s, higher interest rates could have prevented the borrowing boom and the follow on widespread deterioration of financial standards and the subsequent melt down. But this also would have meant lower growth in the US and the rest of the world. The short point is that even as macroeconomic imbalances should not be allowed to proliferate, it is necessary to balance the need for global economic growth against the disruptions which follow the unwinding of such imbalances. So, where do we go from here? The G-20 is now actively engaged in the challenging task of redressing structural imbalances in the global economy. At their Pittsburgh Summit in September 2009, the G-20 leaders agreed on a “Framework for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth” and committed to a “Mutual Assessment Process” (MAP) which is a peer review of each country’s progress towards meeting the shared objectives underlying the framework. Recognizing that global imbalances which had narrowed during the crisis started widening again in the exit phase, driven mainly by the uneven recovery around the world, the G-20 resolved that promoting external sustainability should be the focus of the next stage of the MAP and entrusted this task to a Framework Working Group (FWG). India is privileged in co-chairing, together with Canada, the FWG for managing the task of developing the indicative guidelines for assessing and addressing persistent global imbalances. The FWG has adopted a two-stage approach: a limited number of indicators will                                                  2 Calculations based on IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, June 2010. 3 Calculations based on IMF Balance of Payments Year Book, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 guide the initial assessment process, while a broader set – including qualitative ones – will be used in the second stage to inform an in-depth external sustainability assessment. The success of this initiative is critical for redressing the problem of global imbalances. Lesson 3: global problems require global coordination The crisis demonstrated the interconnectedness of the world through trade, finance and confidence channels. What originated as a bubble in the US housing sector soon snowballed into a crisis and radiated in two different ways – first, in a geographical sense, from the US to other advanced economies and then to the rest of the world; and second, in a sectoral sense, from housing to all productive sectors. Even as each country started dousing the fires on its own, it was soon realized that the effort was in vain and that global coordination is a necessary condition for managing a global crisis. From that perspective, the London G-20 Summit in April 2009 will go down in history as a clear turning point when the leaders of the world showed extraordinary determination and unity. Sure, there were differences, but they were debated and discussed and compromises were made without eroding the end goal – that is to end the crisis. This resulted in an agreed package of measures having both domestic and international components but all of them to be implemented in coordination, and indeed in synchronization where necessary. The entire range of crisis response measures – accommodative monetary stance, fiscal stimulus, debt and deposit guarantees, capital injection, asset purchases, currency swaps – all derived in varying degrees from the G-20 package. Now, as we exit from the crisis, there are concerns and apprehensions that the vaunted unity that the G-20 had shown during the crisis is dissipating. But might it also be a tad unrealistic to expect the degree of unity shown in managing the crisis to also be shown in addressing “peace time” issues? The focus of G-20 now is to flesh out the agenda for economic and financial restructuring at national and international levels so that the world can prevent, or at any rate minimize the probability of, another crisis of the type we have gone through. Differences of opinion, when the agenda is so broad, are not only to be expected, but may in fact have a positive influence in determining what is collectively optimal.  The common thread running through the entire G-20 agenda is the need for global cooperation in solving our most pressing problems of today. The crisis has taught us that no country can be an island and that economic and financial disruptions anywhere can cause ripples, if not waves, everywhere. The crisis also taught us that given the deepening integration of countries into the global economic and financial system, uncoordinated responses will lead to worse outcomes for everyone. The global problems we are facing today are complex and not amenable to easy solutions. Many of them require significant and often painful adjustments at the national level. Because short term national interests conflict with globally optimal solutions, it is quite understandable that there are differences of views within the G-20. We must remember though that in a world divided by nation-states, there is no natural constituency for the global economy. At the same time, the global crisis has shown that the global economy as an entity is more important than ever and that global coordination to solve global problems is critical. Lesson 4: price stability and macroeconomic stability do not guarantee financial  stability The years before the crisis were characterized by steady growth and low and stable inflation in advanced economies and rapid growth and development in EMEs. The so called “Great Moderation” prompted a growing consensus around the view that the best practice in monetary policy framework is the pursuit of a single target (price stability) by means of a single instrument (short term policy interest rate). The success of the Great Moderation 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches fortified the argument that price stability is a necessary and (a nearly) sufficient condition for economic growth and for financial stability. Central bankers believed they had discovered the holy grail. That sense of triumph was deflated by the unravelling of the crisis. As the global financial sector came to the brink of a collapse even in the midst of a period of extraordinary price stability, it became clear that price stability does not necessarily guarantee financial stability.  Indeed the experience of the crisis has prompted an even stronger assertion – that there is a trade off between price stability and financial stability, and that the more successful a central bank is with price stability, the more likely it is to imperil financial stability. The argument goes as follows. The extended period of steady growth and low and stable inflation during the Great Moderation lulled central banks into complacency. Only with the benefit of hindsight is it now clear that the prolonged period of price stability blindsided policy makers to the cancer of financial instability growing in the underbelly.  A dominant issue in the wake of the crisis has been the role of central banks in preventing asset price bubbles. The monetary stance of studied indifference to asset price inflation stemmed from the famous Greenspan orthodoxy which can be summarized as follows. First, asset price bubbles are hard to identify on a real time basis, and the fundamental factors that drive asset prices are not directly observable. A central bank should not therefore second guess the market. Second, monetary policy is too blunt an instrument to counteract asset price booms. And third, central banks can “clean up the mess” after the bubble bursts. The surmise therefore was that the cost-benefit calculus of a more activist monetary stance of “leaning against the wind” was clearly negative.  The crisis has dented the credibility of the Greenspan orthodoxy. The emerging view post-crisis is that preventing an asset price build up should be within the remit of a central bank. Opinion is divided, however, on whether central banks should prevent asset bubbles through monetary policy action or through regulatory action. On one side, there is a purist view questioning the efficacy of resorting to monetary tightening to check speculative bubbles. Opposed to this is the argument that a necessary condition for speculative excesses is abundant liquidity, and that controlling liquidity which is within the remit of monetary policy should be the first line of defence against “irrational exuberance”. No matter how this debate settles, a clear, if also disquieting lesson of the crisis is that price stability and macroeconomic stability do not guarantee financial stability. Lesson 5: microprudential regulation and supervision need to be supplemented by  macroprudential oversight The crisis has clearly demonstrated that a collection of healthy financial institutions does not necessarily make a healthy financial sector. This is because there are complex interconnections in the financial sector across banks, other financial institutions, markets, and geographies and a problem in any part of the system can rapidly transmit through the system, cascade across layers and develop into a crisis. Systemic safety can also be jeopardized by procyclicality. As the crisis demonstrated, there is a strong collective tendency among financial entities to overexpose themselves to the same type of risk during an upturn and become overly risk averse during a downturn. Importantly, individual institutions, and indeed microprudential oversight too, fail to take into account the spillover impact of the actions of the rest of the financial system on them. This raises the paradox of the fallacy of composition. What is good from an individual institution’s point of view can become disruptive, and even destructive, if all institutions act in a similar way. That a bubble that started in the US housing sector snowballed into a major crisis is a vivid illustration of the risks arising from the interconnectedness of the global financial system and the risks of procyclicality. The lesson clearly is that as much as microprudential supervision is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 necessary, it needs to be supplemented by macroprudential oversight to prevent systemic risk building up. Macroprudential oversight requires both analytical sophistication and good judgement. Regulators need to be able to analyze the nature and extent of risk and be able to make informed judgement on when and what type of countercyclical buffers they must impose. Both type I and type II errors – imposing buffers too early out of excessive caution or delaying imposition of buffers till it is too late to avert an implosion – can be costly in macroeconomic terms. Lesson 6: capital controls are not only unavoidable, but advisable in certain  circumstances As EMEs started recovering from the crisis earlier than advanced economies, they also began exiting from the crisis driven accommodative monetary stance ahead of the advanced economies. This multi-speed recovery and the consequent differential exit have triggered speculative capital flows into EMEs resulting in currency appreciation unrelated to economic fundamentals. This poses complex policy management challenges. Currency appreciation erodes export competitiveness. Intervention in the forex market to prevent appreciation entails costs. If the resultant liquidity is left unsterilized, it could potentially fuel inflationary pressures. If the resultant liquidity is sterilized, it puts upward pressure on interest rates which not only hurts competitiveness, but also, in a curious variation of the Dutch disease, encourages further flows. Capital inflows far in excess of a country’s absorptive capacity could pose problems other than currency appreciation. Speculative flows on the look out for quick returns can potentially lead to asset price build up. Also, in the current juncture, one of the driving forces behind hardening commodity prices in recent months is the excess liquidity in the global system which has possibly triggered financialization of commodities. Quite unsurprisingly, the old debate about whether capital controls are a legitimate policy option has resurfaced again. This is a debate that has traditionally frowned on moderation. Critics maintain that capital controls are distortionary, largely ineffective, difficult to implement, easy to evade and that they entail negative externalities. On the other hand, supporters of capital controls argue that controls preserve monetary policy autonomy, save sterilization costs and tilt the composition of foreign liabilities toward long-term maturities and ensure macroeconomic and financial stability. The debate on capital controls resurfaced after the Asian crisis of the mid-1990s, especially as one of the root causes of the crisis was the open capital accounts of the East Asian economies. However, as the Asian economies recovered in quick order, regained their export competitiveness and started building up external reserves for self-insurance, the debate was not pursued to its logical conclusion, and the orthodoxy that capital controls are undesirable persisted. The recent crisis has, however, been a clear turning point in the worldview on capital controls. Notably, the IMF put out a policy note4 in February 2010 that reversed its long held orthodoxy that capital controls are inadvisable always and everywhere. The note has referred to certain “circumstances in which capital controls can be a legitimate component of the policy response to surges in capital flows”. The World Bank5 and the Asian Development Bank Outlook – 2010 too echoed these views.                                                   4 Ostry, Jonathan D. and Others (2010), “Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls”, IMF Staff Position Note, SPN/10/04, February 19, 2010. 5 World Bank: Global Monitoring Report 2009: A Development Emergency. Washington DC 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches A useful way of assessing the capital account management of an EME is to draw a distinction between “strategic” and “tactical” controls. Strategic controls would involve defining a long term policy indicating the inter se preference, or the hierarchy of preferences as it were, across different types of capital flows and the controls that will be deployed to operationalize that policy. Strategic controls give stakeholders a clear and predictable framework of rules to make informed choices and to manage risks, and they give policy makers sufficient levers to calibrate the flows; in essence they define the boundaries of the playing field. Tactical controls, on the other hand, introduce barriers into the playing field itself. They are deployed opportunistically to stem a surge in inflows or outflows. By their very nature, tactical controls introduce a new element of uncertainty into the calculations of both domestic and foreign stakeholders.  India’s approach to capital account management is typically strategic. For example, we have an explicitly expressed preference for long term over short term flows and equity over debt flows, and we have used both price based and quantity based controls to operationalize this policy. We have, of course, periodically recalibrated elements of the strategy in pursuit of capital account liberalization. An important lesson from India’s experience is that even with relatively large swings in capital flows during the crisis, the pressure to use tactical controls did not build up because the strategic controls provided automatic buffers. Even as we debate what EMEs should or should not do to manage excess capital flows, we should remember that to the extent that lumpy and volatile flows are a spillover from policy choices of advanced economies, managing capital flows should not be treated as an exclusive problem of emerging market economies. How this burden is to be shared raises both intellectual and practical challenges. The intellectual challenge is to build a better understanding of the forces driving capital flows, what type of policy instruments, including capital controls, work and in what situations. The practical challenge is the need to reach a shared understanding on a framework for cross border spillovers of domestic policies in capital-originating countries, and the gamut of policy responses by capital receiving countries. Lesson 7: economics is not physics A few months into the crisis, the Queen happened to be at the London School of Economics and asked a perfectly sensible question: “how come none of the economists saw the crisis coming”. The Queen’s question resonated with people around the world who felt that they had been let down by economics and economists. As economists saw their profession discredited and their reputations dented, the economic crisis soon turned into a crisis in economics. What went wrong with economics? It now seems that by far the most egregious fault of economics, one that led it astray, has been to project it like an exact science. The charge is that economists suffered from “physics envy” which led them to formulate elegant theories and models – using sophisticated mathematics with impressive quantitative  finesse – deluding themselves and the world at large that their models have more exactitude than they actually did. Admittedly, in a limited sense there may be some parallels between economics and physics. But similarity in a few laws does not mean similarity in the basic nature of the academic discipline. The fundamental difference between physics and economics is that physics deals with the physical universe which is governed by immutable laws, beyond the pale of human behaviour. Economics, in contrast, is a social science whose laws are influenced by human behaviour. Simply put, I cannot change the mass of an electron no matter how I behave but I can change the price of a derivative by my behaviour. The laws of physics are universal in space and time. The laws of economics are very much a function of the context. Going back to the earlier example, the mass of an electron does not 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 change whether we are in the world of Newton or of Einstein. But in the world of economics, how firms, households and governments behave is altered by the reigning economic ideology of the time. To give another example, there is nothing absolute, for example, about savings being equal to investment or supply equalling demand as maintained by classical economics but there is something absolute about energy lost being equal to energy gained as enunciated by classical physics.  In natural sciences, progress is a two way street. It can run from empirical findings to theory or the other way round. The famous Michelson-Morley experiment that found that the velocity of light is constant led to the theory of relativity – an example of progression from practice to theory. In the reverse direction, the ferocious search now under way for the  Higgs Boson – the God particle – which has been predicted by quantum theory is an example of traversing from theory to practice. In economics, on the other hand, where the human dimension is paramount, the progression has necessarily to be one way, from empirical finding to theory. There is a joke that if something works in practice, economists run to see if it works in theory. Actually, I don’t see the joke; that is indeed the way it should be. Karl Popper, by far the most influential philosopher of science of the twentieth century, propounded that a good theory is one that gives rise to falsifiable hypotheses. By this measure, Einstein’s General Theory was a good theory as it led to the hypothesis about the curvature of space under the force of gravity which indeed was verified by scientists from observations made during a solar eclipse from the West African islands of Sao Tome and Principe. Economics on the other hand cannot stand the scrutiny of the falsifiable hypothesis test since empirical results in economics are a function of the context. The short point is that economics cannot lay claim to the immutability, universality, precision and exactitude of physics. Take the recent financial crisis. It is not as if no one saw the pressures building up. There were a respectable number of economists who warned of the perilous consequences of the build-up of global imbalances, said that this was simply unsustainable and predicted a currency collapse. In the event, we did have the system imploding but not as a currency collapse but as a melt down of the financial system. We will be better able to safeguard financial stability both at global and national levels if we remember that economics is a social science and real world outcomes are influenced at a fundamental level by human behaviour. Lesson 8: having a sense of economic history is important to prevent and resolve  financial crises Let me finish with the last lesson which is on a larger canvas – that having a sense of economic history is important to prevent and to resolve financial crises. In their painstakingly researched book, This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, Kenneth Rogoff and Carmen Reinhart argue that every time a crisis occurs and experts are confronted with the question of why they could not, based on past experience, see it coming, they would argue that past experience was no guide as circumstances had changed. Yet this “this time is different” argument does not hold. Reinhart and Rogoff put forward impressive evidence showing that over eight hundred years, all financial crises can be traced to the same fundamental causes as if we learnt nothing from one crisis to another. If only teaching in economics had included a study of economic history, perhaps we can avoid repeating history, never mind as a farce or a tragedy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Philipp Hildebrand: Overview of the Swiss and global economy Introductory remarks by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 16 June 2011. *      *      * The Swiss National Bank (SNB) is maintaining its expansionary monetary policy. The target range for the three-month Libor remains at 0.0–0.75%, and the SNB intends to keep the Libor within the lower part of the target range at around 0.25%.  The global economic recovery is continuing, even if the outlook has dampened somewhat in the past few weeks. The level of capacity utilisation in the Swiss economy is rising. Despite the strong appreciation of the Swiss franc, the economy continues to benefit from robust international demand. However, margins in the export industry are coming under increasing pressure. For 2011, the SNB is maintaining its forecast of real growth in Swiss GDP of around 2%.  Overall, however, downside risks predominate. These include, in particular, the debt problems in the euro area periphery. In addition, high deficits require several countries in various parts of the world to undertake fiscal consolidation measures, economic fragility notwithstanding. The recent commodity price increase weighs on global economic growth and poses upside risks to inflation. In Switzerland, the main risks remain, on the one hand, the effects of the strong Swiss franc on the export industry and, on the other, the danger of overheating in the real estate sector.  Until the beginning of 2012, the path of the SNB’s conditional inflation forecast lies above that of the previous quarter’s forecast. This is attributable to the assumption of higher oil prices compared to the previous quarter and somewhat higher import prices. Assuming an unchanged three-month Libor of 0.25% over the forecast horizon, the SNB expects average inflation rates of 0.9% for 2011, 1.0% for 2012 and 1.7% for 2013. Over the course of 2012, the path of the new forecast is lower than that of March because of the latest appreciation of the Swiss franc and the slightly slower development of international growth. Towards the end of the forecast period, inflation rises briskly and exceeds the upper bound of 2%. This shows that the current expansionary monetary policy cannot be maintained over the entire forecast horizon without compromising price stability in the long term. Due to the risks mentioned previously, the conditional inflation forecast is, however, associated with a high level of uncertainty.  Global economic outlook Economic growth continued worldwide in the first quarter, although there were considerable regional differences. As in the previous quarters, the emerging economies recorded the highest growth rates. In the euro area, particularly Germany, the recovery was supported by strong export and investment activity. In the US, by contrast, high energy prices weighed on sentiment and held back growth. In addition, the persistent crisis on the real estate market is hampering the economic recovery. In Japan, there was a significant decline in GDP as a result of the earthquake.  Although the international economic outlook is somewhat less favourable than in March, the upswing in the global economy is likely to be maintained in the months ahead. In the US, in particular, the latest production and labour market indicators have been disappointing. Due to the high commodity prices and the production losses in Japan, the SNB has revised its 2011 growth forecast for the advanced economies downwards to some extent. Moreover, numerous countries are planning to undertake additional cost-cutting measures in the year 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches ahead. The rise in commodity prices since autumn of last year is expected to result in significantly higher inflation worldwide in 2011.  Swiss economic outlook According to the SECO estimate, the growth of real GDP in Switzerland slowed in the first quarter, mainly because of the muted advance in private consumption and equipment investment. By contrast, exports recorded a marked gain as a result of robust international demand, particularly from Germany and Asia, despite the strength of the Swiss franc. The strong momentum in construction also supported growth. Utilisation of technical capacity continued to pick up and was above the long-term average in manufacturing; in the construction sector it actually attained a record high level. The recovery on the labour market also continued. After a massive increase during the crisis, measures introducing short-term work have largely been retracted. In May, the seasonally-adjusted unemployment ratio decreased to 3.0% and companies are reporting more difficulties in recruiting qualified employees. Due to the appreciation of the Swiss franc, export-geared companies are exposed to strong price competition. In manufacturing, in particular, margins are under very strong pressure in some cases. However, survey results still suggest that robust foreign demand allows for good utilisation of capacities and supports exports. The short-term outlook also remains good for domestic demand. Construction investment is benefiting from favourable financing conditions, while higher capacity utilisation should stimulate equipment investment. Demand for labour is likely to firm further. For 2011, the SNB is maintaining its forecast of real GDP growth amounting to around 2%. Monetary and financial conditions  Monetary conditions were again characterised by the divergence between low interest rates and the Swiss franc, which appreciated significantly in the second quarter. Since the last monetary policy assessment, the three-month Libor has persisted in the lower part of the target range. With inflation expectations rising slightly, real interest rates have remained low and even, in the short-term range, negative. In general, although long-term interest rates have risen since their low point in August 2010, they are still at a low level.  By contrast, the real export-weighted Swiss franc appreciated further in the second quarter and has reached an all-time high. By the beginning of May, the US dollar – mainly – had weakened significantly against the Swiss franc. Thereafter, renewed concerns about stability in the euro area also led to a depreciation of the euro. My colleague, Jean-Pierre Danthine, will speak about the situation on the international financial markets in more detail later on. The SNB is concerned about exchange rate developments. The SNB forecasts are based on the premise that the exchange rate developments will stabilise in the medium term. Should the exchange rate again be subject to significant changes, a reassessment of the inflation outlook would be required.  Since the last monetary policy assessment, the M2 and M3 aggregates have been growing at about 7% year-on-year. Some of this high growth rate is attributable to the current low interest rates. Overall, ample liquidity is available in the economy and this means potential risks for price stability in the long term. Mortgage lending has also continued to increase substantially, growing at a rate of 4.7% in April. In an environment of low interest rates and substantial advances in real estate prices, a high rate of growth in mortgages can harbour risks for financial stability. In the speech that follows, my colleague Thomas Jordan will outline for you the SNB’s Financial Stability Report. In view of the potential risks for the financial sector, the SNB continues to closely observe the situation on the mortgage and real estate markets.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Chart of conditional inflation forecast  The (dashed) red curve on the chart represents the new conditional inflation forecast. It shows the future path of inflation, assuming that the three-month Libor remains constant at 0.25% over the next twelve quarters, and it covers the period from the first quarter of 2011 to the first quarter of 2014. For purposes of comparison, the (dash-dotted) green curve shows the conditional inflation forecast published in March, which was also based on the assumption of a three-month Libor of 0.25%. Until the beginning of 2012, the path of the SNB’s new conditional inflation forecast lies above that of the previous quarter’s forecast. This is attributable to the assumption of higher oil prices compared to the previous quarter and somewhat higher import prices. The significant increase in the third quarter of 2011 is due to a base effect, because inflation in the corresponding quarter of 2010 was comparatively low. In addition, a one-off statistical effect can be expected in the third quarter of 2011. This is attributable to more frequent data collection in the case of prices for clothing and shoes; it also accounted for an increase in inflation in the first quarter. During the course of 2012, the path of the new forecast falls below that of March, due to the slowdown in inflation attributable to the latest appreciation in the Swiss franc. Towards the end of the forecast period, inflation rises briskly and exceeds the upper bound of 2%. This shows that the current expansionary monetary policy cannot be maintained over the entire forecast horizon without compromising price stability in the long term. Due to the risks mentioned previously, the conditional inflation forecast is, however, associated with a high level of uncertainty.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches   Conditional inflation forecast of March 2011 and of June 2011Percentage change in national consumer price index from previous yearInflationForecast March 2011 (with Libor at 0.25%)Forecast June 2011 (with Libor at 0.25%)% –0.500.511.522.532008200920102011201220132014 Observed inflation June 2011 200820092010Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Inflation2.52.73.01.60.0-0.7-1.0-0.21.11.00.30.30.6   2.4-0.50.72008200920102011 Conditional inflation forecast of March 2011 with Libor at 0.25% and of June 2011 with Libor at 0.25% 201120122013Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Forecast March 2011,Libor at 0.25%0.40.51.21.00.91.01.11.31.51.82.12.5    0.81.12.0Forecast June 2011,Libor at 0.25% 0.51.41.31.00.91.01.21.41.61.82.22.6   0.91.01.72011201320142012  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  
Lim Hng Kiang: Bank capital adequacy and institutional structure – Singapore’s approach Keynote address by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Minister for Trade and Industry and Deputy Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the 38th Association of Banks in Singapore (ABS) Annual Dinner, Singapore, 28 June 2011. *      *      * Introduction Chairman, ABS, Council members of ABS, Ladies and Gentlemen It is my pleasure to be here this evening. I was last here to deliver the keynote address in 2007, prior to the global financial crisis. As economies now recover, especially in Asia, it is easy to forget how close the global financial system was to the precipice. Following the failure of Lehman Brothers, the solvency of many well-known financial institutions in the advanced economies came into question. Weaknesses and failures at the core of their banking system were transmitted to almost all sectors and countries. A global meltdown was averted only through extraordinary actions taken by central banks, governments and financial institutions themselves. Regulators globally have had the benefit of some distance from the depth of the crisis to reflect on what needs to be done to strengthen the resilience of the financial system. MAS has been doing likewise and tonight, I would like to explain MAS’ approach to reforms in the regulation of banking. Post-crisis reflection Singapore’s financial system withstood the global financial crisis well. This did not happen by chance. Singapore banks were, on the whole, prudent and had less risky balance sheets. MAS has always required banks to meet high prudential standards, exceeding international norms in several areas. This ensured adequate safeguards were in place and, in turn, helped to maintain market confidence during the downturn. In its annual assessment on Singapore last year, the IMF stated that “Singapore’s strong supervision and risk management systems had been crucial in safeguarding financial stability in the global downturn.”1  Although banks in Singapore were relatively unscathed during the crisis, we cannot be complacent. Over the past 40 years, Singapore has evolved into an international financial centre, anchored by strong local and foreign banks. We are a small and open economy, intricately connected to the global financial system. Such openness and connectivity has strengthened the diversity of our financial system, but has also made us vulnerable to contagion risks from the external environment. Locally-incorporated banks and most foreign branches here did not have significant exposures to the complex financial assets that caused severe losses in the U.S. and Europe. Despite this, they were not immune to the ripple effects of the global spike in risk aversion.  Our approach to regulation is to allow the financial sector to grow, innovate, and support the needs of the economy, without compromising the safety and soundness of the financial system as a whole. With this context, let me now turn to the reforms.                                                   1  International Monetary Fund, Executive Board Assessment, 23 July 2010. BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
The emerging global regulatory paradigm Following wide-ranging discussions and consultation, the global regulatory community has made progress to strengthen the resilience of the financial system. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has strengthened global minimum capital standards as part of its Basel III Framework. The Financial Stability Board (“FSB”) has released guidelines to reduce the risks posed by systemically-important financial institutions, or “SIFIs”. MAS welcomes the Basel III reforms. They will strengthen the resilience of individual banks during periods of stress, and in doing so, contribute to banking sector stability. Basel III is a major step forward in several areas: (i) First, it strengthens capital requirements for trading activities, off-balance sheet vehicles, securitisation, and counterparty credit derivatives. (ii) Second, it improves the quality of capital, with a greater focus on common equity to absorb losses. (iii) Third, it raises the level of capital that banks will have to hold to absorb losses in both going-concern and unwinding scenarios. (iv) Fourth, it introduces international liquidity standards for the first time, to make banks more resilient to short-term funding disruptions and longer-term liquidity mismatches. The FSB is finalising its recommendations for global systemically important financial institutions, or G-SIFIs. This will comprise a package of measures, the most important of which are quite clear:  First, G-SIFIs will have to meet higher capital requirements, above the Basel III minimums. This is to reflect the greater risk that their failure would pose to the financial system.  Second, resolution frameworks have to be established, to ensure that all banks, however complex or large, can be resolved in an efficient and safe manner. Such frameworks may involve the simplification of firm structures and the design of “bail-in” mechanisms, where creditors are forced to absorb losses when a bank is close to failure2.  Third, G-SIFIs will face more intensive supervisory oversight, guided by an enhanced set of core principles for effective banking supervision.  Singapore’s regulatory approach Many jurisdictions are now considering their responses to the FSB and Basel Committee recommendations. MAS’ regulatory approach is guided by three principles: (i) First, we must maintain the high standards of financial regulation which have become associated with Singapore. Maintaining high regulatory standards is completely compatible with fostering a vibrant financial sector. Being a well-regulated, trusted and stable financial centre is a source of advantage for Singapore. It provides confidence for banks to operate in Singapore and for customers to transact with banks here.                                                   2 “Bail-in” is the process where bank debt in failing firms is forcibly converted into equity. This is intended to make it possible to rapidly recapitalise a bank such that it can continue in business without an equity injection from taxpayers. 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
(ii) Second, our rules must be risk-appropriate. International standards must sometimes be enhanced to be appropriate for Singapore’s context. They must be targeted to address well-defined risks or concerns that could have systemic implications.  (iii) Third, our approach must be sensitive to the impact on industry. No new regulation is costless. MAS must weigh the cost of new regulations on institutions which have to comply with them, against the broader benefits that those regulations have for the economy and society.  With these principles in mind, I will now outline MAS’ approach to the issues I mentioned earlier. I will first touch on what Basel III will mean for Singapore’s capital adequacy requirements. After which, I will share MAS’ views on the current debate on universal banking.  Capital requirements for locally-incorporated banks MAS has reviewed its bank capital adequacy rules. We will require Singapore-incorporated banks to meet Basel III earlier and at a higher standard. Singapore-incorporated banks will be required to meet the Basel III minimum standards by 1 January 2013, ahead of the Basel Committee’s January 2015 timeline. Singapore banks are well-capitalised and are in a good position to adopt Basel III sooner than 2015. Moreover, the long phase-in period provided by the Basel Committee was to ensure that the new requirements did not stall the economic recovery in countries that were at the centre of the crisis. Singapore’s situation is different: the recovery has been robust and the economy is well above pre-crisis levels.  MAS will increase the minimum levels of common equity that locally-incorporated banks will be required to hold. The experience of other countries in the recent crisis shows that common equity is the most effective capital instrument to absorb losses and write-downs. Research done by the Basel Committee shows that banks that failed or required government capital injections during the crisis had significantly lower levels of common equity than those banks that did not.  MAS will enhance the quality of regulatory capital in our banks in the following ways:  (i) There will be an explicit Common Equity Tier 1 capital adequacy requirement, to be set at 6.5%. This will be fully phased in by 1 Jan 2015. (ii) The Tier 1 capital adequacy requirement will be increased from 6% to 8%, to be phased in over the same period. The Total capital adequacy requirement will remain unchanged at 10%. (iii) In addition to these minimum requirements, there will be a capital conservation buffer3, set at 2.5%, to be met with Common Equity Tier 1. This will be phased in between 1 Jan 2016 and 1 Jan 2019. (iv) The new eligibility criteria for regulatory capital will also be phased in between 1 Jan 2014 and 1 Jan 2018. With these changes, locally-incorporated banks will be required to meet capital requirements that are higher than the minimum levels in Basel III. The requirements will apply at both the bank-group and bank-solo levels. Taking into account the capital conservation buffer, locally-                                                 3  The capital conservation buffer is a Basel III requirement for banks to maintain a capital buffer that can be used to absorb losses during periods of stress. Constraints on earnings distributions through dividends, share buybacks and discretionary bonus payments to staff will be imposed on a bank when the conservation buffer is breached. The closer a bank’s regulatory capital ratio approaches the minimum requirement, the greater the constraints on earnings distributions. BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 
incorporated banks will have to maintain at least 9% Common Equity Tier 1, compared to the Basel III minimum of 7%. Let me explain the reasons for this.  (i) First, the Basel III minimums do not adequately take into account the systemic importance of banks. Each locally-incorporated bank is systemically-important in Singapore and has a substantial retail presence. Together, they account for more than half of the total non-bank resident deposits and loans in Singapore. Hence, higher capital levels are required to strengthen their ability to absorb unexpected losses effectively in a crisis. This is necessary to protect depositors, reduce risks to the real economy, and safeguard our financial stability. The experience of countries at the centre of the crisis in Europe and the U.S. showed that the total cost of a financial crisis to the economy and the public can be substantial. (ii) Second, Common Equity Tier 1 capital requirements that are significantly above Basel III will not result in a large reduction in economic output but would be beneficial in reducing the likelihood and cost of a crisis. Several empirical studies confirm this. Notably, the Basel Committee’s assessment of the long-term economic impact of Basel III was that the economic costs of going above Basel minimums were still lower than the costs arising from banking crises.  In deciding on the levels appropriate for Singapore, MAS carefully weighed the costs of additional capital against the benefits. Banks that are well-capitalised, prudently regulated, and located in stable financial centres such as Singapore, present an attractive value proposition to depositors and investors. Holding systemically-important banks to a higher solvency standard reduces both the likelihood of failure and impact to the real economy if one of them runs into difficulties. (iii) Third, the impact on banks’ capital structures will be manageable. This is, in part, due to the already high internal capital buffers held by the banks and also due to the transition arrangements that will apply.  In short, the locally-incorporated banks are in a good position to meet the higher capital adequacy requirements and will emerge stronger in a post-Basel III world. Institutional structure of banking One strand of the regulatory debate that is still ongoing relates to whether reforms to how banks structure themselves can help promote financial stability. There are several dimensions to this. I will focus on the dimension that is most relevant to Singapore as a financial centre. This relates to the merits of the universal branching model compared to a subsidiary model for retail banking.  Most foreign banks in Singapore operate under a universal branching model. Branches here undertake a combination of retail, commercial, and investment banking activities, without the need to legally separate these activities. Some other regulators prefer that banks operating in their jurisdictions operate as subsidiaries, or separate the retail and wholesale activities into different legal entities.  MAS has a long history of permitting the universal branching model and we continue to support it. The universal branching model provides significant efficiency benefits for banks. It permits a bank to take advantage of economies of scale by sharing management resources and capital across its business lines, in addition to pooling its risks across the banking group. A branch can rely on the capital of the parent bank to borrow from the interbank market for funding purposes. This may not be possible for a local subsidiary with a smaller capital base. A branch structure can also give the banking group a greater ability to withstand idiosyncratic shocks to part of the group, because excess liquidity and capital from one part of the group can be redeployed to the parts in need. This, of course, is provided that the shock is not so large as to overwhelm the group as whole.   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 During periods of severe stress, however, the close linkages between business functions in a single, integrated entity make it difficult to isolate and contain problems. The provision of essential services by a branch such as domestic lending and deposit-taking, as well as payment transactions, could be disrupted. Local depositors would be exposed to possible contagion or a crisis of confidence arising from problems in the bank’s home market, or from problems related to its wholesale banking activities.  MAS imposes a number of regulatory requirements on the locally-incorporated banks to protect depositors, including the higher capital adequacy requirements that I mentioned earlier and a minimum paid-up capital of $1.5 billion. However, there are Qualified Full Banks (QFBs) and foreign full banks which operate as branches and accept retail deposits without any capital in Singapore. MAS’ approach has been to closely supervise these branches. They are also required to be members of the deposit insurance scheme, which provides a safety net for all non-bank depositors by insuring their deposits up to $50,000 per depositor per bank.  There are clear benefits, however, for foreign banks with a large retail presence to operate their retail business from a locally-incorporated subsidiary. Where the banks have corporate or investment banking businesses, these activities can continue to operate as part of their existing branches. This will allow banks to continue to benefit from cost efficiencies associated with a branch structure and minimise changes to their business models. Moreover, by conducting retail activities from a separate locally-incorporated entity, the bank will be seen by local retail customers as being strongly committed to the local market for the long-term. International discussions on this topic are ongoing and MAS is monitoring the debate closely.  Conclusion To conclude, Singapore has built a reputation for credibility and prudence in the last 40 years. Our financial sector has weathered several crises well. But we cannot take this for granted. There will continue to be risks and challenges in the financial and economic environment. The changes to the capital adequacy requirements that I have outlined tonight will help keep our banking system strong, and preserve Singapore’s reputation as a safe, open and dynamic financial centre.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Lim Hng Kiang: Singapore’s key role in Asia Opening remarks by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Minister for Trade and Industry and Deputy Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the 8th Annual Citi Asia Pacific Investor Conference 2011, Singapore, 16 February 2011. *      *      * Distinguished guests, Ladies and gentlemen, 1. Good morning and a very warm welcome to everyone here today. It is my pleasure to join you here at the 8th Citi Asia Pacific Investor Conference.  2. This conference is taking place at a time when the global economic recovery is picking up pace. Against this backdrop, there will be many opportunities to be explored. I am confident that this conference will provide an excellent platform for participants to share ideas and build networks. 3. The world’s economic landscape has been re-shaped since the recent global financial crisis. The recent crisis was said to be the worst since the Great Depression of the 1930s. Today, the advanced economies which were at the epicenter of the crisis still face headwinds in their recovery. In the United States, economic recovery remains fragile after two rounds of quantitative easing measures. In the Euro-zone, concerns over sovereign debts have yet to subside. There are still uncertainties in the horizon for these advanced economies. 4. This time, Asia is at the forefront of the global recovery. Asia’s resilience, built up over the years since the Asian Financial Crisis, has enabled us to weather this crisis better. Many Asian economies rebounded quickly and strongly from the crisis. Following the onset of the crisis, policymakers in Asia took prompt actions to stabilise their economies, using measures such as fiscal stimulus. In Singapore’s case, our fiscal flexibility allowed the government to introduce a SGD$20.5 billion resilience package in the FY2009 budget to help Singaporean businesses and households tide over the economic difficulties. This also helped strengthen our economy’s long term competitiveness.  5. Starting from a relatively stronger position, Asia’s role in the global economy will become more important as we continue to build on our strengths. Looking ahead, Asia’s economic prospects look promising, although the region is still at risk from external shocks. The IMF estimated that GDP growth for Asia will settle at a more sustainable 7 percent in 2011. However, Asia as a region remains inter-connected with other major economies through trade and financial linkages. Therefore, Asia is not insulated from external shocks. But Asian foreign policymakers have been quick to respond. To reduce reliance on exports, many Asian countries have taken measures to rebalance their economies towards domestic demand. The growing Asian demand will help support the global economic recovery; and in the longer term, contribute to the growth of our global economy. 6. Going forward, it is widely expected that Asia will continue to lead the global recovery. Investors are confident of Asia’s prospects due to sound economic fundamentals and fiscal strength. The booming Asian economies will present many investment opportunities. In particular, infrastructure financing is likely to be a major driver of demand for investments. The Asian Development Bank estimated that USD$8 trillion worth of infrastructure spending is needed in the 10 years leading up to 2020 to support Asia’s growth. The demand for capital investments driven by the growth in Asia’s real economy will support the development of the region’s capital markets. As investors continue to invest in Asia, the depth, accessibility and efficiency of Asia’s capital markets will continue to improve. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches With proper balance, the continuing inflows of funds, improvements in capital markets and growth in the real economy will create a self-reinforcing virtuous circle. 7. Along with the rise of Asia, Singapore will continue to enhance our position as a Global-Asia financial and business hub. As a well-connected international financial centre, Singapore can be the base for global players to tap into opportunities offered by a rising Asia. To do that, we will build on our strengths in areas such as trading, asset management and infrastructure financing. We will also continue to emphasise the importance of strengthening risk management, enhancing transparency, as well as build depth and diversity in the offering of financial products and services. Let me cover these areas in turn. 8. First, in the area of strengthening risk management. In the context of the capital markets, we have been building the necessary infrastructure to help market participants better manage their risks. There has been greater concern over counterparty risks since the financial crisis. This fear of counterparty default dented global trading and interbank lending activities. To allow market participants to better manage their counterparty risks, the Singapore Exchange launched a new clearing service for OTC financial derivatives in 2010. This is the first such service in Asia. 10 international and local banks have since signed up with SGX to clear their OTC financial derivatives, and there are intentions to expand the product suite going forward. This initiative also enhances our role as a regional risk management centre.  9. In May last year, MAS published a consultation paper on amendments to the Code on Collective Investment Scheme. Among other things, there are proposals to introduce a number of measures to address counterparty risks. For instance, MAS has proposed that managers may only enter into OTC financial derivative transactions with counterparties subject to prudential supervision. If the financial derivative transaction is performed on an exchange where the clearing house performs a central counterparty role, the counterparty risk can be taken as zero. MAS will be publishing its response to the consultation paper in due course.  10. Singapore is also a key risk management hub for the commodities business. We are Asia’s leading OTC commodity derivatives trading hub, accounting for more than 50% of Asia’s volume. There is also a confluence of users and suppliers of commodities risk management solutions in Singapore. Apart from the critical mass of global commodities traders, many global banks have also based their Asian commodities business in Singapore. These banks provide sophisticated risk management and hedging services to the regional corporates. 11. Let me now turn to how to enhance transparency. Sound corporate governance is fundamental to a successful disclosure-based regime. The financial crisis has highlighted the importance of risk management oversight at the Board level and sparked increased global discussions on the need for better corporate governance practices. In December last year, MAS published its response to the consultation feedback on corporate governance regulations and guidelines. The enhanced rules and guidelines underscore the important role played by the Board in overseeing the soundness of the financial institutions. 12. MAS has also been promoting improvements in the disclosure and quality of information available to investors. Since the third quarter of last year, financial institutions are required to provide Product Highlight Sheets when offering investment products to retail investors. This will provide brief highlights, including an overview of product features and risks, and applies to products that are accompanied by prospectuses, including exchange traded funds, asset-backed securities and structured notes. Since January 2010, real estate investment trusts (REITS) have also been required to hold annual general meetings (AGMs). These mandatory AGMs provide an important channel for communication between REIT managers and investors. This will also increase transparency and raise the accountability of REIT managers to investors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 13. Last but not least, we remain committed to building diversity in Singapore’s financial markets. We will continue to provide a conducive business environment that encourages innovation. On this front, we have seen increased diversity, both in terms of product offerings as well as in the issuers. In the area of product offerings, for example, we have seen an increase in the offering of commodity-related financial products. The Singapore Commodity Exchange launched a Robusta coffee futures contract in April last year. The Singapore Mercantile Exchange launched in August last year also provides a platform for trading a diversified basket of commodities including futures and options contracts on precious metals, agriculture commodities and energy. We have also replicated the success of the real estate investment trusts model for the infrastructure sector, further adding to the diversity of our capital markets. 14. On top of the increased diversity in product offerings, we are also encouraged by the increased diversity of issuers coming to tap into the depth and liquidity of our capital markets. Last year, we saw the first Russian debt issue in the Singapore market when VTB Bank launched its Sing Dollar Eurobond here. This paves the way for other highly rated Russian issuers to access our markets. In the area of Islamic finance, a number of international players have also tapped our markets for their shariah-compliant instruments. They include Saudi Arabia’s Al Rajhi Group1 and Malaysia’s Khazanah Nasional2. In November last year, Sabana also launched the first shariah-compliant Real Estate Investment Trust in Singapore, which is also the world’s largest shariah-compliant REIT. 15. Singapore plays a key role as a gateway to Asia, facilitating capital and investment flows. As a regional financial hub, the developments in Singapore’s capital markets reflect the growing vibrancy, diversity, and sophistication of Asia’s capital markets. 16. To conclude, let me reiterate that the outlook for Asia is positive. Although the region’s growth is expected to settle to a more sustainable pace, Asia will remain at the forefront of the global recovery. Despite facing challenges from large capital inflows and inflation, I am confident that Asia’s policy-makers will make appropriate policy adjustments in order to achieve long term sustainable growth.  17. On this note, I wish you a fruitful and successful conference. Thank you.                                                   1 Al Rajhi Group and Keppel T&T announced a joint venture agreement to establish an asset management company to manage the world's first Shariah-compliant data centre fund – Securus Data Property Fund. The fund's initial closing was achieved in June 2010 at US$100 million with institutional investors from the Middle East and Asia. 2 Khazanah Nasional Berhad issued its inaugural Singapore Dollar sukuk amounting to S$1.5 billion in August 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Ignazio Visco: Pension systems in the midst of the demographic transition – the way forward Dinner talk by Mr Ignazio Visco, Deputy Director General and Member of the Governing Board of the Bank of Italy, to the International Pension Workshop, jointly organized by Netspar and CeRP, Moncalieri, 16–17 June 2011. *      *      * I would like to thank Giuseppe Grande for useful discussions and help. Ladies and gentlemen, good evening. I am very pleased to be here today, and to have this opportunity to share with you some thoughts on the global outlook for pension systems. This international pension workshop – jointly organized by Netspar and CeRP – has put together an impressive list of contributions in the fields of pension economics and pension finance. The papers explore key issues that are at the forefront of the current policy debate. This evening, I would like to offer a few thoughts on three topics: (i) The state of pension systems in the midst of the demographic transition; (ii) the to-do list for governments and industry participants ; and (iii) the long-term effectiveness of funded private schemes, with a focus on the crucial role played by strong and sustainable growth and the need to develop well-functioning annuity markets for the pension payout. I. The challenges facing pension systems Considering the current conditions of pension systems, it seems to me that the adjustment of pay-as-you-go schemes to the demographic transition is far from completed, because: (1) population ageing will continue; (2) most advanced economies will require robust fiscal consolidation measures; (3) in many of our countries the economic outlook will be weak for some time to come. First, the ageing process is going on, and dependency ratios continue to rise. Life expectancy will lengthen in the coming decades. According to the UN Population Division’s projections, in the OECD countries between 2010 and 2050 life expectancy at age 65 will increase by 3.1 years for men and 3.6 years for women.  A second driver of change in pay-as-you-go arrangements is fiscal consolidation. One of the main legacies of the global financial crisis is the unprecedented size of fiscal deficits in many advanced economies. This has led several governments to phase in fiscal consolidation programmes over the short and medium term. At this stage, fiscal consolidation programmes are fairly well-defined, for example, in the United Kingdom and the euro area, though still somewhat hazy in the United States and Japan. Cuts in pension outlays (e.g., increase in retirement age, reduced benefits and restrictions on early retirement schemes) have been announced by a number of countries, as these measures are important for longer-term fiscal sustainability. Ageing will also affect fiscal sustainability through rising health and long-term care expenditures, something that is coming to be realized with a lag compared to pension expenditures. The third factor is the weak macroeconomic environment, because lower wages and fewer jobs shrink the revenues from pension contributions. The recovery from the Great Recession is expected to gain momentum only slowly and continues to be unstable, as indicated by the latest downward revisions of growth prospects for the United States. The recovery is also unbalanced: the advanced economies lag behind the emerging-market economies; global imbalances do not appear to be on the way of being reduced; in several countries households are highly indebted. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Nor is the medium-term outlook for the world economy much brighter. In advanced economies public debt is high. The pressure of emerging market economies on energy and commodity markets creates upward risks for inflation. Labour market conditions are expected to improve only slowly and there is a concern that structural unemployment might increase. Geopolitical risks could remain high. If the public pension sector is not yet out of the woods, defined-benefit (DB) pension schemes are in no better shape. The demographic trends and the weak macroeconomic environment have had severe repercussions on them too. What’s more, DB plans have been put under pressure by the huge correction in asset prices triggered by the global financial crisis. The impact of the plunge in share price indices in 2008 has been magnified by the sharp decline in the yields on benchmark government bonds, which provide the backbone of the discount factors used to value future liabilities. As a result, since 2008 the funding gaps of DB plans have widened significantly across the board. According to OECD estimates, for more than 2,000 publicly traded companies headquartered in 15 countries, the median underfunding rate worsened from about one eighth in 2007 to one fourth in 2009. Since the autumn of 2010 the situation is likely to have improved but only slightly, owing to the low level of interest rates. Particular concerns have been raised about the sustainability of DB pension plans for public sector workers. There is evidence that in a number of advanced countries these plans produce potentially large net unfunded liabilities. In the public sector, pension promises tend to be relatively generous (sometimes to make up for lower current earnings relative to the private sector); in some countries, they are also partially funded or paid out directly from government revenues, or their valuation and disclosure may lack transparency. Because of these trends, retirement-income systems have continued to shift from public pay-as-you-go schemes and DB plans to defined-contribution (DC) pension schemes. In the United States, for example, over the last decade the percentage of workers participating in DB plans has declined further from 36 to 30 percent, while that of DC plan members has increased from 50 to 54 percent. The rising importance of DC arrangements implies that investment risks and longevity risk are increasingly borne by individual workers. Over the last decade, however, financial market returns have been disappointing, and the global financial crisis of 2007–09 has dealt a blow to the balances accumulated by many workers on their DC pension schemes. Especially hard hit were senior members nearing retirement. But the risk that DC schemes will deliver low income replacement rates is very serious also for young members. The disappointing performance of DC schemes over the last decade is likely to have sapped employees’ confidence in the ability of the financial markets to provide adequate and secure returns. Where membership is not compulsory, this may affect employees’ propensity to join DC pension schemes and pay pension contributions. The risk that DC schemes will provide a low pension income compounds the reduction in the coverage of public pensions. The possibility of policy reversals cannot be overlooked either. In this regard, it is telling that in some countries the choice of mandatory contribution to funded DC pension schemes has been called into question. II. What to do I now turn to some well-known policy responses to these challenges. While there is, I believe, wide consensus among academic experts and practitioners on the need for such responses, they are obviously demanding for policymakers. But it must be clear that delay in design and implementation could be very costly for our societies. First and foremost, people have to be encouraged to work longer. Living longer is certainly a positive development, especially if we are in good health (and this should not be taken for granted). But we need to have the resources to enjoy our longer lives, which means incomes 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 and jobs. There is no question, then, that a return to what the G-20 defines as “strong, sustainable and balanced growth” is the fundamental objective of economic policy. This will help in furnishing the accumulation of funds necessary for retirement, but there is little question that the retirement age also has to go up.  Statutory pension ages have started to rise in a number of countries. However, according to the OECD, in all but five member countries the projected gains in life expectancy over the next four decades will outstrip the prospective increases in retirement age. To insure the financial sustainability of pay-as-you-go schemes, possible measures include raising the retirement age, introducing incentives for later retirement, cutting benefits and indexing them to life expectancy (as it has been done, for example, in the notional defined contribution systems). It could also be helpful to allow senior workers to combine work with pension income. In this regard, it is worth recalling that there is no evidence that employment of older workers reduces the number of jobs available to young people. Second, for DC pension schemes to deliver on their promises, in my view there are three top priorities: a) DC plan members must be aware of the likely degree of coverage provided by their retirement scheme. This is a crucial condition to persuade workers to increase retirement saving and to help them set target replacement rates for their accumulation plan. Clear information on the expected replacement rates and their likely decline under adverse investment scenarios must be provided. b) Total costs to plan members must be reduced. As has been emphasized, among others, by the Turner Report in the middle of last decade and, more recently, by the Squam Lake Working Group on Financial Regulation, charges may have a major impact on the final balance accruing to plan members over an extended period of time. Costs can be reduced not only by increasing the volume of assets under management, with consequent economies of scale, but also by stimulating competition among pension schemes. This may call for various measures, including educating consumers about the effects of charges on pension fund returns; assuring transparency and comparability of charges between schemes; easing the portability of employer contributions between schemes; and intensifying competition among the financial institutions that manage pension funds. c) Sound default options should be designed. While the regulation of DC plans has to take into account the characteristics of the national pension system as a whole (for example, what share of pension income is provided by DC plans), a good practice would be to make enrolment in DC plans automatic but subject to an opt-out clause. Moreover, the default plan must be carefully designed. In order to encourage workers to join (or not to opt out), the default contribution rate could be rather low initially and rise gradually over time. Furthermore, the default DC plan should have low fees and diversified investment objectives, in order to ensure a fair balance between security and yield in investing retirement saving in financial instruments. These considerations also make it clear that the performance of DC pension schemes may be affected by workers’ degree of financial literacy, as has been highlighted by advanced scientific research. As was pointed out in the 2005 G10 report on Ageing and Pension System Reform, one of the policy challenges is to develop financial education programmes that “can help consumers avoid abuse and fraud, improve their investment choices, and raise their contributions to private pension plans”. Retirement-saving literacy programmes addressed to the labour force are thus important, although obviously they must go hand-in-hand with stronger consumer protection. But developing a sound, robust DC pillar is not enough to ensure that the retirement income provided by private pensions is adequate. In pure DC plans, members remain exposed to extreme financial market risks, as we have seen in the recent financial crisis. This is a serious risk, especially for workers nearing retirement, who may not be able or willing to wait 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches for a full recovery in financial markets. Moreover, severe financial turmoil is typically associated with weak labour markets and older job seekers who have trouble finding work may end up retiring earlier than expected (rather than delaying retirement), with lower pension incomes. The importance of extreme (financial and counterparty) risks in long-term financial contracts is demonstrated by the fact that in a number of countries guarantee arrangements are in place to protect benefits against the insolvency of the DB plan sponsor; for a worker, moving from a DB plan to a DC plan implies abandoning dual protection (the sponsor’s capital and the guarantee arrangement) in favour of no protection at all. This may call for some kind of return guarantee to DC plan members during the accumulation phase.  Available examples include both absolute return guarantees (as in Japan or in some US states), in which the guaranteed return is set against a pre-specified return, and relative guarantees (as in Chile and Denmark), where the return is tied to some industry average or market benchmark. There is evidence that only guarantee schemes in which the minimum return is set at a very low or negligible rate, such as return of principal, can surely withstand adverse financial market conditions. This is consistent with the findings of our own research conducted at the Bank of Italy, which suggests that in order for the guaranteed return insurance scheme to be cost-effective, credible, and robust to moral hazard, the guarantee should be provided by the government and funded by properly risk-based premia. Another important challenge faced by pension systems is given by the changing nature of labour markets. Job mobility and flexibility may hinder the accumulation of retirement wealth. Pension schemes should allow for the fact that workers may change jobs and employers more frequently than in the past, and we should also think about ways to promote the cross-border portability of pension rights. Issues such as vesting periods and (implicit or explicit) penalty fees should be regulated and would be important to prevent any kind of predatory practice on retirement savings. Finally, the pension fund industry may benefit greatly from the development of retirement schemes in emerging-market economies, as these economies will also face more or less rapid population ageing in the coming decades, with pension systems still to be developed especially in their fully-funded dimension. With the current pace of increase in living standards and the emergence of a sizable middle class, the vast potential demand for retirement saving vehicles in these economies would allow the global financial industry to generate important economies of scale and scope. At the same time, given the sheer size of the potential saving pools, competition among financial institutions should be adequately promoted and the risk of an excessive concentration of market shares properly countered. III. Ensuring the long-term effectiveness of funded pension schemes But there are also two other factors which in the future will considerably affect the ability of funded pension schemes to meet their goal of providing pensioners with adequate retirement income. The first is the crucial importance of robust economic growth. The second is the design of the decumulation phase. Both funded and unfunded pension arrangements ultimately rely upon the ability of the economic system to create jobs and allocate resources to the most profitable investment opportunities. Economic growth is therefore the fundamental determinant of the sustainability and adequacy of any retirement system. However, as was highlighted in the IMF’s recent World Economic Outlook of the IMF, in the advanced economies potential output threatens to remain considerably below pre-crisis trends, unless financial and structural policies are significantly strengthened. Partly as a result of lower potential growth in the advanced countries, the weight of emerging market economies on world output is expected to increase steadily over the coming decades. In particular, Asia is expected to have a great potential for growth. According to recent projections by the Asian Development Bank, between 2010 and 2050 its weight will rise from about a quarter of global output in 2010 to at least a third in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 2050 under a pessimistic scenario, and to half if the current trend of sustained convergence were to continue over the next forty years. If financial markets are well-developed, funded schemes make it possible for retirement wealth to expand at the same pace as that of the world economy. In order to do so, over the next few decades the asset allocation of funded pension schemes will have to gradually change its geographical scope, in order to reflect the rising weight of Asian and Latin American countries. It is important to observe that it is not a matter of keeping investment returns afloat by taking more risks. A reckless chase after high-yield assets around the world would be useless if not counterproductive. Retirement saving has to be directed towards those business activities that may put the world economy on a path of strong and sustainable growth. This raises a number of important issues for the global financial markets. On the demand side, pension schemes’ trustees and asset managers will have to devote more resources to the analysis of emerging market economies and the contribution of emerging market bonds and equities. Moreover, to the extent that the geographical composition of portfolios will become a key driver of the asset allocation, DC plan members will also have to improve their understanding of new investment opportunities. Regulation, at both the national and international level, will have to respond to the changing needs of institutional investors. We have to ensure that both individual and institutional investors are accountable for their actions. As for the supply side of financial markets, the challenges that we face may even be more demanding. First, if we want to ensure that financial markets keep track of the expansion of Asian and other rising economies, emerging market companies with good fundamentals and growth opportunities must have access to bond and equity markets. If the financial markets of the emerging market economies had limited capacity to absorb foreign resources, then capital inflows might fuel asset bubbles and even be counterproductive to economic growth in those economies. Second, while policies and practices may differ across countries depending on institutional and economic factors, there should be no uncertainty about some key policy areas, such as the governance of corporations, the legal and regulatory framework, the enforceability of contracts, and tax burdens. Finally, the financial infrastructures of both advanced and emerging economies should be integrated into the global financial system, open to foreign players, and compliant with international standards of transparency. The last key priority is the need to develop well-functioning annuity markets. In a few years’ time the number of pensioners for whom payout instruments will provide a significant fraction of retirement income is bound to increase, both in the advanced economies and in emerging and developing economies. At the moment, annuity markets around the world are rather thin, except in a handful of countries in which private pensions are more highly developed (such as in the United Kingdom, Switzerland, Chile and, to a lesser extent, the United States). Moreover, the payout phase arrangements differ markedly across countries, in terms of government intervention (through regulation and taxation), instruments and providers. Policy action in this field should target two broad objectives: the choice of the payout instruments and their costs. The first goal is to develop products that better protect against the risks that materialize during the decumulation phase, namely inflation, longevity and financial market risk. We have to think about how to achieve an inflation-protected stream of income for life after retirement, also taking into account the possibility that people in old age – while spending on health-care services – might increasingly be able to combine work and pension income. On this issue, as has been repeatedly observed, an adequate supply of government inflation-linked and ultra-long-term bonds is an essential tool to help financial institutions to offer inflation-linked annuities or other instruments that serve pensioners’ needs. Governments should also consider issuing longevity bonds, or providing financial institutions with guarantees against extreme (financial or longevity) risks. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches The second broad policy goal would be to reduce the price of annuities and similar instruments. In this regard, a main policy tool is the timely release of accurate mortality tables, both for the total population and for different subgroups in the population. Improvements in mortality tables would help reduce adverse selection costs and lower the premium for the aggregate longevity risk. Fostering instrument transparency and comparability is another useful option, as it would be to promote competition among annuity providers. IV. Conclusions The adjustment of pension systems to the demographic transition is a complex process that needs close monitoring and that will continue to unfold for a number of years to come. Doubts about the viability of public pay-as-you-go arrangements and defined-benefit pension schemes persist. More importantly, there are growing concerns over the ability of defined-contribution pension schemes to provide adequate income. Some of the issues that we are dealing with now were identified by pension experts and policymakers half a decade ago or more, but so far they have been addressed only in part. At the same time, new issues have come to the fore. I am convinced that the evidence that we have gathered so far on ongoing trends, industry practices and policies – corroborated by the findings of the most dependable scientific literature – provide clear guidelines on how to ensure that pension systems will fulfil their mission of giving workers a decent standard of living in retirement. Members of DC pension schemes must get sound information on their likely retirement income. The default options of DC plans have to be carefully designed. As the first waves of baby-boomers approach retirement, it is urgent to develop the markets for payout instruments. We have to promote competition among the providers of funded pension schemes and annuities. We have to be aware that market-based arrangements may not be able to cope with extreme financial or longevity risks. The centre of gravity of the global pension fund industry will increasingly shift towards the Asian and other emerging-market economies, both in terms of asset allocation and business opportunities. To conclude, one of my favourite quotes on longevity risk is Lorenzo the Magnificent’s rhyme of more than 500 years ago: “Youth is sweet and well / But doth speed away / Let who will be gay / To-morrow, none can tell” [trans. by Lorna de’ Lucchi, 1922]. In our world of increasing longevity and population ageing, we face the risk that expectations of limited economic growth (and the associated liquidity constraints) may reduce the propensity to save for retirement and make Lorenzo’s hyperbolic discounting an appealing though illusionary alternative. But in order not to be obliged to pay extremely high costs in the future we – individuals, market participants, policymakers – must shun any such illusion. There is no alternative to fostering economic growth by structural policies, maintaining incentives for retirement saving, facilitating the supply of long-term and indexed financial instruments, properly designing and protecting the pay-out phase, and upgrading the regulatory and supervisory framework. Thank you very much for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Mario Draghi: Opening statement to the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament Opening statement by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial Stability Board, and Candidate for President of the European Central Bank, to the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 14 June 2011. *      *      * I am honoured to appear before your Committee for this hearing, which is part of the process of my nomination to the Presidency of the ECB.  I trust you have read my CV. What I want to emphasize about my record are my professional experience in financial matters and as a central banker, and my long-standing commitment to the cause of the European construction.  I have served as a member of the Governing Council and the General Council of the European Central Bank since 2006, in my capacity as Governor of the Bank of Italy. I believe that we have been able to deliver very positive results, although we were faced with exceptionally difficult challenges.  I also took part in many of the decisions leading to the birth of the euro. In 1991, in my capacity as Director General of the Italian Treasury, I headed the Italian delegation negotiating the Maastricht Treaty. Subsequently, I was actively involved in many of the steps that were essential in ensuring Italy’s adoption of the euro, particularly the ambitious fiscal adjustment that took place in the 1990s.  I have gained considerable experience in prominent European and international fora. Here, let me just mention that since April 2006 I have been Chairman of the Financial Stability Forum, which became the Financial Stability Board (FSB) in 2009. The FSB, which brings together national and international authorities responsible for financial stability and international standard-setting bodies, coordinates the work to develop and promote the implementation of effective regulatory supervisory and other financial sector policies.  The more detailed information in my CV further clarifies my long-standing professional and academic experience in economic, monetary and banking matters.  Today, I would like to concentrate my introductory comments on my assessment of the experience with EMU and on the main challenges that I believe lie in front of us. ° ° ° Let me first of all say that I am honoured to be considered as a candidate for the Presidency of the ECB, because I believe that EMU, with the euro at its centre, has been a great success, a success that should be preserved for the sake of all the citizens of Europe. Let me state that none of the recent events, including the global crisis, call this fact into question. The euro has established itself as a credible and strong international currency, trade among the euro-area countries has been fostered, financial integration has been given an enormous boost. Price stability is now rooted in the conduct of economic agents: in the twelve years of the euro, annual inflation in the area has averaged just under 2 per cent, fully in line with the definition of price stability adopted by the Governing Council of the European Central Bank (ECB). This achievement is noteworthy, considering the headwinds the euro area had to weather, including substantial increases in oil and other commodity prices and the financial crisis. Thanks to the credibility gained over the years, the Eurosystem was able to keep inflation expectations steady during the crisis and to act with the speed and flexibility demanded by 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches extraordinary circumstances. Without EMU, the response of the different monetary policies could not have been so rapid and decisive: it would have been practically impossible to achieve a similar level of coordination in the monetary field.  This credibility must be preserved and I am fully committed to doing so. I believe its roots lie in the independence that the Treaty grants to the ECB to pursue its mandate of maintaining price stability.  I also firmly believe that, as a counterpart of its independence, the ECB must ensure that in the exercise of its responsibilities there is the highest degree of transparency and accountability, first and foremost towards the citizens and their elected representatives in the European Parliament. I look forward to pursuing a fruitful, frank and open dialogue with your institution. We need responsible behaviour and decisions by all the parties involved, in the monetary, financial stability and economic fields.  ° ° ° Starting with monetary policy, it is of the utmost importance to recall that the credibility we have earned will not necessarily last forever; it cannot be taken for granted.  An important challenge for the ECB is to manage the exit from the still very accommodative monetary policy stance and the phasing-out of the remaining non-standard measures. The measures adopted by the ECB were crucial to restoring orderly conditions on interbank markets, containing risk premia, and preserving credit flows to the economy in the worst phases of the crisis. We have avoided the collapse of the financial system, supported the functioning of the transmission of monetary policy to the economy and, ultimately, ensured price stability, thereby supporting the European economy. However, these measures are by their nature temporary. There have been a number of signs of normalisation in money markets and in the access to market-based financing by most banks in the euro area; the recourse to Eurosystem operations has declined. At the same time, concern about the sustainability of the public finances in some euro-area countries has led to strains in a number of banking sectors and a small number of institutions remain reliant on central bank liquidity, accounting for a substantial share of the overall refinancing volumes.  The continued high degree of uncertainty about the macroeconomic and financial environment requires a careful assessment of the overall situation and outlook. Non-standard measures need to be phased out to the extent that they are no longer needed to support the functioning of the transmission of monetary policy to the economy; we must make sure that liquidity support to the economy is maintained as long as appropriate; but also that we do not sow the seeds of future imbalances and create addiction to our liquidity. At the same time, the setting of our policy rates must be adjusted with the aim of delivering on the ECB’s mandate, – to maintain price stability for the euro area in the medium term – in a pre-emptive manner, in order to avoid any deterioration of inflation expectations. It must be fully clear that neither the sovereign debt crisis nor the abnormal dependence of some banks on central bank liquidity can divert the ECB from pursuing its primary objective.  ° ° ° Secondly, challenges to monetary policy come from the area of financial stability.  The financial crisis and the heightened emphasis on financial stability have raised a number of questions on the relationship with monetary policy. It has shown that a closer interaction is needed between macroeconomic and macroprudential analyses, although it has also brought out that there is no real trade-off between the objective of price stability and the support that the ECB can lend to other areas.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 In this respect, I believe that while synergies must be exploited to the full, the respective roles and responsibilities must remain clearly distinct. Monetary policy must keep its focus on preserving price stability over the medium term. As I just mentioned, the benefits of a sound monetary framework have been made more – not less – evident by the crisis.  At the same time, monitoring the emergence of monetary and credit imbalances and asset price developments is one important element in a robust monetary policy strategy; a medium-term orientation is also crucial. The ECB’s monetary policy strategy already goes a long way towards taking these concerns into account.  However, monetary policy is not necessarily the most appropriate instrument to deal with credit or asset price imbalances. The use of macroprudential instruments targeted on the sources of financial exuberance may be more appropriate. The new European supervisory authorities can make an important contribution in this respect. Let me just remark here that the ECB plays an important role in the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), to which it provides logistical, analytical and administrative support.  An appropriate management of the interaction between macroprudential and monetary policy authorities will be crucial to success. The institutional arrangement adopted in Europe appears well-suited to address any problem that may arise from the management of monetary policy and new macroprudential tools. It will certainly be important for there to be dialogue between the two bodies on policy issues that can affect systemic risk. ° ° ° Finally, let me mention the challenges to the construction of Europe itself. The sovereign debt crisis is a real test of the solidity of European institutions and of the political will in Europe to do whatever is needed to ensure the achievement of economic and monetary integration.  The European surveillance of national budgetary policies proved to be inadequate. For a long time exceptionally favourable financing conditions have concealed the differences between member countries’ underlying conditions and economic policies and the absence of really binding common rules. The global crisis has accentuated investors’ perception of risk and revealed weaknesses in the architecture of the Union.  The exceptional response of national governments and European authorities limited the risk of contagion and safeguarded the area’s financial stability. The financial support granted to the countries in greatest difficulty allows them to proceed with adjustment sheltered from market volatility. It is not a fiscal transfer between countries and it is subject to stringent conditions. There are no shortcuts available: the response to the debt crisis lies first and foremost in national policies, in the complete implementation of the adjustment plans that have been agreed. Solidarity among the member countries in the Union must be matched by a sense of responsibility and compliance with the rules.  Looking ahead, I believe that the steps that have already been taken to tackle the weaknesses of the European architecture are important. The proposals of the EU Commission and the Council reinforce surveillance over budgetary policies. They can be made more ambitious by making procedures more automatic so as to shield them from the arbitrary nature of political negotiations. The European Parliament is having an important influence in this regard. The extension of rules similar to those governing national budgets to the surveillance of macroeconomic imbalances, with special consideration for the state of member countries’ external accounts, is also a very welcome development. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Above all, structural reforms aimed at boosting economies’ competitiveness and growth potential must be a top priority on the policy agenda, not only in those countries hit by the debt crisis. In the end, the ultimate objective of EMU, and the measure of its success, is its ability to promote growth and economic and social welfare. Many of these matters are not the direct responsibility of the ECB, but the ECB can – and I believe must continue to – offer objective and independent advice, based on rigorous and credible analysis. I hope we will continue exchanging our views on these issues in the future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Philipp Hildebrand: The independence of the Swiss National Bank Speech by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at Avenir Suisse, Zurich, 21 June 2011. *      *      * The speaker would like to thank Peter Kuster for his support in preparing this paper. In addition, his thanks go to Rita Kobel Rohr for her helpful comments when drawing up the speech. Is the independence of the Swiss National Bank so extensive that it stands outside the reach of our democratic system based on the separation of state powers, on checks and balances? The topic of central bank independence is a matter of discussion beyond the borders of Switzerland. Around the world, a debate has started on the limits to power, in general, and the independence of central banks, in particular, and in some cases radical demands have been made.1 Because many central banks found themselves obliged to resort to large-scale unconventional measures during the financial crisis, it is not surprising that the debate is raging now. Central banks are indeed very special institutions. They hold the banknote-issuing monopoly and provide the domestic money market with liquidity. Consequently, they can never really be short of money. In Switzerland, the state has conferred the banknote-issuing monopoly on the SNB. This means that it always has the requisite means for meeting its obligations in Swiss francs. However, that does not stop it from making losses. As you know, the SNB had to report a large annual loss in 2010. This was due to exchange rate losses on the foreign currency holdings. These had increased substantially in the course of our foreign exchange market interventions, which we carried out in order to counter the deflationary threat identified by us. The loss and the increased risk in our central bank balance sheet is a matter which we take very seriously. The annual loss has provoked critical remarks, in particular as regards our independence and our ostensibly far-reaching powers. It is understandable that people will question the extensive measures we had to take to manage the financial crisis. That is all part of life in a democratic society. I am therefore grateful for this opportunity to present to you, in the next few minutes, my thoughts on the essence, the boundaries and the pitfalls of our independence. I hope I will be able to clarify one or two misunderstandings in the process. The reason why the SNB is independent is not because it happens to suit the members of the Governing Board, which is the body responsible for monetary policy. I can assure you that it would sometimes be easier if we could just accept instructions from a higher body. What actually happens is that we have to bear responsibility ourselves for the monetary policy decisions we take, and we take them – typically – under a veil of uncertainty. The reason why we are independent is so that we can better fulfil our mandate. In other words, our independence is purely a means to a higher end. That end is defined in article 5 of the National Bank Act as pursuing a monetary policy serving the interests of the country as a whole and ensuring price stability, while taking due account of the development of the economy. Article 6 is the basis of our independence. Under this clause, we are explicitly prohibited from seeking or accepting instructions from Federal authorities. In other words, we are obliged to make our own decisions.                                                  1 For instance, a very well-known US congressman – possibly a future presidential candidate – has gone as far as calling for the Fed to be abolished. Cf. Paul, Ron (2009), End the Fed, New York: Hachette Book Group. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches There are good reasons why Swiss legislators have established our independence so strongly. Theory and practical experience throughout the world are clear on this point. The more independent a central bank, the better it fulfils its mandate. It has much better chances of ensuring price stability and thereby making a contribution to sustained economic developments than a central bank that is not independent.2 I am not planning to overwhelm you now by citing all the relevant literature.3 However, the most important reasons put forward by academic writers on the subject include differences in the legitimation, time horizon and incentives of politicians and central bankers. While politicians are legitimated through popular election, central bankers legitimate themselves by carrying out their legal mandate to the best of their ability. Political processes are often protracted, but once a decision has been taken, results should be rapidly visible. to be available as soon as possible. By contrast, central bankers are able to take decisions very quickly, but the results of these decisions – whether good or bad – may not be evident until years later. It is precisely because this lag is often so long that the credibility of central bankers is essential. If central bankers are credible, economic entities will trust them. As a result, monetary policy is more effective. For instance, if inflation rises due to increasing commodity prices, employees will not immediately ask for higher wages because they are confident that the increase in inflation is only temporary. Thus independence is a necessary prerequisite for a central bank, in order to develop the credibility it requires for carrying out monetary policy. Mind you, independence is a necessary – but not a sufficient – prerequisite for successful monetary policy. Central bank independence in monetary policy is not a specifically Swiss achievement. In many countries it has helped to firmly establish inflation expectations in the long term. Consequently, monetary policy can react to shocks in the short-term, when necessary. However, with a view to certain characteristics of the Swiss economy, the independence of the SNB appears particularly valuable. Allow me to explain this briefly, using our experiences during the financial crisis as my example. When the extreme shock of the great financial crisis occurred in 2008–09, monetary policy was in a position to act rapidly. Our well-developed social security system also fulfilled its role as an automatic stabiliser. Discretionary fiscal policy, by contrast, played a relatively minor role. One reason for this is that we have a federal system with extensive decision-making powers in the hands of the people. Another is the extensive global integration and openness of the Swiss economy. This means that much of the impact of any fiscal programmes designed to stimulate the economy would have been felt abroad rather than in Switzerland. There are certainly positive sides to the fact that fiscal policy in Switzerland was not used actively, or to a large extent, for crisis management – as is evident if we think of the problems of sovereign debt currently afflicting other countries. Yet we should not forget that monetary policy had to bear the lion’s share of the adjustment burden in its place. As I mentioned before, article 6 of the National Bank Act constitutes the foundation stone of our independence. However, the principle that the SNB should be an independent central bank is actually established at the highest level of all, in article 99 of the Swiss Constitution. This shows the importance attached to the independence of the SNB by the constitutional                                                  2 These findings were taken into account when the European Monetary Union was founded. Under the Maastricht Treaty, a country planning to join the union must have an independent national central bank. 3 Cf., for instance, Ricardo, David (1824), Plan for the Establishment of a National Bank; Hayek, Friedrich A. von (1971), Verfassung der Freiheit, pp 440–41, Tübingen, Mohr Siebeck (4th edition 2005); Barro, Robert J. and Gordon, David B. (1983), A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate Model, Journal of Political Economy, 91 (August), pp 589–610; Cukierman, Alex, Webb, Steven B. and Neyapti, Bilin (1992), Measuring the Independence of Central Banks and Its Effect on Policy Outcomes, World Bank Economic Review, 6 pp 353–398; Alesina, Alberto und Summers, Lawrence H. (1993), Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 25 (May), pp 151–162. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 authorities, in other words, the Swiss sovereign power. Our independence comprises several dimensions – function, institution, finances and staff.4 I make a point of repeating the fact that we must fulfil our mandate without seeking or accepting instructions either from the Federal Council or from the Federal Assembly or any other body. The SNB is institutionally independent because it is a legal entity in its own right. It has the legal status of a special-statute joint-stock company. The financial dimension of independence comprises, on the one hand, the prohibition on state financing. Under article 11 of the National Bank Act, we are not permitted to grant the Confederation any loans. Neither are we allowed to acquire government bonds from new issues. These provisions are a strong defence against fiscal policy being bankrolled by the central bank. On the other hand, we can take risk onto our balance sheet should we regard this as absolutely necessary in order to fulfil our mandate. In this respect, the lesson learned from the crisis is that, in good times, we need to ensure that our balance sheet is as robust as possible, so that we can burden it in bad times. Finally, in terms of staff, our independence is expressed by the fact that the members of the SNB executive bodies – the Governing Board members and their deputies – are appointed by the Federal Council for a fixed and comparatively long term of six years.5  Ladies and Gentlemen, our independence is not unlimited, however. First, it is not absolute but related only to our mandate. It is not we ourselves but the Swiss legislators who charge us with maintaining price stability. Incidentally, that also applies to mandates other than the monetary policy core mandate, which I will not be talking about today. The SNB has specified its monetary policy mandate and rendered it measurable. A situation of price stability prevails when the consumer price index (which is calculated by the Swiss Federal Office of Statistics, and not by us) shows an average annual rate of below 2%. Deflation is also regarded as a failure to attain the objective of price stability. Where we are independent is in our choice of the means by which we fulfil this mandate. Under article 9 of the National Bank Act, we may use a great many instruments, as needed. This broad flexibility within our statutory legislation (which came into force in 2004) proved to be a huge advantage during the crisis, also by comparison with other central banks. For instance, we were quickly in a position to issue our own debt certificates and develop a large market for them. We do not use these SNB Bills because we need money. They are used to absorb excess liquidity in the money market. Second, our independence is not unconditional. With the privilege and duty of independent action comes a particular responsibility. And whoever bears responsibility in our democratic constitutional state must be accountable for his or her actions, for the means chosen and the results achieved.6 Consequently, under article 7 of the National Bank Act, we maintain a regular exchange of information with the Federal Council, and the SNB and the Federal Council inform one another of decisions that will have a significant economic or monetary impact. This is important for us, because it ensures that we are familiar with the fiscal political framework within which we conduct our monetary policy. Nevertheless, each body retains full                                                  4 Cf. also Message on the revision of the National Bank Act of 26 June 2002, FF 2002 6107 to 6109. 5 Together with the possibility of re-election, this helps to set the incentives for members of the Governing Board in a way that ensures that long-term fulfilment of the statutory mandate is also in their individual interest. 6 Other societies espouse comparable principles, “It cannot be acceptable in a democratic society that a group of unelected individuals are vested with important responsibilities without being open to full scrutiny and accountability.” Cf. speech given by Alan Greenspan on 5 December 1996 on “'The Challenge of Central Banking in a Democratic Society,” Washington D.C. Also, “Democratic principles demand that, as an agent of the government, a central bank must be accountable in the pursuit of its mandated goals, responsive to the public and its elected representatives and transparent in its policies.” Cf. speech given by Ben Bernanke on 26 May 2010, on “Central Bank Independence, Transparency and Accountability,” Tokyo. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches responsibility for its own area.7 Each year we submit an Accountability Report to the Federal Assembly, in which we outline how we have fulfilled our mandate. Also, on frequent occasions we are called upon to provide a full account of our actions to the relevant parliamentary commissions. In addition, we provide the general public with regular information about our assessment of the economic situation and monetary policy – in press releases or half-yearly media conferences immediately after our quarterly monetary policy assessments, in speeches and in interviews. In this way we ensure transparency. Through our legal status as a joint-stock company, we also have duties towards our shareholders which we fulfil each year, at the General Meeting, within the framework set out by the National Bank Act. The cantons – our majority shareholders – are well represented in our supervisory body for operating matters, the Bank Council.  As you see, the special characteristics of the Swiss system are taken into account. Federalism is mirrored in the composition of the Bank Council and in the distribution of our shareholdings and – not least – in the distribution of profit. The Swiss constitution and the National Bank Act provide for the SNB’s profit to be paid to the Confederation and the cantons. Two-thirds accrue to the cantons and one-third to the Confederation. However, a distribution can only be carried out if the balance sheet and the SNB’s result allow for this to be done. The robustness of our balance sheet, in other words, setting aside provisions for currency reserves, takes first priority over a distribution. This can be derived directly from the legislation. The appreciation of the Swiss franc against most other currencies weakened our balance sheet last year. In addition, very volatile results may be expected in the next few years because of the current size of the balance sheet and the uncertain situation in the capital markets. Consequently, the possibility that distributions to the Confederation and the cantons will have to be suspended in certain years cannot be excluded. Fiscal interests must take a back seat when it comes to ensuring our long-term monetary policy freedom of action and independence. The Governing Board is also genuinely Swiss. The executive body consists of three members with equal rights who jointly carry out the tasks defined in article 46 of the National Bank Act and bear joint responsibility for them. First and foremost, the law describes these tasks as conceptional and operational monetary policy decisions. The Chairman does not have any special powers. Consequently, responsibility is shared. Transparency and accountability are crucial, particularly in times of crisis, when the information needs of the general public and financial markets, as well as other authorities, are increasing exponentially. We have responded to this need. For instance, information on central bank balance sheet items and SNB Bills has been stepped up, and our news conferences can now be watched on our website. During the course of the crisis, in particular, at the time of the measures to strengthen the Swiss financial system in October 2008, the number of appearances of Governing Board members before parliamentary commissions increased significantly.8 I would like to hazard a guess that the SNB has never been as transparent as it is today. In this respect, it also stands up well to international comparison.                                                  7 This is also laid down in the Message on the revision of the National Bank Act with regard to art. 7 para. 1 NBA (6191), “The SNB’s decision-making autonomy must be retained because its accountability would otherwise inevitably come into conflict with its authority to act independently of instructions (under art. 6).” Consequently, the SNB bears “sole responsibility for the mandates described in art. 5” while the Federal Council, in turn, “is solely responsible for the economic decisions that fall within its area of responsibility.” 8 In 2010, members of the Governing Board appeared 13 times before parliamentary commissions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 However, central bank independence has its pitfalls. A latent threat to such independence can, in principle, always be said to exist. This threat is particularly great in times of crisis. Consequently it was right and important, during the recent crisis, for central banks around the world to work closely with governments. However, the risk now is that false expectations have been raised amongst politicians. Central banks need to remain firm and concentrate on their monetary policy mandate. While it was necessary to be close to other government authorities at a time of emergency, now that the crisis has been confined, a little more distance is in order. As I outlined at the beginning, the SNB has also taken exceptional measures in order to fulfil its mandate. In doing so, it has shown that it is prepared to make use of the independence it has been granted. What is essential here is that we are always guided solely by our mandate when making our decisions. At the same time, we are continually analysing developments and constantly drawing conclusions with a view to our future actions. Based on this, the SNB will continue to use the instruments we judge best suited and necessary for fulfilling our mandate in the interests of the country as a whole, to the best of our ability. The SNB must be able to continue exercising its independence without this being fundamentally questioned. Ladies and gentlemen, I have shown you that the SNB’s independence is limited to fulfilling the mandate with which it has been entrusted by the politicians, and that it is accountable for this mandate. The SNB is not powerful. With the precision of a Swiss watchmaker, it has been embedded in our democratic institutions, our constitutional state and the society of our nation.9 We are aware that a high level of responsibility is attached to our mandate-related independence. That is why we use the independence we have been granted with prudence.                                                  9 One of my predecessors described the SNB as, “to some extent”, “the fourth power in the land”, while adding the comforting comment that “this additional element within the – generally speaking – highly developed balance of powers in Switzerland, has functioned well” (Lusser, Geldpolitik 1996). Cf. Lusser, Markus (1996), Geldpolitik, p. 100, Zurich: Verlag Neue Zürcher Zeitung. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Njuguna Ndung’u: Developments in the banking sector in Kenya Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the official opening of Standard Chartered Bank Kenya Limited’s Head Office, Nairobi, 20 June 2011. *      *      * Your Excellency Honourable Mwai Kibaki, President and Commander-In-Chief of the Defence Forces of the Republic of Kenya; Honourable Uhuru Kenyatta, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance; Mr. John Peace, Group Chairman of the Board of Directors, Standard Chartered Bank; Mr. Peter Sands, Group Chief Executive Officer, Standard Chartered Bank; Mr. Wilfred Kiboro the Chair of the Board of the Standard Chartered Bank Kenya; Mr. Richard Etemesi, Chief Executive Officer, Standard Chartered Bank Kenya; Board Members present; Staff of Standard Chartered Bank Kenya; Distinguished Guests; Ladies and Gentlemen: I am delighted to join you on this auspicious occasion in celebrating Standard Chartered Bank Kenya’s 100th Anniversary. It is indeed a momentous achievement for the bank and perhaps to plan for the next 100 years will even be more exciting. May I take this opportunity to appreciate the presence of His Excellency the President which gives this function great significance and importance. Let me also commend the Board, Management and Staff of Standard Chartered Bank for steering the institution from its formation in 1911, and for successfully providing financial services to Kenyans for the last 100 years. Over the years, the Bank has achieved several milestones with a number of strategic alliances and acquisitions. These milestones have extended the customer base, geographic reach and broadened the product range that Standard Chartered offers. The bank has strongly focused on developing its franchises in Asia, Africa and the Middle East through concentration on consumer, corporate and institutional banking. In Kenya, the bank focuses on two core business divisions, Wholesale banking and Consumer banking. With regard to its financial operations in Kenya, the bank as at March 2011, was among the top 6 banks with an asset portfolio of Ksh.149 billion, thereby commanding a market share of 7.9 percent. Customer deposits stood at Ksh.105 billion being supported by a capital base of Ksh.21 billion, while loans and advances amounted to Ksh.72 billion. Your Excellency: Despite various shocks that have hit the economy in recent years, the banking sector continues to exhibit resilience. The sector grew by 8.8% in 2010. Some indicators of the financial sector performance witnessed in the last twelve months to March 2011 are as follows:  The sector’s asset base expanded by 20 percent from Ksh.1.5 trillion in March 2010 to Ksh.1.8 trillion in March 2011 as banks continued to expand their lending portfolio;  The deposit base increased by 16.7 percent from Ksh.1.2 trillion to stand at Ksh.1.4 trillion in March 2011 on account of branch expansion, financial inclusion and domestic economic activity expansion;  The Total and Core Capital Adequacy to Total Risk Weighted Assets Ratios stood at 21.1 percent and 18.9 percent, well above the statutory minimum of 12 percent and 8 percent respectively, signifying the stability of the sector;  The sector’s pre-tax profits increased by 16.5 percent from Ksh.17.0 billion in March 2010 to Ksh.19.8 billion in March 2011 while the average liquidity at end of March 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 2011 was 43.5 percent, well above the statutory minimum requirement of 20 percent. This impressive growth has been supported by the expansion of banks into new market frontiers, improved risk management and continuous legal and regulatory reforms by the Government and Central Bank in a bid to enhance financial inclusion by reaching out to the unbanked population. Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen: I would like to assure the banking sector and stakeholders that the Central Bank will continue to develop cardinal policies aimed at financial inclusion, development and deepening in consultation with the market. So far we have seen the supply-side; the deposit accounts solved. We need to make it easier and cheaper to borrow and loan accounts will grow from the current 2 million accounts compared to 14 million deposit accounts. On the demand side, demand for loans is lagging because of costs. The CBK will is to create a conducive business environment for the sector to operate efficiently, effectively and soundly. We continue to support and build strong institutions both the commercial banks and the regulator must be strong. Strong institutions will always define the appropriate incentives (and penalties) to encourage prudent behavior in the market. We hope such measures and the ensuing environment will of necessity benefit clients of banks who have taken financial inclusion seriously. Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen; Finally, allow me once again to applaud Standard Chartered Bank Kenya Limited on your Centenary celebrations and wish the bank continued prosperity in the future here in Kenya and in the East African region as a whole. It is now my honour and singular pleasure to invite the Honorable Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta to make his remarks and welcome His Excellency, The President. Welcome, Honorable Deputy Prime Minister. Thank You and God bless you all 
Mark Carney: Opening Statement for Appearance before the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce Opening Statement by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, Ontario, 22 June 2011. *      *      * Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and committee members. Tiff and I are pleased to appear today to discuss the Bank of Canada’s analyses of the economic outlook and the stability of the financial system. We look forward to your questions and the discussion that follows. The Bank’s most recent comprehensive assessment of the economy was presented in its April Monetary Policy Report (MPR). On 31 May, the Bank issued its latest policy rate announcement. These provide the basis for my comments today. Please bear in mind that the Bank’s next full economic analysis will be published in the upcoming MPR, which will be released on 20 July 2011. I will also take a few moments this afternoon to outline the highlights of the Bank’s Financial System Review (FSR), which was released just this morning. The FSR reviews developments in the financial system and identifies potential vulnerabilities. Beginning with the economic outlook:  The global recovery is proceeding broadly as we had expected in April.   The U.S. economy continues to grow at a modest pace, limited by the consolidation of household balance sheets.   Growth in Europe is maintaining momentum, although the risks related to peripheral economies have clearly increased. The disasters that struck Japan in March are severely affecting its economic activity and are also causing temporary supply chain disruptions in advanced economies, including Canada.   Although commodity prices have declined recently, they are expected to remain at elevated levels, supported by tight global supply and very strong demand from emerging markets.   These high prices, combined with persistent excess demand conditions in major emerging-market economies, are contributing to broader global inflationary pressures.   Despite the challenges that weigh on the global outlook, financial conditions remain very stimulative.   In the short term, economic growth in Canada is expected to slow to modest rates, due to a number of temporary factors. These include the supply chain disruptions that will dampen automotive production, as well as the drag from adjusting to higher energy prices on consumer spending in Canada and the United States.   Overall, a broad rebalancing of demand in Canada is underway as the economic expansion progresses. Business investment is now growing strongly, and contributions to growth from both household consumption and government spending are diminishing. As I will discuss in a moment, in this context, the Bank anticipates a slowing in both the rate of household credit growth and the upward trajectory of household debt-to-income ratios.   The recovery in net exports is expected to be modest given the relative weakness in the U.S. economy, Canada’s underrepresentation in fast-growing emerging markets, BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
 While underlying inflation is relatively subdued, the Bank expects that high energy prices and changes in provincial indirect taxes will keep total CPI inflation above 3 per cent in the short term.   Total CPI inflation is expected to converge with core inflation at 2 per cent by the middle of 2012, as excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed, labour compensation growth stays modest, productivity recovers and inflation expectations remain well-anchored.  The Bank expects a re-acceleration of growth in the second half of the year, consistent with a renewed narrowing of the output gap. We will update the projection in the July MPR. Allow me to turn now to the Bank’s monitoring of developments in the financial system.  Although the Canadian financial system is currently on a sound footing, the Bank judges that, largely because of external factors, risks to its stability remain elevated and have edged higher since December. Of the five risks identified in the FSR, I would like to concentrate on three:  – First, sovereign balance sheets remain strained in many advanced economies. Fiscal strains in the euro-area periphery have continued to build despite continued efforts by the affected countries and assistance from the International Monetary Fund and the European Commission. Whether or not a sovereign credit event occurs, these strains could trigger a sharp repricing of credit risk for other governments with high debt burdens, as well as a more generalized retrenchment from risk-taking in global markets, including markets in Canada.  – Second, a long period of low interest rates globally may fuel excessive risk-taking. The search for yield could cause risk to be underpriced or lead investors to take on exposures that they may not be able to manage if conditions become less benign. Our institutions should not be lulled into a false sense of security by current low rates.  – Lastly, the high level of household indebtedness has increased financial vulnerabilities in Canada. Canadians are now as indebted (relative to their income) as the Americans and the British. The Bank estimates that the proportion of Canadian households that would be highly vulnerable to an adverse economic shock has risen to its highest level in nine years, despite improving economic conditions and the ongoing low level of interest rates. This partly reflects the fact that the increase in aggregate household debt over the past decade has been driven by households with the highest debt levels. – There are some offsets. Debt is largely fixed rate and household net worth is at an all-time high. However, borrowers should remember that a fixed-rate mortgage will reprice a number of times over the life of the mortgage and, while asset prices can rise and fall, debt endures.  The elevated levels of household debt require continued vigilance. Since 2008, the federal government has taken a series of prudent and timely measures to tighten mortgage insurance requirements. These will reduce the possibility that prices are further driven up simply through higher leverage and, more broadly, support the long-term stability of the Canadian housing market.  While these measures will help moderate the pace of debt accumulation by households, it will take some time for their full effect to be felt. Canadian authorities 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Despite the challenging international environment and increasing strains on household balance sheets, the Canadian financial system remains healthy. For example, asset quality at Canada’s major banks has improved further in recent months. Moreover, the aggregate financial position of the domestic non-financial corporate sector is solid, with corporate leverage remaining at low levels.   Finally, I would like to note that on Monday, the Bank, along with the Minister of Finance and the Commissioner of the RCMP, unveiled a new generation of bank notes.   These new notes are at the frontier of bank note technology. They are secure, durable and green. They will set a benchmark worldwide and will help maintain the confidence Canadians already have in their currency.  With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
Masaaki Shirakawa: Money, government securities and a central bank Keynote address by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 2011 Spring Meeting of The Japan Society of Monetary Economics, Tokyo, 28 May 2011. *      *      * I.  Introduction I am honored to be invited today to the Japan Society of Monetary Economics. It is of great significance to have discussions among academics, practitioners and policymakers in any academic field, and it is certainly true in the field of monetary economics. As I have worked at a central bank for a long time, and also placed myself in a university for a while, I sincerely hope to deepen intellectual interaction among academics, practitioners and policymakers. Today, from a viewpoint of a policymaker and a practitioner, I will offer my thoughts with the title of “Money, Government Securities and A Central Bank.” Since the 2000s, the global credit bubble and the ensuing financial crisis have marked the most striking events in the global finance. The course of the events during the bubble and the ensuing crisis periods shed new light on the interdependency of the confidence in the government, the financial system and the central bank. During the bubble period preceding the crisis, implicit government guarantee by the Government-Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs) such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac was one of the causes of the residential bubble in the United States. During the crisis period after the failure of Lehman Brothers, decisive actions backed by the confidence in the government were required in order to end the crisis. The U.S. and European governments were forced to make large-scale capital injections and guarantees to financial institutions to restore confidence in private financial institutions and the stability of the financial system. The governments also employed aggressive fiscal policies as decisive macroeconomic measures to escape from sharp and deep economic contractions.  Even after the crisis, confidence in the government has remained an important issue. Since the mid-2009, the world economy has gradually recovered, thus preventing a deep depression, through a different path from the 1930s. However, confidence in sovereign debts has been eroded due to the deterioration in fiscal balance. At present, Greece and other European peripheral countries were hit most severely by the deterioration in fiscal balances and resulting sovereign debt problems. Those countries faced an adverse feedback loop among the sovereign risks, the financial system and the real economy. Although Japan has not confronted such a rise in yields on government securities, the deterioration in fiscal balance is also severe.  The issue of confidence in a government has been relevant to a central bank. After the failure of Lehman Brothers, central banks in advanced countries, including Japan, took unconventional policy measures. Those measures were not pure monetary policies defined as liquidity provisioning. They included, more or less, quasi-fiscal policy elements. Debates are still going on regarding to what extent a central bank should pursue such monetary policy, namely, the relationship between a central bank and the government, or the relationship between monetary and fiscal policy.  Looking back on those series of events, I hope you understand why I choose the topic of money, government securities and a central bank. BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
II.  Interdependency of Confidence Money and government securities I will start by talking about two financial assets, money and government securities (Slide 1). Money plays an important role as a means of payment, a unit of account and a store of value. The primary form of money is central bank money which consists of banknotes issued by a central bank and deposits in central bank current accounts. In Japan, the balance of central bank money is 122 trillion yen in March 2011. In addition, bank deposits, which are easily convertible to central bank money, also function as money. The outstanding balance of bank deposits is 1,024 trillion yen.  The outstanding balance of Japanese government securities is 865 trillion yen. A government uses the securities as a means of funding; a central bank uses them as the instrument of monetary control; and investors including private financial institutions use them as one of the primary financial assets for investment. Since government securities are, in many cases, regarded as risk-free assets whose credit risks are negligible, yields on government securities are often used as benchmark rates for pricing various financial instruments. Both of money and government securities are merely pieces of paper which represent the liability of issuers, i.e., a central bank, private banks and a government. The debtor of central bank money is a central bank, the debtors of bank deposits are private banks, and the debtor of government securities is a government. Although those financial assets do not have intrinsic value as materials in themselves, they are regarded as valuable assets and fulfill their functions. That is ultimately because holders of money or government securities have confidence in the issuers of those debts. The importance of confidence is not a new topic; most textbooks on monetary economics emphasize its importance. Governments, central banks and private banks make their best efforts to maintain the confidence. Governments make their efforts to maintain the medium- to long-term fiscal balances. Central banks maintain the stability in prices and the financial systems through the conduct of monetary policy, through actions as the lender of last resort, through financial supervision, and others. Private banks maintain their capital base, manage various risks, and provide credit intermediation and payment services.  My point here today is the interdependency of confidence. Confidence in each issuer is supported not only by the issuer’s own efforts but also by the fact that confidence in other issuers is maintained and that members in society understand the importance of confidence in each other. Now, I will elaborate on the interdependency of confidence. Determination by the government to underpin confidence in private financial institutions First, confidence in bank deposits of private banks, or in debts of financial institutions, is significantly affected by confidence in governments as well. The global financial crisis after the failure of Lehman Brothers demonstrated that. After the failure, financial institutions lost confidence in each other’s creditworthiness, and the interbank money markets almost stopped working. Under the circumstances, central banks acted as the lender of last resort and aggressively provided funds in order to deal with the liquidity shortage of financial institutions. Although the provision of liquidity by central banks was extremely important during the crisis after the failure of Lehman Brothers, it alone was not enough to restore the stability of the financial system. That was because the adverse feedback loop between the financial system and the real economy eroded capital positions of financial institutions and thereby confidence in their solvency significantly. As the central issue shifted from the liquidity shortage problem to the capital shortage problem, governments were required to inject public capital and to guarantee senior debts of the financial institutions in order to 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
restore confidence in private financial institutions. The amount of public capital injected by the governments of the United States, United Kingdom, Germany and France during the recent global financial crisis reached an equivalent of 84 trillion yen.1 The experience above suggests that the stability of money and the financial system also depends on confidence in governments. Support by the public to underpin confidence in a government Second, having talked about the importance of confidence in a government, I would like to emphasize that confidence in a government is, in the end, underpinned by support by the public. After the global financial crisis, fiscal conditions in many countries deteriorated seriously as a result of decreases in fiscal revenues associated with the downturns in economic conditions, aggressive fiscal policy and capital injections to financial institutions. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) reported that fiscal deficits of advanced economies in G20 countries were 1.7 percent of GDP in 2007. The deficit rose to 9.4 percent in 2009 and are projected to be as high as 8.0 percent in 2011 (Slide 2). The report notes that about an half of the increase in outstanding public debts in G20 advanced economies is due to the decrease in fiscal revenues, while nearly 20 percent of the increase is due to fiscal stimulus measures and the authorities’ support to financial institutions.2 When fiscal conditions deteriorate, confidence in a government’s ability to repay its debts declines. As I mentioned earlier, confidence in private financial institutions is affected by confidence in a government as well. Therefore, when confidence in a government is undermined, confidence in private financial institutions is affected through various channels. The channels include a decline in the value of government securities they hold, erosion of their ability of funding due to the depreciation of values of collateral among others. Real economic activity suffers from rises in funding rates and difficulties in obtaining liquidity. As a result, tax revenue declines and confidence in a government’s ability to repay their debts is weakened. In other words, an adverse feedback loop emerges among sovereign risk, the financial system and real economic activities. Although the cause of sovereign debt problems in European peripheral countries varies from country to country, the common nature of the problem is such adverse feedback loop.  When private financial institutions faced the financial crisis, governments succeeded in stabilizing the economy and the financial system by injecting public capital and conducting countercyclical fiscal policy. A prerequisite for such success is that a government is perceived to secure future revenue to cover the current expenditure. If a government is perceived as lacking sufficient future revenue to cover increased expenditure due to public capital injection or expansionary fiscal policy, the effect of the policy measures may lessen, or even worse, could be adverse. The key to success of various aggressive policy measures in an emergency is confidence in the government’s ability to maintain the sustainability of medium- to long-term fiscal balance. Various aggressive policies by a government in a crisis become effective only when a government has a “stock” of confidence in it. And the substance of the stock is, in the end, support by the public to maintain the sustainability of fiscal balance. A government is not able to pursue fiscal policy at will regardless of support by the public in such a way as to wave a magic wand.                                                  1  The figure is the total amount of public capital injections until March 2010 in the United States, United Kingdom, Germany and France. For details, see Bank of Japan, “Financial System Report” (March 2010). 2  See IMF, “Fiscal Monitor” (May 2010). BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 
Determination by the government and support by the public to underpin confidence in a central bank Third, I would like to emphasize that confidence in a central bank is not maintained solely by the efforts of a central bank. Support and understanding by the government and the public about the importance of confidence in a central bank are also essential. Since the recent global financial crisis, central banks around the world have conducted unconventional monetary policies on a large scale.3 There is no universally-accepted definition of “unconventional monetary policy,” as “convention” varies from country to country. In the case of the Bank of England, unconventional monetary policy means a large-scale purchase of long-term government bonds under the Asset Purchase Programme. By contrast, the Bank of Japan has been conducting the purchase of long-term government bonds for nearly fifty years. In that respect, purchasing long-term government bonds is one of the “conventional monetary policy” measures. An unconventional monetary policy measure for the Bank of Japan after the Lehman shock is the purchase of corporate bonds, commercial papers (CPs), exchange-traded funds (ETFs), real estate investment trusts (REITs), etc. In the case of the Fed, the typical unconventional monetary policy measure is the purchase of CPs and mortgage-backed securities.  As I mentioned above, central banks acted decisively to maintain the stability of the financial system in the wake of the recent financial crisis. In such a situation, confidence in a central bank is a prerequisite for a central bank to take those decisive actions. I will explain this point by taking the expansion of a central bank’s balance sheet as an example. When financial systems become unstable, demand for liquidity increases. Opportunity costs of holding central bank money could be negligible because of extremely low short-term interest rates. Under such condition, an increase in central bank money does not necessarily lead to a price hike. As a matter of fact, even though balances in central bank current accounts and the monetary base increased markedly in Japan and the United States in recent years, inflation rates in both countries did not rise (Slide 3). However, it is crucial for a central bank to have the capacity to take necessary action promptly when an increase in interest rates is required due to changes in economic conditions. If market participants and the public perceive that the central bank is unable to take prompt action “for some reasons” when needed, rampant inflation may follow because the amount of money is extremely large.  “Some reasons” include these. One would oppose an increase in interest rates on the grounds of concern about capital losses of government securities held by private financial institutions or concern about an increase in interest payments on government securities. Although those arguments do exist at any time, the arguments tend to be heated more when the outstanding balance of government securities is larger and the period of low interest rates continues longer.  Confidence in a central bank is formed in a complicated manner, and each country designs institutional arrangements deliberately and each central bank acts carefully when conducting their policies in order to maintain the confidence. I will come back to this point in more detail later. III.  Issues related to fiscal balance Having talked about the interdependency of confidence, let me discuss the importance of confidence in light of Japan’s current fiscal condition.                                                   3  As for unconventional monetary policies taken by central banks after the failure of Lehman Brothers, see Monetary Affairs Department, Bank of Japan, “Major Central Banks’ Policy Operations in the Current Financial Crisis,” (July 2009, in Japanese). 4 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Japan’s current fiscal condition is very severe (Slide 4). The outstanding amount of gross financial liabilities of the government is as high as 198 percent of GDP. As the Japanese government, unlike other major countries’ governments, has a large amount of financial assets, some observers argue that net liabilities rather than gross liabilities may be a more adequate indicator for true indebtedness of the Japanese government. In terms of net financial liabilities of the government, Japan is still ranked as the worst among developed countries with its ratio of 114 percent, higher than that of Italy, which is 103 percent. In any event, so far Japan has experienced no currency crisis or financial crises triggered by the deterioration in fiscal balances that occurred in some other countries.  Though the necessity of the sustainability of fiscal balance is generally well recognized in Japan, arguments which raise the alarm on risks associated with the deterioration in fiscal balance are sometimes regarded as crying wolf. That is because Japanese government securities have been issued smoothly for years and yields on long-term Japanese Government Bonds (JGBs) have been stable at low levels in spite of the deteriorated fiscal balance.  No country can perpetuate fiscal deficit. Confidence in a government’s ability to repay its debts can change in a non-linear fashion. The European sovereign debt problem that started in Greece is a case in point. In the fall of 2009, widening spreads of government securities of the European peripheral countries against Germany became evident (Slide 5). In October 2009, spreads were below 2 percent, but suddenly widened dramatically and now remains at high levels currently such as 13.4 percent for Greece, 8.0 percent for Ireland and 6.6 percent for Portugal. Though macroeconomic conditions have not changed drastically since the fall of 2009 in those countries, market participants’ perception has changed substantially. Yields on JGBs have been stable at a low level of 1.15 percent on average in fiscal 2010 (Slide 6). One of the most frequent questions I have got at international meetings is why yields on JGBs have been stable at low levels despite the very severe fiscal condition. According to the economic theory, a quick answer is the expectations for a low growth rate and a low inflation rate. If we compare the past 10-years’ average nominal growth rates, which are the sum of Japan’s real GDP growth and inflation rate, with 10-year JGB yields, we will witness both have followed similar paths generally albeit with a small deviation (Slide 6). The low and stable JGB yields are explicable if many investors expect what prevailed in the past 10 years will continue into the next 10 years. However, the low growth and inflation rates are not sufficient to explain low yields on JGBs. Long-term interest rates are determined not only by the expected growth rate and the expected inflation rate, but also by the risk premium that compensates for their uncertainties. Thus, to fully explain the low yields on JGBs, we have to discuss why the risk premium is low. In that regard, I have to point to the following two.  First, market participants believe that Japan ultimately has a will and an ability to work on fiscal consolidation despite a severe fiscal condition. Second, confidence is maintained in the Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy focused on achieving sustainable economic growth with price stability. To put it differently, if confidence in those two points were to be undermined, the rise in risk premium would raise the yield on JGBs. That clearly underscores the responsibilities of the government and the parliament that formulate fiscal policy and those of the central bank that conducts monetary policy. As I mentioned earlier that confidence in one entity is underpinned by confidence in other entities, it is crucial for all the entities to recognize the importance of confidence in other entities. Ultimately, confidence in money and government securities is underpinned by the determination of people who recognize the importance of confidence. And, such support by the public is able to exist only with a comprehensive account by the government and the central bank, and with people’s understanding of the situation based on the account.  The future is always full of uncertainties, and I see that there are two tendencies on how market participants and the public form expectations for a long-term future. First, they may BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 
tend to think that what has continued over a long period will stay as it is. In the context of the current Japanese economy, they may think that yields on long-term government bonds will continue to be stable at a low level in the future as the yields were for a long time. Second, once a change begins to occur with a trigger, this change reminds them of big events in the past and they may think that drastic changes will occur. Market participants and the public may drastically change their expectations triggered by an increase in fiscal deficit or an event which make market participants and the public think that the independence of the Bank of Japan is not respected. Then, they may expect that rampant inflation will occur in the end. Having mentioned those two contradictory tendencies, I have to add that it is quite difficult to predict when the former tendency will be replaced by the latter. What is certain is that expectations change in a non-linear fashion. That is why the principles of the authorities’ behavior have to be clear.  It is vital for the fiscal authorities to work on the sustainability of fiscal balance in the midium- to long-run. The deterioration in fiscal balance lowers the increase in the expected future income by households, especially for the working-age population, and thus reduces current household expenditure. To make things worse, if confidence in fiscal sustainability is eroded, an adverse feedback loop among fiscal balance, the financial system and the real economy may exert a negative impact on economic activity, as shown in the sovereign debt problem in the European peripheral countries. IV.  Role of a central bank and government securities Use of government securities in the money market operations Principles of a central bank’s behavior must be clear as well as those of the fiscal authorities. Let me now discuss the principles of a central bank’s behavior in association with government securities.  First, let me show you some facts on the relationship between the Bank of Japan and the JGB market. The Bank of Japan uses JGBs to conduct money market operations (Slide 7). During a one-year period up to April this year, central bank money increased by 20.7 trillion yen on the liability side of the Bank of Japan’s balance sheet. Correspondingly, JGBs increased by 8.2 trillion yen on the asset side as a result of the outright purchases of JGBs. To deal with short-term fluctuations in financial institutions’ demand for reserves, the Bank conducts funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral. The operations are that the Bank extends loans to financial institutions against pooled collateral which they submitted beforehand. During a one-year period up to April this year, those loans increased by 20.1 trillion yen and JGBs account for 80 percent of the collateral. It is an example of how JGBs play an important role in the Bank’s money market operations.4 Apparently, the Bank is the most proactive among the central banks of major countries in using government securities in the money market operations.  This way, the Bank of Japan uses JGBs on a large scale in conducting money market operations. In that context, I would like to stress that the goal of the central bank’s outright purchases of JGBs is to satisfy demand for secular growth in currency and to conduct monetary policy, but not to finance government debt or to stabilize yields of long-term government bonds. If market participants were to regard the central bank’s outright purchases of JGBs as a means of government financing or of stabilization of long-term JGB yields, the resultant hike in risk premium would raise yields on long-term government bonds. If the rise in the yields on long-term government bonds reflects improvements in economic                                                  4  For the details of the Bank’s use of JGBs in the conduct of money market operations, see Financial Markets Department, Bank of Japan, “Money Market Operations in Fiscal 2010.” (May 2011). 6 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
conditions, the rise in the yields is natural and desirable. However, if the rise in the yields on long-term government bonds reflects the rise in risk premium, it exerts a negative impact on the real economy and the financial strength of financial institutions.  The Bank has made the principle on the outright purchases of JGBs very clear. This principle, called “banknote principle,” has been working to prevent uncertainties of the Bank’s actions from raising a risk premium and thus from exerting a negative impact on the economy and finance. More specifically, the Bank keeps the total amount of its holding of government bonds below the outstanding amount of banknotes in circulation.  Some criticize the Bank for establishing such a principle. However, if a central bank that holds such a large amount of government bonds were to purchase government bonds without making its fundamental principle of the purchases clear, increased uncertainties would create a risk premium and lead to a rise in yields on long-term government bonds. In addition to the ceiling of the total holding of government bonds, the Bank also makes public the amount of purchases in specific maturity segments as well as the frequency of the purchases in advance (Slide 8).  In 2009, the Bank increased the amount of Bank’s outright purchases of JGBs to 1.8 trillion yen per month, that is, 21.6 trillion yen per year. Since then, the Bank has been keeping the ceiling. The average duration of the JGBs purchased by the Bank was about 4 years in 2010. If the Bank purchases JGBs at the current pace, it will lead the Bank to hold 82 trillion yen of JGBs, the amount calculated by multiplying the amount purchased per year by an average duration. The current outstanding amount of banknotes is around 81 trillion yen. At present, the outstanding amount of JGBs held by the Bank is 60 trillion yen and less than that of banknotes. However, if the Bank continues to purchase JGBs at this pace, the outstanding amount of JGBs will reach that of banknotes. The outstanding amount of banknotes in the future cannot be predicted with certainty because it depends on the income, the interest rate and the degree of stability of the financial system in the future. The Bank thinks it desirable for economic and financial stability that the Bank continues to purchase JGBs at a stable pace, based upon the best possible forecast of those economic developments.  Underwriting of government securities by the Bank of Japan Now, I will talk about the idea of the underwriting of government securities by the Bank, which is occasionally advocated as a way for funding new government spending.  In many countries, laws do not allow the central bank to directly underwrite government securities. In Europe, the underwriting is prohibited by law explicitly. In many other countries around the world, including emerging economies, it is not allowed, either. In Japan, Article 5 of Public Finance Act prohibits the Bank from underwriting government securities. The principle on prohibiting the central bank from underwriting government securities has been derived from historical lessons. History shows that once the underwriting by the central bank was introduced, it often led to an excess issuance of money and hence rampant inflation, even if it seemed to be under control at an initial phase. The excess issuance of money and resultant inflation destroy people’s lives and the national economy. Based upon this conventional wisdom, the introduction of the Bank’s underwriting of government securities would damage confidence in money. The damage would lead to higher long-term interest rates and instability in the financial market. Then, the government might not be able to issue its debts in the primary market. The current condition in the auction of Japanese government securities remains stable even after the recent Great East Japan Earthquake. Still, taking account of the deteriorated fiscal condition in Japan, it is of utmost importance to maintain the current stable condition in the primary government securities market. BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 
Confidence in money and the well-developed government securities markets are parts of the social infrastructure for the Japanese economy. Now, it is even more important to maintain confidence in money and government securities on both international and domestic grounds, given the severe fiscal condition and damage of the recent earthquake on the Japanese economy. Let me add a few words about the Bank’s bitter experience in oft-quoted underwriting of government bonds in the early 1930s when the veteran Finance Minister Korekiyo Takahashi initiated it. Though some commentators refer to this episode at times in their favor, they do not necessarily recognize a big difference between financial and economic conditions at that time and those at present (Slide 9). First, conditions in the financial market were tight on the eve of the Bank’s underwriting of government bonds in the early 1930s. The overnight call rate was 6.6 percent in December 1931, compared with the current level of 0.07 percent. The long-term interest rate was 5.9 percent in December 1931, compared with the current level of 1.14 percent. Second, fiscal conditions were much better in the early 1930s than in 2011. The outstanding amount of government securities was 47.6 percent of GNP at the end of December 1931, compared with 181.9 percent of GDP at the end of March 2011. Third, the Bank’s underwriting of government bonds in the early 1930s was associated with tighter capital controls in the early 1930s. By contrast, the financial market and other economic activities are much more globalized now. Under those circumstances, the misconduct of monetary and fiscal policy, which leads to a deterioration in confidence in money, would affect long-term interest rates immediately. Fourth, the relative size of a domestic financial market was smaller in the early 1930s than today, and the government securities markets were less developed. In the 1920s and in the early 1930s, the government issued its securities mainly through a syndicate of private financial institutions or through the Deposit Bureau of the Ministry of Finance. A large part of the fund of the Deposit Bureau came from postal savings. Under such condition, the government lacked effective measures to issue a large amount of its securities promptly and smoothly.  During the first several years of Mr. Takahashi in office, the Bank was able to sell most of the underwritten government bonds in the secondary market promptly. The amount of the Bank’s holding of government securities did not grow significantly, hence the monetary base did not, either. By contrast, we now have well-developed primary government securities markets. Even after the recent earthquake, the government is able to issue its securities in the market smoothly, and the bid-to-cover ratios in the primary markets remain unchanged. Although some commentators mention a sharp depreciation of the Japanese exchange rate in the early 1930s, the exchange rate regime at that time was quite different. After the departure from the gold standard at the end of 1931, the yen depreciated from an overvalued level under the gold standard. By contrast, Japan is on the flexible exchange rate system today. As many of you know, Mr. Takahashi was assassinated in 1936 by militarists when he was trying to stop ever-growing demand for military spending, and the course of events led to the eventual rampant inflation. I would argue that the introduction of the scheme of the Bank’s underwriting of government securities itself paved the way for eventual ballooning of fiscal spending, precisely because the scheme lacked the checking process through the market mechanism.  We often use the words of “entrance” and “exit” to discuss the conduct of monetary policy nowadays. In that terminology, we should interpret that the “entrance” of the introduction of 8 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the Bank’s underwriting of government bonds in the early 1930s led to the “exit” of the failure in containing growing demand for fiscal expenditure. In retrospect, we should note that the Bank’s underwriting of government bonds started as a “temporary measure.”5 Though Mr. Takahashi stated that he issued government bonds by a means of the Bank’s underwriting just temporarily in his address at a Diet session,6 history told us that it was not temporary. Today, central banks are not allowed to underwrite government securities in emerging economies as well as developed countries. Underwriting government securities by central banks may eventually lead to an excess issuance of money and rampant inflation, devastating people’s lives and economic activity, even though it may appear no problem at the beginning. Humans are prone to temptations, but at the same time, humans are aware of that and take a preventive measure by prohibiting central banks’ underwriting of government securities. We are not able to improve fiscal balance simply by creating inflation (Slide 10). Inflation may cause an increase in tax revenue, but as the data for the last twenty years in Japan shows, changes in fiscal revenue show no significant correlation with inflation. Rather, fiscal revenue increased as the economy grew in real terms. Expenditures such as social security and public works increase with inflation. Interest payments on the government debts also increase with inflation, since long-term interest rates also go up, reflecting inflation. In the interest of time, I do not get into more detail on fiscal issues. What is clear is that we need to review the overall structure of revenues and expenditures in order to improve fiscal balance. Also, higher economic growth is needed to improve fiscal balance. Here, we have to bear in mind that it is growth in real terms rather than in nominal terms that matters. It should be noted that the view that higher nominal growth is needed for the improvement in the fiscal balance is misleading. That view gives a false impression that economic growth in real terms and inflation would exert the same impact on fiscal balance. The truth is that inflation per se does not improve fiscal balance. The crucial element for improving fiscal balance is steady efforts toward higher economic growth in real terms. When higher economic growth is achieved, prices may rise as a result. V.  Concluding remarks Now, it is time to conclude my speech. Let me first emphasize that money and the financial systems are essential for sustained economic growth, and that confidence in them is the most important foundation for money and the financial system to perform their roles. The starting point is obviously the efforts to maintain the confidence by the government, the central bank and private financial institutions, respectively. The government has to maintain fiscal balance in the medium- to long-run. The central bank has to maintain stability in prices and the financial system through the conduct of monetary policy and the lender-of-last-resort function. Private financial institutions have to provide payment and settlement services and the credit intermediation function properly. Those individual efforts are important, but they alone are not sufficient to achieve stability in money and the financial system. Confidence in private financial institutions depends on confidence in the government as well. To maintain confidence in the government, achieving the medium- to long-term fiscal balance is an important precondition. Support by the public is also essential in achieving the fiscal balance. Confidence in government securities is                                                  5  Fukai, Eigo, Reflections on Seventy Years, 1941 (in Japanese). 6  “The Address on the Government Debt Policy in Fiscal 1933 Budget,” January 21, 1933, Plenary Meeting, the 64th Diet, Ministry of Finance, Financial History of the Showa Era, vol.6 (1954, in Japanese). BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 
underpinned by confidence in the central bank. Confidence in the central bank may be enhanced if the government and people respect the central bank’s judgments, and it may be eroded if not. In other words, confidence in money and the financial system are interdependent on each other. Confidence is something like the air; nobody doubts about its existence at normal times. Confidence may wane in a discontinuous manner unless we make utmost efforts to maintain it. Once confidence is lost, the impact on the economy is enormous. Confidence is fragile. I have started this talk by mentioning the importance of dialogues among academics, practitioners and policymakers. Let me conclude by sincerely hoping that we, members of the Japan Society of Monetary Economics and the Bank of Japan, can cooperate further to promote understanding in society about the importance of maintaining confidence in money and the financial system. Thank you.      10 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 13 
   14 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 15 
Nout Wellink: Looking beyond the current reforms Speech by Mr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the Amsterdam Financial Forum, Amsterdam, 17 June 2011. *      *      * The history of The Grand dates back to 1578, even before the establishment of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange, which is the oldest in the world. In the course of the centuries, the buildings of The Grand underwent quite a few architectural changes and additions. As a consequence, they have not become outdated, and today they provide a great location for the Amsterdam Financial Forum. It is easy to see a parallel between the architecture of this site and the future global financial architecture, the topic of this session. We need to keep financial system regulation up to date as well and make quite a few changes and additions to it in the course of time. My term as governor is coming to an end. In about two weeks time, I will hand over the presidency of the Dutch Central Bank to my successor, Klaas Knot. In these last days, I am not going to look back on the past 14 years. Neither will I focus on what is going on in the financial system today. Instead, I will share some thoughts with you about the future of the financial system. That future is being shaped by a broad set of new regulations addressing weaknesses exposed by the financial crisis. In this speech, I will briefly highlight the main elements of these reforms. After that, I will focus on the consequences for the financial system – both the intended and the unintended ones. Looking beyond the current reforms, I also have a few messages for regulators and for the financial sector. Key elements of the current reforms The financial system is currently being reformed. Some new rules are already fully in effect, others are being phased in or are still being fleshed out. For some issues, the approach differs per country. Nonetheless, several key common elements can be identified. I will discuss the following four: capital requirements, liquidity requirements, measures to reduce excessive risk taking, and resolution measures. Capital requirements are a first key element. During the crisis, it turned out that banks had insufficient buffers to withstand large losses. The Basel III framework therefore sets tighter capital standards. Most importantly, it requires that the quality of bank capital be improved. A larger part of capital must consist of common equity, the most loss absorbing type. Furthermore, banks will have to increase the size of their capital buffer. The new regulations involve a higher minimum capital ratio as well as heavier risk weights for specific activities. For proprietary trading, which caused large losses during the crisis, and investments in re-securitisations, a complex and relatively high-risk financial instrument, banks will have to hold much larger capital buffers. Still, in good times, risks may again be underestimated. Therefore the new regulations also set a limit for leverage regardless of risk weights. To further ensure the build-up of additional buffers in good times and enhance the capacity of banks to absorb losses in bad times, the Basel III framework introduces dynamic capital requirements. These come on top of the minimum capital requirements that must be met at all times and by all banks. The dynamic buffer consists of two parts. One part, the capital conservation buffer, relates the build-up of buffers to the profits of an individual bank. The other part, the countercyclical buffer, relates it to conditions in the economy at large. This is truly a novelty: for the first time in history, a macroprudential element has been included in international banking regulations. BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
On top of the minimum and dynamic requirements, there will be a capital surcharge for systemically important banks. This will make those banks whose failure would pose the greatest threat to the financial system yet a little bit safer. The second key element of the current reforms concerns liquidity requirements. These are essential to make the financial system more stable. Liquidity and maturity transformation is at the core of the banking business and provides a large benefit to the economy. It enables households and companies to earn interest on savings that they can access at any time, while providing essential long-term financing to the economy. However, when excessive, maturity transformation creates a vulnerability to market shocks and can become a source of instability to the financial system. During the crisis, insufficient management of liquidity risk emerged as a major problem. Even well-capitalised financial institutions experienced liquidity problems and central banks needed to intervene, including with unconventional measures, to provide large scale financing and thereby prevent further escalation. Therefore the new liquidity requirements, introduced as part of the Basel III framework, are of utmost importance. They require banks to hold sufficient high quality liquid assets to cover net cash outflows for a period of 30 days under a stress scenario. In addition, they set minimum requirements for the use of long-term and stable funding sources to finance long-term lending. Together, these measures will help to prevent excessive maturity transformation. Given the importance of these liquidity requirements, it is worrying that the EU has not yet shown a clear commitment to implement them in full, without any reservations. Next to capital and liquidity requirements, there is a variety of other measures aimed at reducing excessive risk taking. These are a third element of the current reforms. For instance, in the US, the Volcker rule may impose direct restrictions on trading by banks for their own account. For banks based in Europe, excessive risk taking will be discouraged by remuneration rules. These rules require that traders with a significant risk-taking role will receive part of their bonus in the form of shares with a delay of several years. Thus, if high-risk trading results in large losses, then traders will share in these losses. The fourth key element of the current reforms consists of resolution measures. The crisis has shown that with the current regulatory tools large banks cannot be allowed to fail, because the costs for society would be too large. However, a bank failure can never be fully prevented – not even with the new rules for capital and liquidity and the other measures. It is therefore essential that any bank failure can be resolved at minimal cost and, if possible, without taxpayer support. Resolution measures include the preparation of recovery and resolution plans, or living wills. These plans provide detailed guidance for emergency measures and, if these were to fail, an orderly restructuring or bankruptcy. In addition, in some countries there is a discussion about precautionary measures such as ring-fencing of retail activities. Regardless of the precise regulatory approach, to make the failure of a large international bank – however unlikely it may be – a manageable event, some banks may need to change their structure. Unfortunately, for the near future, resolution frameworks will remain focussed on the national level, because an international resolution regime is not politically feasible. As a consequence, resolution can be inhibited by the complex structure of large banks, many of which consist of thousands of legal entities all over the world that are interconnected through a variety of financial arrangements. To be able to quickly restructure a bank in times of crisis, these interdependencies must be made transparent and reduced. Consequences for the financial system The current reforms will undoubtedly increase the resilience of financial institutions and enhance the stability of the system as a whole. However, there will also be broader consequences for the financial system. Some of those consequences are intended, others 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
are unintended. Looking beyond the current reforms, which will take years to be fully implemented, I will now say something about the outcomes. What follows refers to the financial system as a whole, not to specific countries or institutions. First, besides reducing risks, the reforms will inevitably lead to unintended risk shifting. The new regulations will increase resilience and discourage excessive risk taking in of most parts of the financial sector, but elsewhere financial risks are likely to grow larger. For instance, risks will shift to households. There is already an ongoing trend of insurers providing less guarantees on new life insurance policies. This is largely driven by the lessons that institutional investors learned from previous crises, but they may well be reinforced by new regulations, such as Solvency 2. As a consequence, households are bearing more and more financial market risks, even though they may not be very well equipped to deal with those risks. That is an unintended consequence. Like before the crisis, risks may also shift to unregulated entities that form a shadow banking system. Maturity and liquidity transformation do not only take place within the official banking system, but also outside it. To some extent, this is being addressed in the current reforms. However, some part of financial innovation will always be aimed at circumventing existing regulations. An unintended but likely outcome is therefore that over time, risks will again shift to yet unregulated areas. The response should not be to control innovation, but to closely monitor the main vulnerabilities in the financial system and adapt the regulatory framework when necessary. A second consequence for the financial system is that the reforms will induce changes to business models. For banks and insurers, some activities and investments will become less attractive due to the current reforms. Banks may move out of certain trades for their own account, for instance, because the required capital buffers will reduce the return on equity. Under Solvency 2, insurers may find it unattractive to continue investing in complex structured products, because of the high risk weight and the detailed analysis that is required of the underlying assets. Furthermore, retail deposits will become a favoured source of bank funding, as a consequence of the new liquidity requirements. These are just some examples. Such changes in business models are not merely side effects; they are a necessary outcome of the current reforms. Changes in business models are a fully intended consequence. If there would be no significant changes to business models, and if that would mean that risk profiles remained too high and potential threats to the stability of the financial system were insufficiently addressed, then we will need to see a further tightening of the rules. The most profound changes to business models will probably not result from capital or liquidity requirements or from other measures to reduce excessive risk taking. Instead, the most profound impact will come from resolution measures. That is because effective resolution measures will put an end to the “too big to fail” or “too big to save” status of systemically important financial institutions. When they loose this status, large financial institutions will also loose important competitive advantages over smaller and less interconnected institutions. At present, systemically important banks enjoy an implicit subsidy on their funding costs. This is apparent in credit ratings, for instance. Credit rating agencies assign higher ratings to large banks than their intrinsic financial strength would justify. The rating enhancement reflects the probability of government support and can be as large as five notches. For smaller banks, the enhancement is lower or even zero, because it is perceived that smaller banks are less likely to receive government support when they get in trouble. Effective resolution measures will thus eliminate the support-related rating advantage and lower funding costs of large banks. A capital surcharge for systemically important banks fits with this reasoning and compensates for the unfair benefits of being very large. This is a fully intended consequence and will enhance economic efficiency and market discipline. BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 
But there may be unintended consequences too. Ideally, governments would agree an international resolution framework, but that requires international burden sharing in case they would have to support the restructuring of a cross-border bank. At present, this is not a realistic option. The alternative, national resolution regimes, imply that some degree of autonomy for domestic retail operations may be a necessary precondition for effective resolution. This comes at a cost. Financial integration can make financial markets more efficient, especially within a common market like the EU. It enables banks to raise funds where they are readily available and invest those funds where they generate the largest return, even if that is in another country. In addition, banks can diversify their risks by combining retail and investment banking. If the economic benefits from international and universal banking operations cannot be fully realised, that would be an unintended and indeed an undesirable outcome. A third consequence of the current reforms is that they will have an impact on financial markets. We know for sure that there will be an impact and we can almost be sure about the direction of some changes. For instance, banks will need to attract more stable long-term funding. At the same time, European insurers, which are important providers of bank funding, show an increasing preference for investment in covered bonds because of the low capital requirements under Solvency 2. Together with a range of other factors, this will give a boost to European covered bond markets. However, we cannot be sure how large and how permanent the changes will be. That is because there are many different factors at work. Some market participants, such as pension funds and other large investors, are much less affected by the current reforms. They will respond to changes in market prices and this may partly offset the impact of new regulations. This makes the overall impact on financial markets uncertain. It is therefore important that major new regulations are phased in gradually. The new liquidity measures for banks provide an example of this approach. They are phased in over four to seven years to prevent large shocks to financial markets. In addition, they are subject to an observation period to facilitate mitigation of undesirable outcomes. A fourth consequence from the current reforms is that the financial system will continue to suffer from important distortions. In other words, there will be incentives for financial institutions to behave in a way that is not in the public interest. Of course, this will always be the case. The perfect world of economists, without distortions or frictions of any kind, exists only in their models. Still, it is worth pointing out a few important distortions that the current reforms have been unable to tackle. Perhaps the most important distortion is that high leverage will remain attractive for financial corporations because interest payments are tax deductible. This makes it attractive for a company to use more debt financing and less equity capital than would be desirable from a social point of view. Of course, this distortion exists for non-financial corporations as well. Yet in the financial sector it is more troublesome, because tax considerations do not just have an effect on the funding choices, they also stimulate the design of tax-driven financial products. Such products may add little economic value, but create leverage and complexity, increasing vulnerabilities in the financial system and making them more difficult to monitor. Another distortion is that the current reforms are not uniform across countries. For example, countries with a large financial sector, such as Switzerland, will require large banks to hold more capital than the international standard. Furthermore, EU remuneration rules will apply to the global operations of banks headquartered in Europe and the US Volcker rule will apply to the global operations of banks headquartered in the US. The lack of uniformity has the unintended consequence that banks operating abroad in the same market, but headquartered in different countries, will each have to observe different rules. This causes unfair competition, induces arbitrage and creates complexity. However, just as with resolution frameworks, it is a political reality that some reforms, however desirable they may be, can only be passed at the national level. 4 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Concluding remarks Looking beyond the current reforms, there will be major changes to the financial system, some intended and others unintended. Regulators will have to monitor the consequences carefully and respond to what they see. Risks will shift away from where they are regulated most tightly. Regulators will also need to evaluate the impact on financial markets and the effects of market distortions. If they detect the emergence of new vulnerabilities, rules will need to be adjusted. Furthermore, business models have to be adapted. If the largest banks do not undergo a substantial transformation, a further tightening of banking regulations will be required to produce the intended outcome. One thing is certain: beyond the current reforms, further reforms will be necessary to safeguard the stability of the financial system. It took ten years to develop the Basel II framework. The current, more profound reforms will have taken shape in about half that period. Future regulators should continue this trend and make sure that regulation of the financial system keeps evolving, especially when public concerns about global financial crises fade away. And ideally, the next round of reforms should be even more harmonised at the international level, to reduce unfair competition and unproductive barriers to financial integration. I also have two messages for the financial sector. First, within the new regulatory framework, it is important that financial institutions continue to strengthen their own risk assessments. To all executives that are present here, I would say: you have a responsibility of your own as well. Second, risk shifting and financial innovation imply that the regulatory framework will continue to evolve and will never be completed. Therefore your business models should be sufficiently flexible and not fine-tuned to a current set of regulations. You have seen that most of today’s regulators are quick and determined to pass the necessary reforms. I am confident that this will also apply to tomorrow’s regulators, who will continue to make changes and additions to the future global financial architecture. 
K C Chakrabarty: Challenges and opportunities in a trillion dollar economy Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India’s (ASSOCHAM) National Banking Conclave, New Delhi, 17 June 2011. *      *      * The assistance provided by Ms P B Rakhe in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Hon’ble Finance Minister, Government of India, Dr Narendra Jadhav, Member, Planning Commission, Shri Dilip Modi, President , ASSOCHAM, Shri R. N. Dhoot, Senior Vice President, ASSOCHAM, and MP, Rajya Sabha, Shri J. M. Garg, Central Vigilance Commissioner, Dr Thomas Mathew, Jt Secretary, Capital Markets, Ministry of Finance, Shri M. Narendra, Chairperson, ASSOCHAM National Council for Banking & Finance and CMD, Indian Overseas Bank, Shri T. M. Bhasin, CMD, Indian Bank, Shri M. V. Tanksale, ED, PNB, Shri N. Seshadri, ED, Bank of India, Shri D. S. Rawat, Secretary General, ASSOCHAM, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  It is a pleasure and privilege to be here at the National Banking Conclave on the theme “Challenges and Opportunities in a Trillion Dollar Economy”. As you are aware, the Indian economy reached the trillion US dollar GDP milestone in 2007 and joined other countries of the trillion dollar club, namely, the US, UK, Japan, Germany, China, France, Italy, Spain, Canada, Brazil and Russia. In fact, over the period 1960 to the late 1980s, India’s GDP in US dollar terms doubled every nine years, on an average. Since then, the period for doubling has declined to around 5 years, coinciding with the initiation of wide-ranging structural reforms. With India’s GDP at current market prices during 2010–11 already placed at around US dollar 1.7 trillion, it is expected that the Indian economy would cross the US dollar 3.4 trillion mark by 2015–16, i.e., well within the span of the ensuing (Twelfth) Five Year Plan. Therefore, as policy makers and business leaders, we should be thinking about exploiting the opportunities and preparing ourselves for the challenges of managing a multi-trillion dollar (and not a one trillion dollar) economy! Although some argue that India catapulted to the trillion dollar league in 2007 on account of GDP valuation based on sharply appreciated exchange rate that resulted from huge inflows of foreign exchange, most others consider this as an emerging sign of take-off that could accelerate the growth momentum going forward. Last year, economists at Morgan Stanley and other long-range forecasters predicted that India’s growth will start to outpace China’s within three to five years and continue at a faster rate than any other large country over the next 20 to 25 years. Hence, I believe, and others do so too, that the Indian economy is set to experience double digit growth during the coming two to three decades. While the future growth outlook of the Indian economy looks promising, the challenge is to make it more inclusive. At the grassroots level, India continues to be a poor and less developed country in spite of years of financial and other support provided by the Government to equity enhancing distributional programmes and the spectacular turnaround in investment and growth. According to a Planning Commission Report on the methodology of estimation of poverty issued in 2009, the all India poverty head count ratio was at 37.2 per cent in 2004–05 compared to 45.3 per cent in 1993–94. Prima facie, while the slow pace of reduction in poverty due to high population growth rate, large workforce still dependent on agriculture and illiteracy continue to obstruct the growth potential, the paradigm that these disabilities can be nevertheless be turned around into a winning proposition is also surely within the realm of possibility. In fact, many of the disadvantages which the Indian economy faced in the past has already been waned and turned out to be advantages. To illustrate, a disadvantage that has plagued BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
most developing economies including India has been that of scarcity of capital. This scarcity has hindered the investment and growth prospects of these economies in the past. This, however, is no longer a disadvantage. With most countries including India opening their doors to foreign investment, the question is no longer of scarcity of capital but the rate of return that we can pay on this capital. Hence, capital is no longer a constraint in the era of liberalization and globalization if we are able to pay the required return and are able to attract the capital flows into our economies especially in the form of foreign direct investment. Further, high population growth was another disadvantage faced by many developing countries while making efforts to improve the GDP in per capita terms. However, with the emergence of skills and knowledge as new engines of economic growth, higher population growth is more of an opportunity than a constraint. According to Census 2011, 56.9 per cent of India’s total population belongs to the age group 15–59 years. Importantly, only 7.5 per cent of the population belongs to the age category “60 years and above”. This shows that India is yet to experience the problem of aging. Further, it is predicted that India will see a sharp decline in the dependency ratio over the next thirty years, which will be a major demographic dividend for India. Moreover, it is estimated that not only India’s demographic trend would remain favourable for the next three decades but also remain better than other BRIC economies. We have to, however, realise that these advantages will not transform on its own to higher economic growth. In this regard, appropriate interventions would be required to reap maximum benefits from this favourable demographic dividend by investing in education and skill development. In the Union budget for 2011–12, Indian Government has allocated Rs. 52,057 crore for the education sector, which is 24 per cent higher than the 2010–11 education expenditure. However, expenditure on education as per cent of GDP is relatively low in India when compared with some of the developed nations as also with some developing countries (Table). Among the G-20 countries, India not only has lowest educational indicators, but the public education system is also poor when compared with other BRIC countries and some of the emerging market economies. In 2009, World Bank expressed the view that acute shortage of skills especially in the area of civil engineering shadows the growth prospects of the Indian economy. According to Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh, “around 10 per cent of the relevant age group is enrolled in any institute of higher education as compared to 40 to 50 per cent in most developed countries”. Banks play a facilitating and enabling role in this endeavour by extending education loans and they have a great responsibility to ensure that no deserving student is denied an education loan. However, just providing education loan is not sufficient. Industry and bankers would have to work together to ensure that the employability of such students is high and that the people with the right type of education and skills are available for the industry.  Table:  Expenditure on Education Country Spending on Education as per cent of GDP Country Spending on Education as per cent of GDP Switzerland 5.8 South Africa 5.3 United States 5.7 Thailand 5.2 France 5.6 Chile 4.2 UK 5.3 Brazil 4.2 Malaysia 8.1 India 4.1 Mexico 5.3 Russia 3.8 Note: Government education expenditure as per cent of GDP (2000–2002) Source: United Nations Human Development Programme 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We need to recognize that the knowledge, skills and productivity of our growing young and dynamic work force forms the backbone of our economy. This would not only require effective implementation of developmental and poverty alleviation schemes at the bottom of the pyramid, but also the recognition that these new factors of production, namely, knowledge, skills and technology which have the ability to unleash the productive frontiers of the economy in the most efficient and dramatic way. Notably, these new factors of production which can liberate human enterprise from the binding constraints of land, labour and capital are the engines of growth in the knowledge economies of the western hemisphere, along with countries like Japan and Israel both of which are otherwise scarcely endowed with land and labor. Technology is the surest and the most appropriate way of bringing inclusion in respect of any product and / or service. Technology has revolutionized every industry in the world by extending faster and cost-effective delivery of products and services, ensuring affordability to those who otherwise could not, and simultaneously, ensuring viability and profitability of producers. This has other positive spinoffs. If the cost of products and services is brought down leveraging technology, inflation also would come down. That would lead to a softer interest rate regime which would enable sustainable growth. Taking cue from examples of western hemisphere, India should try to become a knowledge economy to promote inclusive economic growth. The progress from agrarian and/or industrial economy to that of knowledge economy is based on the ability to acquire ownership of knowledge and to use it to create or improve goods and services. Workers in the knowledge economy are especially distinct in so far they know what they are doing, how the work is done and why they are doing the work. They also excel in their fields of knowledge and are often better at their jobs than their superiors. The respect for knowledge workers leads to most desired outcomes through change management as experimentation and innovation are encouraged and rewarded. Thus, we must strive assiduously to convert our young work force into potential power house of productivity and growth. Having said that, it would be impossible to achieve these objectives in the absence of poverty alleviation. Extreme poverty and deprivation often discourage the urge of the poor to participate in programs that do not provide immediate support to their livelihood. To encourage the poor to participate in these initiatives, therefore, requires that developmental programs, at the starting point, should focus on providing opportunities for people to earn a living and increase their incomes over time. The program can be followed up by providing people the means for enhancement of their capabilities to exploit available opportunities. Finally, effective mechanisms for protection against a temporary or permanent loss of livelihood should supplement the overall program to achieve the goal of inclusive growth. Presently, a number of intervention programs are conducted by the Government that focus on employment creation and the flagship NREGA is one such significant initiative. One could not, of course, belittle the excellent work being done by non-government organizations engaged in supporting livelihoods in several poor underdeveloped hinterlands. In the financial sector, the Reserve Bank has crafted well known programs to achieve planned, structured and sustained financial inclusion such as adoption of Business Correspondent and Business Facilitator Model, preparation of Board Approved Financial Inclusion Plans, requiring banks to providing a minimum of four banking products and services including no-frills accounts with overdrafts, and is committed to furthering the scope of these initiatives. Collective and multipronged efforts to promote inclusive growth supplemented by some earnest investment in human capital are the only ways by which we can move towards becoming a knowledge economy. The second stage assimilation of knowledge, skills and technology can be obtained from education by means of brain-gain. The virtual modes of education through ICT and linkages to national and international information hubs can provide the benefits of information availability without the need to be present at in certain space or time. The benefits of brain–gain are realized from the wide-spread availability of domain knowledge from remote locations which can transform business productivity at minimal cost. The e-Choupal experiment of ITC, for example, showcases the possibility of BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 
improvement in quality of produce and improved realization of returns from farming due to availability of better information on market prices. The helpline of the Ministry of Agriculture with experts on board has been similarly instrumental in solving day to day problems of farmers. Further, internet based e-education portals for students offer boundary-free learning experience. These portals provide virtual classrooms and guidance from professional instructors on different subject areas and can have widest possible reach regardless of brick and mortar structures. While the initiatives being taken are laudable, there is a crying need for reforms in our educational system which requires to be toned up to impart education that is focused on the demands of the new millennium. Effective delivery of educational inputs in a large economy like India requires a critical mass of volume and quality. In this regard, the Government programmes such as Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) in the elementary education sector and Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) in the secondary education sector helped in achieving the universalisation of education to a very large extent in terms of access to schooling and improvement in gross enrolment ratio. Even then there is a pressing need to further increase school enrollments, along with improvements in the quality of education. This may be extremely important in harvesting the fruits of investment. In this regard, the enactment of Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 and the operationalisation of Article 21-A of the Constitution of India, are expected to address the issues of drop out, out of school children, quality of education and availability of trained teachers in the short to medium term. Further, a proposal to set up a National Commission/Council for Higher Education and Research to prescribe academic quality and advancement of knowledge in higher educational institutions is under the consideration of the Government. Yet another well known problem is the mismatch between quantity and quality of education. According to the research published by the Observer Research Foundation (2010), India recorded 10.4 per cent increase in the number of graduate engineers in 2008 compared with 9.9 per cent in China, 5.9 per cent in South Korea, 3.9 per cent in UK and –1.0 per cent in the US. However, despite the increasingly higher numbers of engineering graduates produced by the technical institutes in India, almost 30 per cent of fresh graduates remain unemployed even one year after graduation. In 2005, a McKinsey-NASSCOM study indicated that only a quarter of India’s technical graduates and 10–15 per cent of general college graduates are of employable quality in the off-shore IT and BPO industries. Further, NASSCOM estimates that the educational system produces nine half-literate graduates for each graduate of passable quality, reflecting the low quality of education. However, despite discounting of the quality of education, when it comes to the number of engineers per million people, India has only 214 with South Korea having the highest number 1435. While Japan has 765 engineers per million people, China has 340. The research also showed that doctorate degrees were less than 1 per cent of graduate engineering degrees in the country. The percentage of doctorate degrees compared to engineering degrees was much higher in most of the other countries, e.g., 9 per cent in the US, 10 per cent in the UK, 8 per cent in Germany and 3 per cent in South Korea. Comparing Indian institutions with the well known international centers the study also observed that most Indian institutions had not progressed beyond undergraduate teaching institutions into graduate teaching and research institutions. Clearly, therefore, we need a lot of catching up to do both in numbers and quality in order to realize our goal of creating a knowledge economy with equitable and productive employment opportunities for the youth. Besides forwarding the inclusive growth program massive investments in education are also required by the government with participation of the private sector which should target at the development of occupational skills based on knowledge and technology. The participation of private sector is needed to implement educational programs that have occupational relevance in contemporary enterprise. To sum, in the new era of growth with knowledge, skills and technology as engines, without knowledge workers it will be extremely difficult to shift the production frontier of any 4 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 economy. Without adequate investments in education and skill development, we will not be able to transform our growing young population into knowledge workers and it will result in a disaster. We thus have to work on the trinity of the issues of Inclusion, Technology and Education to propel India to a 10 Trillion Dollar Economy and beyond, else we will not be able to sustain even the current growth. I hope that industry representatives and bankers present here would deliberate on these issues and work together to ensure sustainable growth. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Mark Carney: Canada’s new polymer bank notes – celebrating Canada’s achievements at the frontiers of innovation Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the presentation of new polymer bank notes, Bank of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 20 June 2011. *      *      * I am very proud to represent the Bank at this historic unveiling of a new generation of bank notes. Secure, durable and innovative, these new notes are at the frontier of bank note technology. They will set a benchmark worldwide and will help maintain the confidence Canadians already have in their currency. Designing and issuing bank notes that you can trust is an important element of the Bank’s mandate to promote the economic and financial welfare of our country. This new series of bank notes combines innovative technology and Canadian ingenuity. They were developed by a team of physicists, chemists, engineers and other experts from the Bank of Canada and from across the bank note industry. This work was borne out of necessity. Beginning in 2001, counterfeiting in Canada increased dramatically, to levels that were very high by Canadian and international standards. By 2004, counterfeiting was at a historic peak of 470 counterfeit notes detected per one million notes in circulation. The Bank responded with an aggressive strategy to deter counterfeiting, which included training retailers to recognize genuine notes, working with law enforcement to catch and prosecute criminals, and improving the quality of those notes in circulation. We succeeded. Today there are only 35 counterfeit notes detected per million notes – a more than ten-fold reduction. Of course, even one counterfeit note is one too many! That is why the Bank is continuing to work closely with our partners in law enforcement and that is why we are investing heavily in new technology to stay ahead of counterfeiting threats. And we are. The polymer notes we are introducing today are unique. There is simply no other currency like it. These new notes combine transparency, holography and other sophisticated security elements. These new bills are not only more secure; they are also more cost effective. In addition, we have independently verified that the environmental footprint of polymer notes will be smaller than that of currency made from cotton-based bank note paper. The new bills will last at least 2.5 times longer than cotton-based bank note paper bills, and after being removed from circulation, for the first time in Canada, they will be recycled into other products. Safer, cheaper, and greener: these new bank notes are a 21st century achievement in which all Canadians can take pride and place their confidence. We have heard how these new bank notes will explore the frontiers of Canadian history and innovation, all while being at the frontier of bank note security. The product of leading-edge technology, these notes will be among the most secure in the world. These polymer bills will last at least two-and-a half times longer than the current cotton-paper bills now in circulation, thereby costing less to produce and leaving a smaller ecological footprint: in every way, this is better money. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches We will be phasing in these new bills, working closely with financial institutions and manufacturers of bank note equipment to ensure a smooth transition from cotton-paper to polymer. There are many important partners in this process. We will be working with law enforcement agencies, as well as retailers. Today, we unveil the new $100 and $50 notes so that Canadians can start to learn about the new features and appearances of each denomination. Starting in November 2011, the $100 bill will be available and the $50 notes will follow in March 2012. The $20, $10, and $5 notes will be unveiled and issued by the end of 2013. So after telling you about the new money, the time has come to show it to you. 
Ardian Fullani: Recent developments in the Albanian banking system Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at a meeting organised by Raiffeisen Bank with business representatives and its major clients, Tirana, 14 June 2011. *      *      * Dear Minister of Finances, Dear Mr. Lennkh and Mr. Hodell, Dear Mr. Canacaris, Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, Today’s meeting organised by the Raiffeisen Bank with the business community is very significant. Firstly, it shows a well-defined strategy of the Raiffeisen group to increase its market share in Albania through dialogue with business partners. Secondly, such forums serve also as a platform to generate development ideas and projects of national, and why not, regional importance. Thirdly, I think that today’s meeting is indicative of the maturity and rising awareness of the banking system and the business community. Personally, I would wish that such meetings be intensified in the future: they should also be more structured, oriented towards a constructive debate, and involve the entire system and all sectors of the economy. In short, banks and businesses need to sit together for the best.  Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, We are in mid-2011 now, which is a complex year in terms of its challenges for objective reasons owing to the international financial dynamics of the past 3–4 years. Whilst our economy has posted positive growth, it continues to operate below its potential. The international setting is filled with uncertainty for a group of advanced economies, while agricultural products and raw materials prices remain high. Despite last year’s narrowing current deficit, Albania’s external position remains a constant structural weakness. The Albanian banking system is considered to have adapted commendably to this complex situation. I would like to underline that we have done an immense amount of work so far. Therefore, I take this opportunity to congratulate all central and local managing units of banks operating in Albania. During this period, the Albanian banking system has continued to expand its activity and lending to the economy. Financial soundness and profitability indicators have improved and system’s activity capitalization is in a good position. The banking sector remains the main actor of financial intermediation in Albania, whose financing continues to rely mainly on public deposits. The main problem of the banking system has been the growing non-performing loans share, which has also reflected the active policy of the Bank of Albania to enhance the transparency of banks’ balance sheets. Credit risk remains the primary risk to our banking sector. In response, the banking sector has established adequate reserve funds to buffer major shocks on the borrowers repayment capacity and market equilibrium. Stress tests support our conclusion on banking system resilience. The presence in this room of both the business community and the banking system suggests me to refer once again to the need for sincere cooperation of mutual benefit. With a few exceptions, I think this cooperation has been present and operational and has certainly supported in particular the country’s economic activity over the past years. The global financial crisis that erupted in late 2008 had its influence on our economy by stiffening this cooperation. On the one hand, the system found itself in a difficult liquidity situation, while on the other hand businesses found it difficult to access markets. With some additional subjective reasons, the outcome of this was a deterioration of the system’s loan portfolio and companies’ liquidating capacity. Consequently, 2009–2010 marked a slowdown of lending growth to the economy, reflecting the increased prudence, fully justified by the system, and BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches business inability to earn a meritable new loan. The period coincided with a review of balances and portfolio restructuring, when possible with provisions, directly affecting the system’s financial performance. The Bank of Albania has played a major role as a guardian of the country’s macroeconomic and financial stability. Macroprudence has been the prevalent word in our communication with the market, authorities and the public. We have translated macroprudence as a need for more capital and liquidity, and increased banking system payment capacity. Consequently, the Albanian banking sector did not experience contracting. The Bank of Albania has provided and continues to provide the necessary liquidity to the banking system, to stimulate not only to the market but also to the entire economy. Prudent policies and timely legal regulations guaranteed effective banking supervision and enabled satisfactory businesses’ access to bank loans. Actually, I would like to point out that the Albanian banking system left the crisis in healthy condition and that it guarantees growing stability.  Our banking system, during this period, has carried out a considerable amount of work, which has served to consolidate each bank’s position prior, during and after the crisis. Hence, the banks are now able to use again their full lending potential. For the truth’s sake, it must be underlined that the latest figures speak of growth in the order of 10 per cent in annual terms, a figure which should not go unnoticed or be considered as inadequate. I would suggest the same philosophy to the business community. For objective reasons, the concept of free money belongs to the past. By that I mean that a bank loan should be earned, which means unconditional and honest cooperation within the legal and regulatory framework approved by the country’s authorities. Of course, banks are established to lend money, but first and foremost we need to bear in mind that the public deposits’ stability is more important than an individual business loan or bank portfolio. Moreover, the business community needs to recalibrate its position in relation to recent developments both in the national and global economy context. It must aim a higher productivity, primarily through identifying comparative advantages in the framework of global changes.  In that regard, it is necessary to adopt new business administration philosophies on capacity building and investment in human resources, governance, internal control, financial and legal expertise, and risk management. Besides a legal relation, the bank-client relation is a human relation, one of trust. When a business delays the payment of a bank loan instalment, it should consider its judgement on the bank if the bank delayed the payment of the matured interest to that business. Dear ladies and gentlemen, On behalf of the Bank of Albania, I would like to invite the communities present in this event to strengthen their communication bridges, which is of benefit not only to them but also to the economy in general.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Svante Öberg: Economic conditions for wage formation Speech by Mr Svante Öberg, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the National Mediation Office, Stockholm, 16 June 2011. *      *      * The Riksbank’s task is to maintain a low and stable level of inflation. But the development of wages affects inflation and inflation affects the development of wages. Wage formation and monetary policy are consequently connected, and, consequently, the Riksbank monitors wage formation with great attentiveness. The message of my speech today can be summarised by two points:  Wage formation has worked well since the mid-1990s, and my assessment is that it will continue to work well in the years ahead.   But if wage increases were to be slightly less than the approximately 3.5 per cent per year that the Riksbank estimated in April, not only inflation and unemployment could be lower, but so could interest rates.  I will start by taking a look back at wage formation over the last 40 years. Following this, I will address the economic conditions for wage formation in the years ahead. I will base this on the Riksbank’s most recent forecast for Sweden’s economy, from April. A look back at wage formation over the last 40 years Wage formation did not work well in the 1970s and 1980s  Following the “record years” of the 1960s, a period of weaker development for Sweden’s economy began in the mid-1970s. This was partly the result of the deterioration of external conditions in the wake of the oil crisis of 1973. This gave rise to an international recession.  At that time, we had a fixed exchange rate in principle. Having left the Bretton Woods fixed exchange rate cooperation in 1971, Sweden joined the so-called currency snake in 1973. This entailed a fixed exchange rate against the D-mark in particular. The idea was that wages and prices would then increase in line with their equivalents in Germany and that the fixed exchange rate would act as a “nominal anchor”. This strategy did not work. From the mid-1970s until the early 1990s, inflation was significantly higher than in Germany (see Figure 1). Wages also increased faster than among our competitors and the competitiveness of the Swedish economy was weakened. Price clauses in wage agreements meant that wages were adjusted upwards at the prevailing rate of inflation, while wage clauses in the agreements meant that wages were adjusted upwards as a consequence of other, as yet unknown agreements. In this way, a price/wage spiral developed, in which expectations of high inflation were built in to the wage agreements. At the same time, in practice, not much was left in wage earners’ wallets of these high wage increases, as they had been “eaten up” by the high rate of inflation. From the mid-1970s, real wages developed poorly (see Figure 2).  Sweden attempted to mitigate this impaired competitiveness through a series of devaluations. These devaluations meant that competitiveness could temporarily be strengthened. But in the long term, this strategy was unsustainable. Expectations that increased costs could be compensated for though devaluations weakened the incentive for restraint in price and wage formation. Put rather simply, for a devaluation to be successful, price and wage increases after the devaluation must return to the same level as among competitors. Sweden never succeeded with this in the 1970s and 1980s.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches The two larger devaluations of the early 1980s were followed by the deregulation of the credit market in the mid-1980s. This was followed by the dramatic expansion of credit and rapidly increasing property prices. This led to the overheating of the Swedish economy, a property bubble that eventually burst, and, subsequently, the banking crisis of the early 1990s. Following increasingly persistent speculation on a new devaluation, the fixed exchange rate was abandoned in November 1992.  Wage formation has worked well since the mid-1990s Since the mid-1990s, conditions for the strong development of the Swedish economy have improved significantly, compared with the 1970s and 1980s. In particular, three important changes have taken place. Firstly, the framework for fiscal policy has improved. After the crisis and the large public finance deficit at the start of the 1990s, a new fiscal policy framework was established. This consists of three parts: an expenditure ceiling entailing that the Riksbank annually sets up an upper limit for nominal government expenditure for the next three years, a surplus target requiring public finances to have a surplus of one per cent of GDP over an economic cycle1 and a stipulation that municipal and county council budgets may not have deficits. This framework has worked well. Unlike many other countries, Sweden was able to enter the most recent financial crisis with a large public finance surplus. Secondly, the monetary policy regime has been changed. Instead of a fixed exchange rate, we now have a floating exchange rate and an inflation target. After the fixed exchange rate was abandoned in November 1992, the Riksbank decided in January 1993 on a new “nominal anchor” in the form of an inflation target of 2 per cent, to apply from 1995. The new monetary policy regime has worked significantly better than the old one with the fixed exchange rate. Inflation has decreased considerably since the 1970s and 1980s (see Figure 3). In addition, this has not been at the cost of lower average GDP growth than previously. On the contrary, since the mid-1990s, GDP growth has been higher than it was in the 1970s and 1980s.  Thirdly, and perhaps not as widely-known, wage formation has improved since the mid-1990s. The changes had already started by the early 1990s. The Rehnberg Agreements of 1991–1992 resulted in significantly lower agreed wages than previously and – more importantly – they removed the price and wage clauses from the agreements, thus contributing to breaking the price and wage spiral. The Industrial Agreement of 1997 was another important change. The wage bargaining rounds of 1995 had resulted in relatively high wage increases of over 5 per cent per year for the following two years. This resulted in pressure from the government of the time on social partners to change wage formation through negotiation. The Industrial Agreement was exactly this kind of change. It assumes that the manufacturing sector, exposed as it is to international competition, should determine the level of wage increases. The Agreement also means that there are rules for the conducting of negotiations, for example that demands should be specified well ahead of the expiry of agreements and that the conclusion of negotiations should be supported by mediators, the so-called impartial chairman. There are also similar, but not as far-reaching, agreements in other sectors. The National Mediation Office, which was set up in 2000, was another important change. As is widely known, the Office’s tasks are to mediate in labour disputes and to actively promote efficient wage formation. The active promotion of efficient wage formation entails, among other tasks, ensuring that wage formation permits the strong growth of employment. In                                                  1  The surplus target was originally 2 per cent of GDP, but this was later changed to 1 per cent, as a result of an EU decision to start recording premium pension fund saving as private saving rather than public saving. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 addition, it is also responsible for the official wage statistics. I usually view the National Mediation Office as the third party in wage negotiations. The Office ensures that there is a neutral arena in which the parties can meet outside formal negotiations. The outcome for wage earners has also been better in terms of higher real wage increases. Virtually no real wage increases took place during the 1970s and 1980s. The wage increases agreed upon in the wage bargaining rounds of 2007 were too high  The two most recent wage bargaining rounds have taken place under widely-differing circumstances. The wage bargaining rounds in 2007 took place at the crest of an economic boom, when the economic prospects were also strong for the following years, while the wage bargaining rounds in 2010 took place during a financial crisis and a deep recession. The wage bargaining rounds for 2007 did not work well from an economic perspective. The agreed wages were too high. I myself was quite optimistic ahead of the negotiations. My assessment was that they could be carried out in good order and could result in wage increases in line with the Riksbank’s inflation target. But the result of the wage bargaining rounds was surprisingly negative. The centrally-agreed wage increases for the agreement period 2007 to 2009 were almost 3 per cent per year, which is almost one percentage point higher than during the previous agreement period. Inflation increased and the Riksbank successively raised the repo rate from 3 per cent at the start of 2007 to 4.75 per cent in September 2008.  In addition, the financial crisis led the economic conditions to change radically during the agreement period. During the autumn of 2008, it became obvious that the financial crisis would also hit the Swedish economy hard. The Riksbank and other authorities made comprehensive efforts to prevent the Swedish banks from being dragged into the crisis. And, to alleviate the consequences of the crisis, the Riksbank rapidly lowered the repo rate to 0.25 per cent in July 2009. Even so, developments became clearly worse than expected. During 2009, GDP showed the greatest fall since the Second World War, while unemployment rose to almost 9 per cent at the end of 2009. This reaffirmed the conclusion that wage increases had been too high. On average, wages increased by 3.7 per cent during the years 2007 to 2009. The wages agreed for 2010 contributed towards preventing the crisis from being so deep in Sweden In many ways, the wage bargaining rounds in 2010 were the direct opposite of the wage bargaining rounds in 2007. Developments were marked by the financial crisis, which resulted in low wage agreements which were largely in line with the Riksbank’s forecasts. The crisis also meant that the commonest agreement period became two years instead of three years, as had been normal since 1995. The centrally-agreed wage increases were calculated to average 1.8 per cent per year in 2010 and 2011.  However, the economic recovery was significantly stronger in 2010 than most people had expected. The growth in GDP was the highest in 40 years. The labour market also developed above expectations. Among other reasons, this was because the decline in employment was primarily concentrated on the manufacturing sector, which is less labour-intensive than many other sectors. Furthermore, the so-called crisis agreements in the manufacturing sector contributed towards dampening the decrease of employment. Due to the low agreed wage increases, the wage bargaining rounds in 2010 probably contributed to the strong development of the Swedish economy we experienced in 2010 and the start of 2011. According to our present assessment, the average increase of hourly wages in 2010 and 2011 has been 2.8 per cent per year, which is 0.5 percentage points per year more than we had estimated before the wage bargaining rounds. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches But at the same time, the wage bargaining rounds in 2010 entailed a couple of problems for future developments. One such problem was that the dates for the expiry of the various agreements became more spread out than before. In the manufacturing sector, the white-collar workers’ collective agreement expires in September of this year, while the agreements for blue-collar workers run until the end of January 2012. This risks weakening the standard-setting role of the manufacturing industry. The social partners in the manufacturing sector have now agreed to coordinate the negotiations for blue-collar and white-collar workers so that the new agreements will be ready in November. This coordination should improve the prospects for agreements within the parts of the economy exposed to international competition to become normative for future wage bargaining rounds.  This is because I believe that it is positive if the parts of the business sector that are exposed to international competition set the standard for other parts of the economy. This part of the economy is the most clearly affected when wages increase too rapidly for Sweden to compete successfully on the world market. This also holds true when there is a floating exchange rate, as the inflation targets of our most important trading partners are largely the same and it cannot be assumed that a weakened krona would restore competitiveness after excessive wage increases. The remaining problem is that other agreements will expire during the spring of 2012, a number of months after the first agreements. This means that the normative effect of the first agreements remains uncertain. Among other circumstances, it will depend on the level of coordination of negotiations between employers and employees.  Another problem was that Teknikföretagen, an employers’ organisation in the engineering industry, revoked the Industrial Agreement last year. The Industrial Agreement is an important reason that wage formation has worked so well since the mid-1990s. The revocation of this Agreement by one of the signatories meant that the future of the Agreement became uncertain. This has been sorted out now, with a new proposed Industrial Agreement having been accepted by all parties except the Swedish Paper Workers’ Union. I view the new Industrial Agreement as a success. It cements the principle that the parts of the business sector that are exposed to international competition should play a normative role in wage bargaining and gives the impartial chairmen a stronger role in the coordination within the manufacturing sector.  It is thus positive that there is a new Industrial Agreement. But there is reason to remind ourselves of our experiences from the wage bargaining rounds in 1995. The coordination of the demands from the Swedish Trade Union Confederation failed in these wage bargaining rounds. The Swedish Paper Workers’ Union and the Employers’ Federation of Swedish Forest Industries were first out then, and concluded a relatively high agreement that set the level for a large part of the labour market. The result of this was wage increases of over 5 per cent in the years 1996 and 1997, levels which were altogether too high in relation to the inflation target and the weak employment situation. The economic conditions for wage formation in the years ahead I will now briefly present the Riksbank’s assessment of economic development in recent years. I will refer to the most recently published forecast from April. Of course, quite a lot has happened since then, but, at the same time, two months later you don’t normally know a great deal more about developments two to three years ahead. In any event, we will be publishing an updated assessment in the Monetary Policy Report in July. The international recovery is proceeding at a good rate For the world as a whole, we expect to see a GDP growth of over 4 per cent per year for the next three years. This is a high growth rate from an historical perspective (see Figure 4). But 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 developments across the world are divided, with weaker growth taking place in the developed economies and stronger growth in emerging economies.  The recovery of the United States and Europe is continuing at a fairly moderate pace. In the United States, GDP is now back to the level it was at before the crisis (see Figure 5). But the labour market has yet to recover. In the euro area, it seems likely to take a couple more years until GDP has returned to the same level as before the crisis. Growth in Europe is being restrained by the fiscal problems in several countries and the tightening of fiscal policies (see Figure 5).  In contrast, in the emerging economies, GDP growth is strong. These countries account for almost half of the world’s GDP and for almost 70 per cent of the world’s growth this year. China is expected to continue to grow by almost 10 per cent per year, and India by about 8 per cent over the years ahead. In the two other BRIC countries, Brazil and Russia, growth in the range of 4–5 per cent is expected (see Table 1).  Differences around the world are also extensive in terms of inflation. In the United States and the euro area, inflation has risen in recent years, primarily as a result of rising energy and commodity prices, but underlying inflation excluding these prices is still low. In the BRIC countries, on the other hand, inflation is high, and the monetary policies of these countries are now being tightened to avoid overheating (see Table 2).  However, there are also risks in international developments. The greatest risk for us in Sweden is probably whether the fiscal problems in certain euro area countries will lead to renewed turbulence on the financial markets. Greece, Ireland and Portugal have already received assistance from the EU and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), but it remains unclear whether Greece, in particular, will be able to repay its debts. Furthermore, the possibility that Spain may also encounter difficulties in managing its problems cannot be ruled out. Naturally, the outlook is also being affected by the political unease in North Africa and the Middle East and the repercussions of the natural disaster in Japan, but contagion effects have as yet been limited. Another risk is that the strong growth in the world will push up prices for energy and commodities beyond expectations. A significant part of the rise in oil prices since February can be ascribed to uncertainty over how the supply of oil will be impacted by the political unease in North Africa and the Middle East. Essentially, however, it is the strong growth in Asia in particular that is making these commodity prices increase. This may result in higher inflation and lower growth in the United States, Europe and other developed economies. The Swedish economy remains strong The high rate of growth in Sweden in 2010 means that GDP has now returned to roughly the same level as prior to the financial crisis. This year, we expect a GDP growth of 4.6 per cent, while, for the next two years, we expect growth averaging 2.4 per cent per year (see Figure 6).  Employment is now increasing rapidly. Over the last year, it has increased by 120 000 jobs. This increase has primarily taken place in the service sector and the construction sector, which were not impacted so severely by the crisis. New statistics for the manufacturing sector, where employment has developed very weakly since the start of the crisis, also show that employment is increasing and that companies are planning for further new recruitment. We expect employment to continue to grow relatively strongly over the coming years (see Figure 7). Unemployment is now decreasing rapidly. It has fallen by over one percentage point over the last year. Our assessment is that unemployment will continue to decrease towards just over 6 per cent by 2013 (see Figure 8). 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches CPI inflation is presently unusually high. This is primarily connected with the circumstance that we are now in a phase in which interest rates are being increased. Mortgage rates are included in the CPI and they are increasing at the same rate as the Riksbank raises the repo rate – or, recently, even slightly faster. We expect CPI inflation to remain high in the years ahead (see Figure 9).2 CPIF inflation (the CPI with a fixed interest rate) provides a better view of underlying inflationary pressures and shows that inflation is currently low. The effect of rising energy prices on inflation has so far been counteracted by the strengthening of the krona. However, the main reason for the low rate of inflation is the weak development of unit labour costs. Productivity has increased rapidly at the same time as the rate of increase in hourly wages has been low. Unit labour costs are expected to increase marginally in the present year, before returning to a more normal rate of increase at the end of the forecast period. Inflation expectations are important to follow for the Riksbank, particularly in the present situation when the difference between CPI inflation and various measures of underlying inflation is great. Inflation expectations five years ahead have so far been stable and close to 2 per cent. This indicates strong confidence in the Riksbank’s ability to meet its inflation target over the long term. On the other hand, inflation expectations one and two years ahead have increased significantly over the last 12 months. However, this is largely a consequence of an increase in the actual measured rate of inflation (see Figure 10). A matter of some concern ahead of the wage bargaining rounds may be that wage expectations also largely seem to be a consequence of the actual measured rate of inflation. I shall return to this shortly.  In light of this economic development, monetary policy has been aimed at successively increasing the repo rate towards a more normal level after the extremely low level it reached during the crisis. In April, we raised the repo rate by 0.25 percentage points for the sixth time in a row, to 1.75 per cent. Our assessment was that there is a need to continue to raise the repo rate in order to stabilise inflation at a level close to the inflation target of 2 per cent and to avoid too high a level of resource utilisation in the future (see Figure 11). However, as usual, we would like to add that uncertainty concerning the future is great and the interest rate path we have calculated is a forecast, not a promise.  Wage formation will probably continue to work well in the years ahead The conditions are good for wage formation to continue to work well in the years ahead, just as it has since the mid-1990s. This is also the assumption made in the Riksbank’s forecasts from April. The rapid improvement of the labour market means that the central agreements concluded in the autumn and next year are expected to reach higher levels than the agreements concluded last year. Wage increases over and above the central agreements (“wage drift”) are also expected to contribute towards slightly faster wage increases. The Riksbank’s assessment is that overall hourly wages will increase by about 3.5 per cent per year in 2012–2013, which is compatible with a CPIF inflation rate (inflation excluding interest rate changes) of close to 2 per cent at the end of the forecast period.3  But all forecasts are uncertain. This also applies to wage forecasts. It is normally easier to make good forecasts for the development of wages than it is for inflation. This is probably partially because, over time, there are smaller variations in wage growth than there are in inflation, and partially because wage agreements provide important information on future                                                  2  See J. Johansson, S. Palmqvist and C. Selander, “The CPI will increase more rapidly than the CPIF over the next few years”, Economic Commentary no. 5, 2011, Sveriges Riksbank. 3  Hourly wage costs are estimated to increase above hourly wages by 0.2 per cent per year. For the sake of simplicity, I have chosen to disregard this difference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 wage growth. Over the last 14 years, the Riksbank has had an average forecast error of 0.4 percentage points in its spring forecasts of the next year’s wages. However, the error has been significantly larger in certain years. Wage increases in the years ahead will ultimately be determined both by the final agreements and by economic developments. There is a risk that the rapid improvement of the labour market will push up wage increases faster than we have calculated. This applies to both agreed wages and wages over and above agreement. There are signs that matching on the labour market may have deteriorated. Labour market shortages are increasing rapidly, even though unemployment is still relatively high (see Figure 12). The Beveridge curve, which shows the connection between unemployment and vacancies, also indicates impaired matching. On previous occasions when the vacancy rate has been at the current high level, unemployment has been just below 6 per cent. However, it is too early to draw any far-reaching conclusions, as it is a normal cyclical phenomenon for matching to become impaired during the recovery from a recession (see Figure 13). Another risk that I have already mentioned is that the high level of CPI inflation may be influencing inflation and wage expectations. Even if underlying CPIF inflation is low, the CPI is increasing rapidly as a result of interest rate increases. The forecast for CPI inflation is close to 3 per cent over the next three years, and will probably continue to be high for a couple more years. There is thus a risk that the high level of CPI inflation will push up inflation and wage expectations. Wage expectations are closely linked to inflation expectations, which, in turn, are largely determined by the inflation outcome – and wage expectations have increased recently (see Figure 14).4 It is important to emphasise that the high level of CPI inflation is a temporary effect. This is a delayed consequence of the low level of the repo rate during the crisis. When we first lowered the repo rate sharply, CPI inflation was negative for at least a year. Over the last year, the repo rate has successively been raised, which is instead contributing towards increasing CPI inflation. A better measure of inflationary pressures at present is provided by CPIF inflation. The wage growth rate influences inflation, unemployment and interest rates In the Riksbank’s most recent forecast, we estimate that hourly wages will increase by about 3.5 per cent per year in 2012 and 2013, and that this corresponds with underlying CPIF inflation of close to 2 per cent towards the end of the forecast period. At the same time, unemployment will only fall to just above 6 per cent at the end of the forecast period.  The National Institute of Economic Research’s most recent report of wage formation, from May of this year, presents calculations of the impact of the size of wage increases on inflation and employment. These indicate that wage increases would have to be limited to about 3 per cent per year in 2012–2014 for unemployment to be sustainably decreased to 5 per cent, in accordance with the government’s ambitions. I assume that we will be hearing more about this later today.  The Riksbank has made similar calculations that also indicate a connection between wage trends, inflation and unemployment. The basic mechanism in these calculations is that higher wage increases lead to increased costs for companies. If companies wish to retain profitability, they have to choose between raising their prices or decreasing their personnel costs by reducing employee numbers. The most likely scenario is that a combination of these measures will be adopted. Inflation will increase and employment will decrease. To meet the                                                  4  When interpreting the figure, it may be useful to know that Prospera’s wage expectations systematically underestimate wage trends by around 0.5 percentage points. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches inflation target in such a situation, the Riksbank would have to raise the repo rate more rapidly. This would further dampen employment.  However, the result also depends on the reason for the higher wage increases. If these are due to the stronger development of productivity, costs will not increase and the intensifying effects on inflation and unemployment will not be experienced.  My assessment is still that if wage increases were to be slightly lower than the approximately 3.5 per cent per year in 2012 and 2013 that the Riksbank estimated in its April forecast, not only inflation and unemployment, but also interest rates, could be lower. This would be preferable from the wider perspective of welfare. It would also reduce the risk that increasing energy and commodity prices or rising inflation and wage expectations will push up inflation beyond our expectations. Conclusion The Riksbank is not a party in the collective bargaining process. It is the social partners that conclude the agreements. But monetary policy aims to maintain a low and stable level of inflation. This job is made easier if wage formation works well. The effective functioning of wage formation since the mid-1990s is due to the improvement of both the conditions for wage formation and wage formation itself. The Riksbank’s assessment is that wage formation will continue to work well in the years ahead. I therefore look ahead to the approaching wage bargaining rounds with confidence.        
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9       
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches         
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11        
12 BIS central bankers’ speeches         
BIS central bankers’ speeches 13        
14 BIS central bankers’ speeches        
BIS central bankers’ speeches 15        
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 K C Chakrabarty: Non-financial reporting – what, why and how – Indian perspective Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the National Conference on “Non-Financial Reporting and Risk Management for Financial Institutions in India”, jointly organised by GIZ, SIDBI, Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), IIM Bangalore and NextGen, Mumbai, 6 June 2011. *      *      * Mr Stefan Helming, Country Director, GIZ India, Mr Rakesh Rewari, DMD, SIDBI, Prof Rajeev Gowda, Chair, Centre for Public Policy, IIM-Bangalore, Ms Karin Ireton, Director, Group Sustainability Management, Standard Bank, Dr Aditi Haldar, Director, GRI, India, Ms Richa Bajpai- co founder NextGen, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. It is a pleasure to be here at this National Conference on “Non-Financial Reporting and Risk Management for Financial Institutions in India” jointly organised by GIZ, SIDBI, Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), IIM Bangalore and NextGen. I congratulate the organisers for having chosen this theme as the importance of non-financial reporting in the overall assessment of a company’s performance, its risk-return trade off is steadily gaining ground, both globally and in India. Conference such as these help to create awareness among the financial services industry players about the importance and benefits of Non-Financial Reporting (NFR). What is sustainability reporting or non-financial reporting? 2. I have borrowed the topic of my address “Non-Financial reporting- What, Why and How- Indian Perspective” from the theme of one of the conference sessions. Let me start from what is reporting? Well, very broadly speaking, you would all agree that it is a structured way of presenting information about ones performance. If the information is financial in nature, such as financial position, profits, cash flows of an enterprise then it constitutes financial reporting which is beneficial to a wide range of users e.g. stakeholders, investors, regulators, etc. This then brings us to Non-Financial (NFR) or Sustainability Reporting (SR) which, as you are aware, is the practice of measuring, disclosing and being accountable to internal and external stakeholders for organisational performance towards the goal of sustainable and inclusive development. There has been a general perception that right from the time of Industrial Revolution, economic development has come at the cost of environment and has brought about large scale destruction of nature and growth process has not been inclusive. Due to the negative externalities of economic development, the practice of non-financial reporting started largely in response to pressure from non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and civic society, which claimed that many firms lacked social and environmental responsibility. It epitomises that a company’s financial health is dependent on much more than the assets on its balance sheet and the movements on its profit and loss account. Non-financial reporting is an opportunity to communicate in an open and transparent way with stakeholders. In their non-financial reports, firms volunteer an overview of their environmental and social impact during the previous year. The information in non-financial reports contributes to building up a company’s risk-return profile. Why is it important? 3. To be able to truly appreciate the importance of non-financial reporting, we have to step back in time to recollect how the parameters for evaluation of corporate performance have been changing over the years. During the initial phases, when business was organized as sole proprietorship or partnership firms, profit was the dominant indictor of the 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches performance. Subsequently, with the formation of joint stock companies and the development of stock markets, corporate performance was judged by market capitalization, share price and certain financial ratios such as Earnings Per Share (EPS), Return on Equity (ROE), etc. Now in the 21st century, corporate performance will be judged by corporate social responsibility (CSR) whose disclosure will fall under non-financial reporting. One of the critical parameters to be evaluated in this context would be the value created by the firm for society and whether such value creation is going to be enduring in nature. While the foregoing is true for any corporate, as far as banks are concerned, since they are highly leveraged institutions dealing with public money and public confidence, there is a greater responsibility for value creation. As a result, non-financial reporting will be extremely important for financial institutions such as banks and its relevance is only going to increase in times to come. Just as financial reporting is not only concerned with returns but the risk-return trade-off, similarly, non-financial reporting is also about the risks that one creates in the society. I also want to draw a fine distinction between sustainability and CSR. While very often these terms are used inter-changeably, what normally goes in the name of CSR are few acts of philanthropy like donation, setting up educational facilities, health services, etc. and a part of the profit is used for that. But charity is not CSR; charity is not sustainability. Sustainability means business has to be undertaken in a sustainable and profitable manner, and not create undue pressure. Having said that, sustainability reporting has become more relevant and important in today’s context not only from social or environmental concerns, but because, globally, we have come to realize that our goal is not just growth and profits, but we are looking at inclusive growth. And, if the growth process is not equitable, it cannot be sustainable. If inclusive growth has to be a permanent agenda item in our growth process, then it has to be sustainable. Today, many of world’s problems have been attributed to the lack on inclusive growth. I would like the participants in this Conference to debate on this how this inclusive growth agenda can be brought in Sustainability Reporting. Finally, reporting has to be credible. It must be audited. If we do not make credible reporting systems, then it would not be meaningful. I would like the forum to also debate on this aspect as to how do you improve the standards of non-financial reporting. How sustainable reporting is to be done – reporting framework 4. Studies reveal that the structure of reporting has changed substantially over the years. Whereas in the 1990s, most reports focused on environmental indicators only, today, reports tend to be more comprehensive and bring together economic and social as well as environmental data, or triple line reporting. John Elkington coined the term “triple bottom line” to describe social, environmental and financial accounting, and his sustainable development think-tank, “SustainAbility”, released its first survey benchmarking non-financial reporting. I would venture to say that, maybe, we can coin a new phrase “quadruple bottom line” reporting to explicitly include inclusive development. But, reporting frameworks keep evolving and one does not have to wait for some finality before starting to report. 5. Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) is a global initiative to standardize NFR which the institutions adopt and has become the de-facto standard internationally. GRI is a long-term, multi-stakeholder, international process whose mission is to develop and disseminate globally applicable Sustainability Reporting Guidelines. These Guidelines are for voluntary use by organizations for reporting on the economic, social and environmental dimensions of their activities, products and services. The aim of the Guidelines is to assist reporting organizations and their stakeholders in articulating and understanding contributions of the reporting organisations to sustainable development. 6. One of the most widely used frameworks for reporting on sustainability is the Global Reporting Initiative’s G3 Guidelines. This framework has been used in nearly 7500 reports to report on sustainability worldwide and more than 100 GRI reports have been published by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Indian companies so far. These guidelines also include a sector supplement, which specially focuses on the financial services sector. The drivers and levers behind NFR 7. When analysing the factors that influence NFR trends, it is instructive to differentiate between drivers and levers. To better understand the two concepts, it is helpful to consider the metaphor of a car. A lever is a mechanism employed to induce action indirectly, for example, by pressing the gas pedal. Drivers, on the other hand, are direct forces, such as the fuel that sets an engine in motion. The strategic management of brand and reputation seems by far the most significant driver behind NFR for institutions. Further, another driver behind NFR is stakeholder pressure on companies to become more transparent and accountable about their environment and social behaviour. Thus, it is not surprising that the most publicly criticized sectors, in particular chemicals and mining, should display the strongest growth in the use of NFR. Pressure from competitors, pressure from NGOs, responding to pressure from financial industry etc. seem to be the other drivers behind NFR. 8. The role of Governments/regulators in pushing NFR could be one of the most powerful levers but is also one of the most controversial aspects of international sustainability debates. While most of the private sector is opposed to active Government involvement, many in the NGO community and general public see mandatory reporting rules as the only way to turn NFR into mainstream practice. Mandatory versus voluntary 9. In most parts of the world, NFR remains a voluntary practice. So far, France is the only country to enact specific legislation requiring publicly listed companies to produce non-financial reports covering economic, social as well as environmental dimensions. Various other countries mandate detailed reporting for specific industry sectors. Additionally, some stock exchanges like the South African Stock Exchange now make NFR a requirement for listed companies. A number of stakeholders have called for sustainability reporting to be a mandatory requirement aimed at increasing corporate accountability, the argument being that most companies will generally not report of their own accord or, when they do, such reporting will be incomplete and rarely material to stakeholder interests. 10. Critics to the mandatory approach to NFR maintain that government regulation is not needed in this area since: • Other market-based drivers exist that provide sufficient incentives for firms to report.  • Pushing the regulatory track will lead to a host of diverse national NFR regimes, thereby making international comparisons of non-financial reports difficult (if not impossible) and adding significant regulatory burdens on companies that operate across national borders.  • The approach would not allow for the continuous updating and improvement of NFR frameworks since the practice of NFR is still relatively young and requirement of a legislative process to effect changes would result in long delays. • Innovation in the area of NFR will be reduced. Innovation is likely to occur if companies push for higher benchmark standards in order to produce superior reports to those of their competition. In a mandatory framework, such completion is far less likely.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Advantages of NFR 11. There are multiple advantages to both report preparers and report readers. The advantages to the report preparers are: • Tool for increased comparability and reduced cost of sustainability  • Brand and reputation enhancement  • Differentiation in the market place  • Protection from brand erosion due to action of suppliers or competitors  • Fosters innovations in order to make processes environment friendly.  Advantages to the report readers are: • Useful benchmarking tool  • Corporate governance tool  • Avenue for long-term dialogue with reporting organisation.  To sum up: • Corporates that focus on Sustainability Reporting outperform their peers in the long run and help in consolidating their market position • In view of reliable correlation between business integrity and above average financial performance, NFR demonstrates ongoing business integrity and enhances investor and stakeholder confidence. • Helps to acquire national and international listing and gain access to otherwise restricted markets • Helps to attract finance through transparent relationship with credit providers, improve management systems and employee motivation and customer satisfaction. Banks and financial institutions and NFR 12. Banking and finance institutions’ immediate environmental and social impacts are relatively low because most of those impacts are delivered through the activities of other businesses that rely on financial institutions – the businesses in a loan or investment portfolio. But they have a paramount role in ensuring that businesses that borrow from them and depend on them for financing understand the risk their business may pose for society and follow a sustainable agenda. So, despite the relatively indirect nature of their environmental and social impacts, banks need to examine the effects of their lending and investment decisions. All business activities have some environmental and social impact that typically results from substandard environmental and social practices, including: • over-use and wastage of natural resources  • environmental damage caused by continuing polluting activities  • persistent damage caused by past polluting practices  • damage caused by accidents and mishaps  • use of environmentally sensitive materials  13. All these impacts have ramifications to business. The risks that such impacts create can be legal, financial, and reputational, and banks themselves are increasingly accountable for the effects their portfolios have on the environment and society. The costs that can be incurred by a business operating without regard to environmental and social issues include: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 • pollution clean up costs  • fines  • increased waste handling costs  • costs from damaged assets with reduced value  • legal claims  • regulatory delays  • reduced public regard, and reduced sales  14. The risks that often get transferred to financial institutions include: • increased loan defaults  • decreased value of investment and loss of collateral due to decreased asset values  • liability for damages arising from negligent investment advice  • loss of reputation and standing as a result of association with polluting businesses.  Position in India 15. The level of sustainability reporting in India is in its infancy and still evolving. In India, there are various drivers behind the increase in dialogue, discussion and publication of sustainability reports – drivers that are somewhat different from other parts of the world. For example, pressure from the NGO sector is low in India when compared to other countries. Pressure originates rather from increasing involvement in the global business environment. Many companies issuing CSR corporate communications now actively report on the social dimension as well. One thing is clear however, and that is, we cannot sacrifice growth. If our society has to survive, then it has to achieve a double digit growth for the next several years. If we bring the environmental and social concerns at the cost of growth, then it will not be acceptable. What would change the balance is how we integrate these concerns keeping our overall inclusive growth agenda intact. It will make SR more palatable and acceptable in our context. In the Indian context, it is relevant to note that a beginning has been made by Yes Bank becoming a member of United Nations Environment Programme – Finance Initiative (UNEP FI), which is an initiative to promote the integration of environmental considerations into all aspects of the financial sector’s operations and services. While SIDBI has released a report as per GRI Guidelines, a few Indian banks are beginning to consider reporting on their non-financial parameters. In other international initiatives for sustainable development, corporate social responsibility and non-financial reporting also, the involvement of our banks, financial institutions, etc. is peripheral or at a very nascent stage. 16. For institutions in India’s financial and banking sector, one of the primary drivers of their involvement in activities in social and environmental spheres is their reputation and branding. This is fuelled by the fact that these institutions have high visibility in every business sector and industry. Moreover, in emerging markets such as India, financing projects that focus on clean production, good corporate governance and sustainable energy are being increasingly identified as potential business opportunities for financial institutions. Furthermore, many financial institutions are also actively publicising their philanthropic activities under the corporate social responsibility banner. All these initiatives point to the sector’s move toward financial institutions banking on their brand and reputation, to make a difference in the community in which they operate as well as, in their new risk management strategies that reflect the socio-environmental aspects of their investments. 17. There are many reasons for this change in mindset. Foremost is the increasing globalization of business. As more Indian companies expand internationally and acquire interests overseas, whilst at the same time, there is a rapid increase in foreign investment in 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Indian Corporates, demands on transparency from a more “global audience” have put pressure on Indian companies to start reporting on sustainability issues. Within India, there has also been a change in the mindset and attitudes of stakeholders on issues relating to environmental and social responsibility. Recently, government faced public protests and pressure to refuse entry to foreign ships that were brought to India for decommissioning, as they contained large amounts of asbestos and other harmful substances. While the general public opinion on sustainability issues is still evolving, companies taking the first steps can expect intense public scrutiny, which again highlights the need for transparent reporting on operations. Another significant push factor has been the role of government as a stakeholder. India has historically had stringent laws on labour, environment, health and safety. Over the past few years the government has become increasingly proactive in addressing enforcement. Intense media attention and scrutiny on corporate social responsibility has also led to companies taking more cognisance of their activities and engagement with stakeholders. Reporting standards 18. While currently there are no officially recognized guidelines or reporting standards on sustainability reporting (by accounting or regulatory bodies), there has been an increasing trend amongst companies to publish a variety of information relating to themes such as community, corporate social responsibility, environment, health and safety. Indian companies, therefore, present diversity in content and format under the overall umbrella of sustainability reporting. Traditionally, while many organizations both in the public and private sector practice some sort of corporate social responsibility programmes, reporting has not been a common practice. A survey conducted in 2003 by “Partners In Change” showed that 70 per cent of the participating companies do not have a CSR policy, but are nevertheless doing “good work”. However, over the past few years, there has been an increasing awareness and activity in the CSR field and many companies have started some reporting on sustainability issues, albeit in limited and diverse formats. 19. Many organizations in India have certified environmental management systems, based on ISO 14001. Consequently, data on environmental indicators are more readily available and many companies have started reporting by issuing environmental reports which also include health and safety data. It is only after this initial phase that companies in general start developing reporting formats that conform with the GRI Guidelines. In accordance with global trends, some Indian companies have also started seeking independent assurance on their sustainability reports. Reporting under environmental legislation 20. One of the fundamental features of India’s ancient philosophy has always been respect for the environment. The Indian Constitution is amongst the few in the world that contains specific provisions on environmental protection. State policy principles explicitly enunciate the national commitment to protect and improve the environment. The national environmental policy framework is the responsibility of the Ministry of Environment and Forests. Implementation is undertaken by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and the State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) at the Central and state levels respectively. The Department of Environment at the Central level supports the SPCBs. The Environment (Protection) Act of 1986, considered as the “Umbrella Act”, was formulated for the protection and improvement of the quality of the environment and prevention, control and abatement of environmental pollution. The Act is also an “enabling” law, which articulates the essential legislative policy on environmental protection and delegates wide powers to competent authorities to frame necessary rules and regulations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 • In terms of this Act, each covered organization should submit an annual “environmental audit report” (in a prescribed format) to the relevant SPCB. • Reporting in the environmental statement includes parameters such as water and raw material consumption, pollution generated (along with variations from prescribed standards), quantities and characteristics of hazardous and solid wastes, impact of pollution control measures on conservation of natural resources and on cost of production, and additional investment proposals for environmental protection. At this stage, the statement is not required to be audited. The legal requirement on its preparation and submission helps ensure that data on environmental measures is collated, categorized and analysed by all businesses covered under the legislation. Many organizations in India have started to audit these statements internally with a view to improving their environmental performance and as a matter of good practice. Reporting under the Companies Act 21. The Companies Act in India governs the overall regulation of companies in India and includes sections on disclosure and reporting on various aspects of company operations. Section 217 of the Act stipulates that the Board of Directors’ Report (attached to every balance-sheet tabled at a company annual general meeting) shall contain information on conservation of energy. The latter is expected to include: • Energy conservation measures taken; • Additional investments and proposals, if any, being implemented for reduction of the consumption of energy; • Impact of the measures taken above for reduction of energy consumption and consequent impact on the cost of production of goods; and • Total energy consumption and energy consumption per unit of production in respect of specified industries. Reporting on social matters 22. Traditionally, there has been a very thin line of demarcation between socially aware entrepreneurship and philanthropy. Businesses today are becoming more aware of the business case that social responsibility is not limited to acts of charity and that it requires internalization and systemic expression. In 1980, Tata Steel released a “Report of the Social Audit Committee” which explored whether the company had fulfilled the objective contained in the Articles of Association regarding its social and moral responsibilities to consumers, employees, shareholders, the local community and society. Since then, there has been a growth and consistent improvements in the quality of reporting of Indian companies. Discussions reveal that sustainability reporting in India often starts as a voluntary initiative amidst limited pressure from local NGOs/civic society to publish sustainability reports. Reports are often produced and used for internal purposes. 23. The GRI has been working with the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) for a better understanding of the Indian context of reporting and ways of applying the international framework standard domestically. The main challenges for sustainability reporting in India are the following: • Lack of a specific sustainability/CSR reporting legislation or guidelines; • Companies find it challenging to report how they conduct business in the absence of clear guidance based on local conditions; 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches • Following early experimentation, efforts need to be focused and reporting standardized. Typically, companies tend to report their community initiatives on a few pages in their Annual Reports rather than providing detailed information on internal practices and issues such as transparency, risk, and social or environmental impacts; and • Synergizing social and business interests needs top priority. Corporate philanthropy needs to transform into the realm of core business and corporate social responsibility.  Initiatives of RBI 24. Recognising the contribution of financial institutions including banks to sustainable development considering the crucial role they play in financing the economic and developmental activities, the RBI had drawn the attention of banks to their role in Corporate Social Responsibility, Sustainable Development and Non-Financial Reporting in its circular dated December 20, 2007. Since the loan management in banks is in their operational domain, banks were exhorted to keep abreast of the developments in this regard and dovetail / modify their business strategies in the light of developments. Apart from this, even internal efforts to make their day-to-day operations cleaner, greener and more efficient can help. However, as remarked earlier, the position continues to be in early stages of development and lot of work is needed in this direction. 25. One of the key initiatives of RBI and where we are different from any other regulator is in the area of sustainability reporting and financial inclusion. Sustainability has been an integral part of our inclusive growth agenda. We have tried to convey to banks that they must have an objective of financial inclusion. All the banks have been advised to prepare a board approved financial inclusion plan. As we are following a bank-led inclusive growth agenda, they must demonstrate their commitment to do so. That will give sustainability a greater depth and penetration. Now, whether we make NFR mandatory – make it a part of disclosure – has been engaging our attention. But, in so far as directing banks that sustainable growth can be an important agenda for banks, guidelines have been issued. Sustainability reporting-way forward for banks and financial institutions 26. The progress of sustainability reporting in India is slow, but a significant and sound start has been made. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India – Accounting Research Foundation (ICAI ARF) Committee is working on a new set of rules on CSR and, CII is developing a green rating system for Indian companies. The pressure to adopt sustainability has further intensified with the launch of Sustainable Development Funds and Indices in India such as CRISIL, S&P ESG Index. Role of society 27. The role that the society plays in nudging financial institutions to adopt NFR can be catalytic. As a society, while judging a financial institutions’ performance, we must appreciate their contribution to social responsibility. As an illustration, when Best Banks’ Awards are given, only financial parameters like CRAR, ROA, RoE, NPA, etc. are considered. But are the banks judged on parameters like responsible ethical lending? How they meet their social responsibility? How they are faring in serving below poverty line people? How many customers served? What is the intermediation cost? What is the treatment meted to small customers? Are the charges levied for such small customers exorbitant in nature? Do they have a policy of reducing carbon foot print? When these aspects are not taken into consideration, and if the society does not appreciate these while rewarding the banks, how do you expect that these will be reflected in corporate performance? Were such factors taken 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 into account, then the recipients of Best Banks Awards would, probably, be very different from the actual recipients of today. 28. Banks and Financial institutions would benefit by developing a sustainability management and reporting framework, which covers, but is not limited to, identification of material issues and risks, conducting stakeholder engagements as well as environment, health safety and social (EHSS) audits, mapping the carbon footprint of a company’s operations and developing sustainability reports. Conclusion 29. To conclude, I once again congratulate NextGen and GRI for having organised this Conference which provides an important platform for creating awareness and sensitising financial institutions about non-financial reporting. It is a concept whose time has come but it has to transform into a movement. RBI has been encouraging banks to adopt greater environmental and social disclosures apart from financial. But not much has happened on this front, although, on the inclusive agenda front, there has been progress but it has not yet formed part of non-financial disclosures. In order to make an impact, banks need to integrate the concepts of inclusive growth and their risk management processes for assessing performance, CSR and NFR with their business strategy. As society starts rewarding and judging performance of financial institutions by their social, environmental performance and inclusive growth agenda, apart from economic, financial institutions would be more motivated to voluntarily adopt NFR. I wish the deliberations all the success. I hope that some of the issues that I have raised are discussed in this Conference and if any action point emerges which we can address in furthering our sustainable and inclusive growth agenda, we would look forward to receiving it. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Jean-Claude Trichet: The euro area and its role in the global economy Remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, upon reception of the 2011 Global Economy Prize, Kiel, 19 June 2011. *      *      * It is a privilege to receive this Global Prize today. I would like to thank the jury for this distinction, which honours the ECB and its staff. Kiel has a long tradition of openness. It has forged close ties with the rest of the world, ever since it joined the Hanseatic League in 1283. Seven centuries later, Kiel is today part of the euro area, a vast economic continent, which is itself globally open and linked in many ways to the rest of the world. It is about the euro area and of its role in the global economy that I would like to share with you some thoughts in receiving this Prize today. How can we characterize the salient features of the euro area and of its role in the global economy? And what are the challenges that need to be addressed in this context? Three key aspects deserve attention in my view. First, the euro area is amongst the most open of large economies in the world. The euro area’s trade relations with the rest of the world have grown appreciably since 1999, which underscores that the euro area is not a closed shop. The euro area’s trade openness has increased by about 9 percentage points over the first years of the euro, from roughly one-quarter to one-third of output, notably as a result of rapidly growing trade with vibrant economies, such as the new EU Member States or China. The euro area is the world’s largest trading partner, after the European Union itself, accounting for about 14% of global exports and imports in 2010. Economic and Monetary Union has fostered trade. Not only inside the euro area (+50% increase in trade volumes over the first years of the euro), but even more so with the European Union as a whole and the rest of the world (+80% over the same period). The euro area is also very open financially, and increasingly so. Its international assets and liabilities averaged each around 170% of GDP in 2009, compared with roughly 140% of GDP for the US and 90% of GDP for Japan. As financial globalisation unfolded in the last decade, the euro area’s external assets and liabilities have grown in tandem, by roughly 80 percentage points of GDP between 1999 and 2009. The euro area is a vast continent of more than 331 million citizens. By population size, it is comparable with the other large economy of the developed world, namely the United States, with a population of 310 million. In terms of economic output, the euro area is second only to the United States. It accounted for about 20% of world output in 2010, twice the share of Japan (about 10% of world output), and somewhat less than the United States (about one-quarter of world output).  Second, the euro is a stable and credible currency. For over 12 years now, the European Central Bank –together with all national central banks– has been delivering what it is expected to deliver: price stability in the euro area as a whole over the medium-term, with an average annual inflation of less than 2%, but close to 2%. Since we are in Kiel, let me add that in Germany the average yearly inflation has been 1.5%, which is a better result than for any such 12 year period over the last 50 years. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches We have thereby been safeguarding the euro’s purchasing power. This has been achieved despite several headwinds to the European economy: oil prices went up; the internet bubble burst; violence and wars have raged in some parts of the world; and starting in mid-2007 we had to cope with the most severe global financial crisis in over 60 years. Taken as a whole, the euro area performed soundly also when looking at other macroeconomic indicators, or comparing with other large developed economies.  Adjusted for differences in population growth, per capita GDP growth in the euro area over the last decade has been almost the same as in the United States, at about 1% per year.  The dispersion of real GDP growth rates across euro area countries is comparable with the equivalent dispersion across U.S. states. For instance, the difference between the fastest and slowest-growing U.S. states is not of a markedly different order of magnitude as that between euro area countries.   Overall employment in the euro area increased by 14 million during the first twelve years, compared with a rise of about 8 million in the United States.  And the overall yearly public finance deficit in the euro area is presently about half that in the United States or in Japan. The IMF projects indeed the euro area’s fiscal deficit to reach 4.4% of GDP this year, against 10.8% of GDP in the U.S. and 10.0% in Japan. The euro’s international status is the outcome of market forces. But one of the particular characteristics of the euro’s international role is to be markedly regional and strongest in economies with close geographical and institutional links to the euro area. The euro’s international role also displays a high degree of stability. And the available factual evidence suggests that it has remained broadly unchanged since the outbreak of the global financial crisis, in particular. For instance, the euro accounted in 2010 for about one-quarter of disclosed foreign exchange reserves globally (against around 60% for the US dollar and 4% for the yen). It also accounted for about one-quarter of the stock of international debt securities and for roughly 20% of foreign exchange turnover. Third, the euro area has a balanced current account.  As such, the euro area does not contribute to global imbalances, one of the main challenges facing the global economy and the world community. It is worth stressing that the euro area is the relevant dimension to consider for a vast single currency and economic area with a common exchange rate and monetary policy. And there, the numbers are clear: the euro area current account balance averaged less than 0.1% of GDP over 2005–2007 before the global crisis broke out, according to IMF figures. Moreover, the euro area current account is still projected by the Fund to be broadly balanced this year and the next up to 2015. The picture is very different in other parts of the world.  A concern is that after some partial reduction induced by the crisis, global imbalances are starting to widen again. This raises challenges for international monetary and financial cooperation. The euro area has a significant stake in effective global re-balancing, notably through sounder domestic policies worldwide which, in turn, would contribute to global external stability. The global economy has a lot of homework to do if it is to address these challenges. People of goodwill, inspired by the desire to keep the global economy “open, market-based, just and protective” will surely be needed to that end. Credit should therefore be given to initiatives such as the Global Economy Prize to encourage them to press ahead in that direction. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Jean-Claude Trichet: Economic diversity on both sides of the Atlantic Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the US Sciences Po Foundation Annual Benefit, New York, 16 June 2011. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a great pleasure for me to speak to you here tonight.  The past few years have been a testing time for the economies of both the United States and Europe. We were faced with the worst financial and economic crisis since the Second World War. Still today – on both sides of the Atlantic – we are dealing with the consequences of the crisis – for economic growth, for employment and for government finances.  The crisis has also exposed the United States and Europe to a number of asymmetric shocks – in which different parts of our economies have had a wide diversity of experience. Some countries within the euro area are the particular focus of market attention at the moment as a result of their sovereign debt issues. Some observers have been wondering how diversity can be dealt with in Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), what it means for monetary policy and whether the variations in economic conditions are aggravated by product and labour market rigidities. It has often been argued that economic diversity or heterogeneity is very significantly larger in Europe than in the United States.  We at the European Central Bank (ECB) have been looking closely at the degree of diversity in the two large, continental advanced economies on either side of the Atlantic. And some of the findings from this comparison are quite interesting. Because they show that economic diversity within the two currency areas is very similar in many ways. The analysis also shows that, in fact, in a large number of respects the two economies are similarly diverse.  I would like to share some of the key insights of this analysis with you tonight. I. Economic diversity in the euro area and the United States The United States and Europe are often compared. This is quite natural. Americans and Europeans share a common cultural legacy. But our two economies, and I am speaking here of the economy of the euro area on our side, are also similar. Both are of similar size, in terms of population and in terms of economic output. Both have closely integrated financial and product markets. And both have a single currency. Let me begin my comparison with an economic indicator that is particularly close to a central banker’s heart: inflation. In historical terms, overall inflation has been low and stable in both the United States and the euro area since the late 1990s.  The ECB aims at an inflation rate of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Since the inception of the euro, the ECB has achieved that objective. Annual inflation in the euro area has been 1.97% on average over the first 12 years. Importantly, the standard deviation in inflation across the members of the euro area has been around 1%. And it has remained broadly stable at similar levels to those observed in the US Metropolitan Statistical Areas. From that standpoint prices in the euro area are broadly homogenous and similar to those in the United States.  My second point of comparison is how diverse the United States and the euro area are in terms of economic growth. The results here are similar to that for inflation. First of all, the overall growth rates over the first twelve years of the euro were actually quite similar in the 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches euro area to those in the US, once you adjust for differences in population growth. In both the euro area and the US, per capita growth was about 1% during 1999–2010. As concerns dispersion within the economies, before the crisis, the standard deviation of growth rates was around 2% in both the euro area and the United States. Dispersion rose somewhat during the crisis in both currency areas but remained broadly in line with pre-crisis patterns.1 Allow me to go one step further and compare the sources of this growth dispersion in the United States and the euro area. Both currency areas include regions that experienced a significant boom-and-bust cycle over the past decade. Both also contain regions that are facing significant structural challenges of a more long-term nature. Let me start off with the United States. Here, several states experienced increases in house prices that outpaced the national average by a wide margin. The steep house price increases probably contributed to above average growth in these states, owing to strong positive contributions from real estate, construction and financial services.  Nevada, Arizona, Florida and California are good examples, where average growth between 1998 and 2006 exceeded that of most other states. The sharp fall in house prices in recent years turned boom into bust. These states experienced the harshest recession among the US states.  At the same time, some other US states have seen a long period of below average growth, particularly the former manufacturing powerhouses in the “Great Lakes” region. Structural shifts in the US economy towards services have gradually reduced the value added of manufacturing relative to GDP. In the decade before the financial crisis, growth rates in states with a high concentration of companies in manufacturing industries other than information and communications technology, such as Michigan and Ohio, were lower than in most other US states. Unsurprisingly, GDP growth in these regions remained below average during the crisis. The euro area also contains examples of these two types of regions. On the one hand, some countries experienced asymmetric boom-and-bust cycles. Several euro area countries had higher than average growth in the pre-crisis years. For example, up to 2006, growth in Ireland was higher than in most other euro area economies, owing much to large increases in house prices.  On the other hand, a few euro area countries – Portugal for example – experienced growth below the euro area average in the decade preceding the crisis. This was typically a consequence of structural issues that could have been tackled earlier and with more determination.  Just a few years ago, this group of countries included Germany, then labelled completely wrongly the “sick man of Europe”. Yet Germany is now an example of how big the dividends of reform can be if structural adjustment is made a strategic priority and implemented with sufficient patience. In short, the effects of the crisis on the different economies in the euro area follow a similar pattern to those in the United States. The countries in the euro area that have been hit hardest are those in which either large asset-bubble driven imbalances unwound or structural problems were left unaddressed before the crisis. More specifically, Ireland and Greece, in particular, remained in recession in 2010.  Those countries that have yet to implement more far reaching structural reforms also have relatively low growth prospects after the crisis. These relatively low growth rates are linked to                                                  1  The 2010 data for US regions are provisional estimates published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis on 7 June 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 a deterioration of competitiveness, driven by persistent losses in relative competitiveness, for example by above average increases in relative labour costs. Again, this problem is not isolated to the euro area. Disregarding the most recent countries to join the euro area, dispersion of unit labour costs is similar in the euro area and the United States, both before and during the crisis.  It is worth noting that both currency areas include regions with persistently above or below average unit labour cost growth. Again leaving aside the most recent countries to join the euro area, Greece, Portugal and Ireland, in particular, have lost competitiveness vis-à-vis their main trading partners in the euro area. Germany, in contrast, has been able to lower relative unit labour costs.  There have been similar persistent losses and gains in competitiveness in the United States. Some states have experienced large or persistent increases in unit labour costs, currently exceeding the national average by as much as 20%. Other states have been gaining competitiveness vis-à-vis the national average over the past decade. In summary, economic heterogeneity in the euro area and the United States has been broadly similar on a number of measures over the past 12 years.  II. Economic governance in the euro area But the crisis has shown us that this should be no reason for any complacency in the euro area. Persistent losses in competitiveness on the part of individual members in a currency union lead to a build-up of external and internal imbalances. When these unravel, the cost for the affected economies can be large. They can also have spillover effects on other members of the currency union. In any union, an economic governance framework is needed to prevent developments in an individual member state endangering the smooth functioning of the union. This is particularly true in a currency union that – in contrast to the United States – does not have a large federal budget to balance severe asymmetric developments. For EMU, the economic governance framework devised in the 1990s has not been correctly implemented and, in any case, has proved too weak during the crisis.  As I speak today, the reform debate is still in progress. Allow me to take a few more minutes to outline the reforms required to make Europe’s institutions of economic governance commensurate with monetary union. As you may know, the ECB takes the strong view that there is the need for more speed and automaticity in the sanctioning mechanism. This is particularly true for the Stability and Growth Pact, the EU’s framework for fiscal governance. But it is also the case for the broader framework for macroeconomic policy surveillance. The experience of recent months has vividly demonstrated the importance of a timely correction of internal and external imbalances. But faster and more automatic sanctions alone will not be enough. The enforcement tools will also need to be made more effective. The macroeconomic surveillance framework, in particular, needs to provide clear incentives for sound policies in the member states by imposing financial sanctions at an early stage. This also means that there should be no room for discretion in the implementation of the surveillance framework.  At the same time, requirements on fiscal and other macroeconomic policies should be more ambitious. To ensure that none of the euro area members are left behind, they have to bring national policies in line with membership of a currency union. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Finally, the implementation of sound fiscal and macroeconomic policies is best ensured if these are solidly anchored at the national level. An effective way of achieving this is to implement strong national budgetary frameworks in the members of the euro area.  III. Conclusion  Let me conclude. The European Union and the Euro area on one side of the Atlantic, the United States on the other side not only share the common heritage of their culture and their nature of advanced economies. They are not only of similar size. Our economies are also showing remarkable resemblance in their diversity – among the 50 states on this side of the Atlantic and among the 17 euro area members on the other side. This is true for both the euro area and the United States before the crisis and also in their reaction to the asymmetric shocks during the crisis.  Therefore we have a common challenge. That of governing, in the best fashion possible, very large and similarly diversified economies as regards the economic features of member countries and states. This is naturally done in the US through the federal institutional framework.  We Europeans need to reform our economic governance framework, as I have briefly outlined here tonight. Here, we would do well to heed the words of Alexander Hamilton, a founding father of America’s economic and political union. Just as Hamilton once called to his fellow Americans, we Europeans should call on our leaders to “learn to think (more) continentally”. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 K C Chakrabarty: Connecting the dots Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 6th CII (Confederation of Indian Industry) BANKing TECH Summit 2011, Mumbai, 28 June 2011. *      *      * Shri N Chandrasekaran, CEO & MD, Tata Consultancy Services Ltd., Shri Praveen Toshniwal, Chairman, CII Western Region, Mr Robert Lattimore, ED, Price Waterhouse Coopers (PwC), Shri Dev Ranjan Mukherjee, Head-CII Gujarat State, distinguished guests, friends from the media, ladies and gentlemen. I am thankful to CII for having invited me over to address the participants of the 6th BANKing TECH Summit 2011. At the outset, I would like to congratulate CII and PwC for presenting their report titled “Changing the rules of the game through technology” and I hope that this report would provide an insight into several challenges which technology seeks to address. Technology is changing the cultural and business landscapes beyond recognition. You would agree that world over organisations are using the transformative power of technology to create business value for today, and step-function growth for tomorrow. And the Banking sector is no exception. You would be wondering about the title of the speech and what is its relation to banking. I have taken inspiration from one of the quotes of Steve Jobs in his address to students of Stanford University and I quote: “You can’t connect the dots looking forward; you can only connect them looking backwards. So you have to trust…in something – or your gut, destiny, life whatever. This approach has never let me down, and it has made all the difference in my life.”  Can we not be inspired by this and work towards “connecting the dots” in our banking “space” to create a suitable business environment?  My speech today is divided into three main parts. In the first part, I would be touching upon how banking in India has changed/evolved over the years, what the perceived benefits of technology usage are and the complex role of the Indian banker. In the second part, I would be speaking on the drivers of the next generation banking which would touch upon analytics, technologies (including disruptive ones) and current and possible trends in technology that can be used by banks which would emerge as the game changers. In the third part, I would be covering the recent technological initiatives of the Reserve Bank. PART I Introduction - genesis of the Indian banking system The early 1980s were instrumental in the introduction of mechanisation and computerisation in Indian banks. This was the period when banks as well as the RBI went very slow on mechanisation, carefully avoiding the use of “computers” to avoid resistance from employee unions. However, this was the critical period acting as the icebreaker, which led to the slow and steady move towards large scale technology adoption. Over the years technological innovation in banking was meant to achieve a broader reach in terms of consumer banking and continued inclusive growth, to meet the demands of households and businesses, movement from “class” banking to “mass” banking and quick transmission of information inexpensively and conveniently. We have moved a long way from 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches the age of mechanization in the Indian banks to the present age where banks are successfully experimenting with disruptive technologies. Perceived benefits of technology usage It was expected that technology adoption would enable the banking sector to be integrated with the global financial markets, adopt international best practices and ensure delivery of superior customer service. It was also envisaged to result in greater productivity, profitability, and efficiency; faster service and customer satisfaction; convenience and flexibility; and space and cost savings. It was presumed that robust and reliable services would be delivered to their customers at a lower cost, as well as help banks to make better decisions. IT usage was also expected to result in improving process integration and flexibility, decreasing operational exceptions that climb through the management hierarchy, thus, freeing up management time for decision making. But has this happened? Have the banks been able to deliver what they were expected to deliver with adoption of technology? The answers to these questions are not very encouraging. Often the inhibiting factors attributed to this would be poor strategic alignment between business and IT strategy, absence of appropriate and re-engineered business processes and delivery models, lack of project ownership, poor risk management, ineffective resource management and missing governance principles. Also the human resources in banks were drained as they have not done appropriate Business Process Re-engineering before implementing IT projects. Further, the banks lacked in possessing business and IT plans to leverage technology for increasing business and profits. Last but not the least, banks have not used information for MIS and Decision Support systems. Complex role of the Indian banker - manage financial inclusion and CRM The role of the Indian banker is very challenging. At one end of his spectrum lies the demand to achieve financial inclusion as nearly 50% of the country’s population is yet to be covered under the formal system of banking and at the other end lies the task to fulfill the needs of the existing customer. Customer Relationship Management - completing the picture A bank which closely integrates its technology strategy with its business strategy can certainly hope to reap the benefits of CRM as it would help the bank to select and reach the target customers using the right channels, understand the value of the customers to the bank and optimize service quality, “sense and respond” to customers’ needs through appropriate cross-selling and up-selling tactics besides re-selling opportunities.  Banks are realizing the need to understand their customers like never before. Today’s customer expects – actually demands – to be treated as an individual Consumer and business depositors will be more valuable to the banks than ever before; failure to communicate with these customers at the right time, through the right channel, with the right offer will slowly wear away the client base. Further availability of a single view of customer would also facilitate the banks. The earlier they realize and accept these issues, the faster they would be able to face competition from their counterparts. The need of the hour, therefore, is to be awake and alive to the needs of the masses and to ensure that benefits of technology percolate to even the weakest of them. As the saying goes “the strength of the chain is determined by the weakest link”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Strength of the chain - financial inclusion I am sure this gathering of bankers needs no introduction to financial inclusion. Today, the concept is an integral part of every banker’s responsibility with the focus being on “inclusive growth”. With increasing adoption of technology by banks, it is but natural that all stakeholders expect benefit from it. But is it fair that the fruits should be enjoyed only by those who have access to it or those who can afford it? This in fact has been focus of the Government – Central Bank commitment to IT-enabled financial inclusion. Setting up of the Financial Inclusion Technology Fund as well as urging the banks to formulate a board approved Financial Inclusion Plan for three years up to March 2013 are some of the initiatives in this direction. Besides resources and strategic planning, the next obvious focus area is the delivery model and this is where technology provides value. We need to remember that we should work towards bringing nearly 400 million citizens to the formal fold of the banking sector. It is not just about opening “no frill” accounts. As of today, 75 million “no frill” accounts have opened but there are hardly any transactions in them. Banks need to work towards providing a full range of financial services and this would need a low cost, reliable, easy to use and secure technology backbone linking 6 lakh villages in the country in the next 4/5 years. The first priority is to get all banks on adopting Core Banking Solution, including all RRBs. Next, a multi-channel approach using handheld devices, mobiles, cards, micro-ATMs, branches, kiosks etc. can be used. However, it should be ensured that the transactions put through such front-end devices should be seamlessly integrated with the banks’ CBS. Often a multitude of operational issues are quoted as reasons for lagging behind in financial inclusion targets. Till such time complete technology integration can take place on all fronts, there are bound to be areas where intermediate brick-and-mortar structures need to be in place. Even with Business Correspondents issues arise regarding their supervision, customer grievance redressal etc. Certain accounting issues in this regards are also being addressed. All these operational issues and many more can be resolved if banks begin to look at financial inclusion as a business opportunity rather than an obligation to fulfill their CSR objective. One final observation before I move to Part II. Banks have to realise that for Business Correspondent (BC) model to succeed the BCs who are the first level of contact for customers have to be compensated adequately so that they too see this as a business opportunity. Is this happening? To my mind the answer is in the negative. Similarly as regards MSPs (mobile service providers) acting as BCs reports reaching us still suggest that the true spirit of co operation is yet to stabilise with each still trying to destabilise the other. The entire world is looking at this experiment in India and I would urge all of you to get your acts together. PART II Drivers of next generation banking - game changers The first decade of this century is behind us and with it, we have seen the euphoria of growth and also the despondencies brought by the global financial crisis. We have seen that technology alone cannot be the panacea for all evils. There is a serious responsibility thrust upon us, and technology – the next generation technology – should be able to help us navigate our way forward. Some of such key drivers which would evolve as game changers are mentioned below. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Identity management UIDAI can emerge as a major game changer as it would transform the management of identity of citizens into a digital mode. By its usage, customer acquisition and service can dramatically improve. Banks would, therefore, need to innovate and build systems around UIDAI architecture to deliver full range of financial services. The requirements of adhering to the Know Your Customer (KYC) norms of banks may become easy if a citizen acquires an Aadhar card. Competition Interalia, keen competition among banks as also IT solution providers and BCs would necessitate devising unique business strategies and demand that the banking industry develop a robust next-generation architecture to enable customer-centric IT. Thus competition would stand out as a game changer. Use of analytics Analytics can hold the key to optimized performance, informed decisions, actionable insights and trusted information thus emerging as a game changer. By bringing together all relevant information in an organization, banks can answer fundamental questions such as: What is happening? Why is it happening? What is likely to happen in the future? How should we plan for that future? Banks can use analytics in a big way for Business Intelligence encompassing simple querying and reporting mechanisms that improve decision-making, Analytical Applications using data models, process workflows etc., Financial Performance and Strategy Management comprising budgeting & planning and scorecards and Advanced Analytics including data mining, predictive modelling, “what if” simulations etc. Banks may also look at carrying out “Sentiment analysis” to better understand internal customer data and understand perceptions about bank’s brand, products and services, and identify problems with customer experience so that banks can act efficiently and effectively. Plugging the weak links - prevention of frauds Banks themselves hold the most powerful weapon to predict and prevent fraud – data and hold a rich trove of information about customers, transactions, accounts and broader trends and patterns. The effective use and analysis of that data can become a game changer as it can identify fraud patterns, anomalies and common data points that reveal associations between fraudulent accounts and group fraud activity. Banks must deploy the most powerful analytics available, consolidate data and various fraud components, and make use of multilayered detection technology. After all, it is just good business to protect the most important asset of banks i.e. customers. Big data – big promise Big data is one of the recent technology trends that is catching up. This catch phrase encompasses the data, tools, platforms and analytics needed to turn large repositories of internal and external data into trends, statistics and other actionable information to help in taking their decisions. As costs fall and new ways to correlate data are devised, Big data analytics may become commonplace thus surfacing as a game changer. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Alternate channels - role of the social media Social media is a blending of technology and social interaction for the co-creation of value and this can emerge as another game changer. It is one evolving channel that might help banks to generate insights on customer attitudes and preferences, which can be used to inform marketing campaigns and help deliver better customer experiences. For banks, use of the social media has its pros and cons. One influencer can drive thousands of potential customers to a website. However, that same influencer can spread his or her dissatisfaction, causing erosion in brand equity and profitability. Regardless, embracing social media may not be a choice for banks as of now; though it is an imperative. Fortunately, as social media has evolved, so too has the technology to understand users and their networks. The myriad benefits that come from analyzing social media data include product and service quality improvements, assessing customer sentiment and uncovering fraud rings. Banks can tap into the root of what social media means to the community, enjoy success by way of returning real value for their institutions. Customer value innovation Customer experience is no longer the sole domain of the branch. It exudes in everything we do, and customers are demanding a better experience across the bank. An emerging field in customer experience and behavioural research and marketing is the area of value innovation which can be an eventual game changer.  Innovation of the customer experience is no longer a choice but a necessity and more importantly a competitive weapon. An Innovations group or network created across the bank can be a useful tool to generate new ideas. Here I recollect the quote of Jeffrey Immelt, CEO of General Electricon the subject of innovation and I quote: “The only source of profit, the only reason to invest in companies in the future is their ability to innovate and their ability to differentiate”. Current and possible future trends in technology Before I move over to Part III of my speech, I would like to talk about the current trends in technologies. It is likely that cloud computing would still remain a medium-low priority. It had been estimated that globally, emergence of new technologies such as back office virtualisation, mobile telephony and Service Oriented Architecture (SoA) will reduce absolute spending on IT. You are all aware that Mobile telephony is pervasive with close to 700 million subscribers and is ubiquitous. And therefore, Mobile banking has the potential to emerge as a game changer in terms of costs, convenience, and speed of reach. Business models of banks, telecom operators and other stake holders need to converge. All the above would stand out as major game changers in the future. PART III Recent initiatives taken by the Reserve Bank in the area related to technology I would like to draw your attention to the recent initiatives that have been taken up by the Reserve Bank in the areas relating to technology. IT vision for the Reserve Bank - 2011–17: The Reserve Bank has released its IT Vision document for 2011–17. The major recommendations of this document relate to transforming the RBI into a knowledge organisation, using IT as a strategic resource, IT governance and environmental friendly initiatives (including green computing). The Vision Document also sets priorities for 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches commercial banks to move forward from their core banking solutions to enhanced use of IT in areas like MIS, regulatory reporting, overall risk management, financial inclusion and customer relationship management. It also dwells on the possible operational risks arising out of adopting technology in the banking sector which could affect financial stability and emphasizes the need for internal controls, risk mitigation systems, fraud detection / prevention and business continuity plans. Although banks have deployed technology for transaction processing, analytical processing by banks is still in a nascent stage. Banks may work towards reaping benefits of technology in terms of cost reduction, improved customer services and effective flow of information within the banks and to the regulator. Steps have already been initiated to implement the recommendations as given in the Vision document. Automated data flow Banks have been advised to submit a roadmap indicating the returns which can be sourced directly from their systems to a centralized repository without manual intervention and then for submission to the Reserve Bank. It was also decided to prescribe a quarterly monitoring format in which the banks were advised to certify the list of returns which have been internally generated from the IT source systems without manual intervention. Next generation RTGS (NG-RTGS) The existing RTGS system, even with all upgrades, is not in a position to handle increasing volumes due to various limitations with regard to scalability, flexibility and adaptability to technological advancements. Further, there have been developments globally regarding features and functionalities. Therefore it was decided to replace the application to a higher level by using the latest technology and redefined business requirements. Report of the Working Group on Information Security, Electronic Banking, Technology Risk Management and Cyber Frauds The above Report examined various issues arising out of the use of Information Technology in banks and made its recommendations in nine broad areas i.e. IT Governance, Information Security, IS Audit, IT Operations, IT Services Outsourcing, Cyber Fraud, Business Continuity Planning, Customer Awareness programmes and Legal aspects. The objective of this Report is to serve as a common minimum standard for all banks to adopt as well as lay down the best practices for banks for a safer and sounder banking environment. The final guidelines in the respective areas as mentioned above have been issued to banks for implementation. Keeping the customer’s perspective in mind, banks would need to ensure that they implement solutions that exploit the latest available technology to build their applications/solutions to ensure customer’s delight as also proliferation of banking services; albeit the cost of providing adequate security. Having said this, I would caution the banks that unless they keep them simple, they run a risk of losing their customer base to their competitors. It is also imperative that redundancy or alternate service delivery channels are available to the customer. We need to give a thought about this and provide workable systems at the earliest if we have to retain the customer within the fold of the banking system. Developments in IT have also brought along a whole set of challenges to deal with. These include rapid changes in technology, complexities, high costs, security and data privacy issues, new laws and regulations and inadequate trained manpower. There is a need to enhance the governance of IT and institute robust information security measures in the banking sector based on extant international standards and best practices. Given the instances of cyber fraud in banks recently, it is necessary to improve controls and examine 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 the need for pro-active fraud risk assessments and management processes in commercial banks. Banks must also work towards ensuring dissemination of the IT security policy and procedures and related parameters amongst all operative functionaries of banks. Summary How can banks achieve enhanced customer profitability? A bank can take the first step, which is to consolidate and streamline customer segment data. With accurate, segmented, easy-to-access data, analysis tools can be used to develop strategies and models, determine appropriate sales channels, calculate value measures, and set targets to advance the profitability of each customer segment and individual customer. When the process is running smoothly, the bank can use business intelligence and planning technologies to monitor the success of its initiatives and feed the information gained back into a continuous improvement cycle; thus riding its way to success and meet its growth and customer profitability targets. Banks should move towards setting new standards that would enable them to attract, retain, and service customers with superior speed, efficiency, and satisfaction. In the banking industry use of Information Technology (IT) is omnipresent. From acquiring a customer, servicing the customer’s needs, building the customer relationship to managing employees, processes and partners, every action in the bank’s value chain relies on technology to ensure efficacy and efficiency. Retail banks that will survive and thrive in the current economic climate are using new technologies and channels to grow revenue from basic services, such as deposits and loans, by understanding customer needs, providing relevant products and services cost-effectively and calculating the unique lifetime value of customers to the institution. I would conclude by posing the following three questions to the audience: Is it possible for us to make our banking paperless? Cheque less? Cash less? I know that the answers to these questions are not easy and nobody has a readymade answer. But this should put us on the track to think “differently” and think “Big”. It would definitely take time to achieve the above goals but it is not impossible. Let me tell you that this is already happening globally. It is possible for us to leapfrog to achieve the above objectives? I hope it would be possible for the participants this Summit to deliberate on these issues and give some broad recommendations for the banking sector to emulate. I wish the Summit a grand success. Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Fatos Ibrahimi: Business development opportunities in Albania Speech by Mr Fatos Ibrahimi, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Forum on Business Activity, with Governors and Managing Board of the Black Sea Trade and Development Bank, Tirana, 20 June 2011. *      *      * Distinguished participants, It is a great pleasure for me to take the floor at this forum organized by the Black Sea Trade and Development Bank, which this time has on focus the promotion of development opportunities in Albania. Allow me say that the time of holding this forum coincides with the need to ensure the economy’s revival at home, after weathering the direct impacts of the global economic and financial crisis. The economy’s revival needs to become more sustainable, promoting the development of sectors that provide a competitive advantage by developing specific public policies and taking the public-private investment partnership to a new level. Allow me to dwell in more details on the contribution that the financial system and the banking sector can provide to support valuable business projects. The development and good financial position of the financial system in general and the banking sector in particular is a prerequisite for carrying out a successful financial intermediation activity. In fact, over the last decade, the banking sector has experienced a rapid development. Well-known European banking groups have entered the market, bringing about knowledge and best technologies, as well as enhancing competition in the interbank market. Also, the banks with Albanian capital have expanded their network and have properly utilized the advantages of better recognition of the domestic market. As a result of active business development policies, the banking sector has experienced a steady growth of deposits and credit expansion. It suffices to say that at end-2004, total loan accounted for only 7% of GDP, while today it accounts for approximately 40%. About two-thirds of loans are extended to the private sector, while the rest to households and individuals. In business sector, loans are extended to the most important and fast-growing sectors, such as trade, other services, transport and construction. Almost all business loans are extended to private sector, though recently an increase in loans for public sector’s projects / investments is registered.  On the other hand, the expanded banking network and better use of new technologies have enabled the pursuit of more competitive policies, attracting a high number of depositors and providing valuable services to citizens. Deposits continue to represent the main source of banking sector financing, an element that highlights its stability. Interest rates on loans and deposits have reflected the banks’ targets on financial indicators, the monetary policy at home and in the countries of the major currencies, as well as the country risk margin. We deem that over this period, these interest rates have been appropriate for a sustainable development of the banking financial intermediation. During the last 2–3 years, the country’s economy was affected by the global economic and financial crisis. The public authorities at home were committed to supporting the domestic economic development by pursuing stimulus fiscal and monetary policies. In the banking sector, the global financial crisis appeared mainly with the contracted paces of lending to the economy. Throughout this period, the Bank of Albania has aimed at preventing the deepening of the impact of this crisis by conducting an ease monetary policy and supplying the interbank market with necessary liquidity. During 2009 and 2010, the Bank of Albania lowered the key interest rate by 1.25 percentage points, to 5%. Also, during the major part of 2009, the banks benefited unlimited liquidity, at an interest rate equal to the key policy rate. In the meantime, before the impact of the crisis, through special regulatory acts initiated 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches since 2006, the Bank of Albania has aimed at limiting some risks arising from banking activity, such as rapid and foreign-currency lending, by setting higher capital requirements for more exposed banks. Throughout this period, we have communicated regularly with the public at large, businesses and banking industry, to explain our actions and discuss the challenges posed to economic actors. We believe that as a result of these actions taken by public authorities and the cooperation with the financial industry, the banking sector has successfully withstood the impact of the global financial crises, remaining sustainable and maintaining positive indicators of financial intermediation. Thus, during 2010, the banking sector credit growth, albeit lower than in the pre-crisis period, was considerable, around  9%, while in some Central and South-Eastern European countries, it was negative. The deceleration of credit growth, which was initially driven by supply-side factors, is mostly a phenomenon attributed to the decline in the demand for loans. As a consequence of weaker expectations for activity development, businesses decreased their production capacity utilization, lowering investment objectives and the demand for loan. In spite of weathering the direct impact of the crisis, important challenges lay ahead of the banking sector and the Bank of Albania. First, the performance of credit quality should be monitored prudentially, aiming to timely identify non-performing loans, assess them correctly according to possibilities of their repayment and pursue proper policies, in order to recover the loan value within an appropriate time. Second, during this phase, it is necessary to strengthen the banks’ internal audit systems, not only related to credit risk but also to provide a higher standard of management. Third, banks should assess their expectations about the performance of their activity and take measures to strengthen their capital position in advance, in case of need.  The Bank of Albania deems that in the periods ahead the Albanian banking sector and the economy need to determine and pursue more suitable development policies, which should include: setting realistic development objectives; setting more competitive prices for banking products and services; and increasing lending in the national currency. About overall economy, a more sustainable development should be ensured, relating mainly to better control on trade deficit, supporting the sectors that actually contribute or may contribute to increasing exports in the country. Public authorities should strengthen their commitment to developing the non-bank financial market, which gradually leads to reduction of economic dependence on the banking sector condition and improves access to financing of a higher number of private entities. In this way, a greater opportunity would be provided to the financial system to finance projects in the agricultural sector, which has a high potential for ensuring competitive advantages in the Albanian economy. Allow me to conclude by emphasizing the Bank of Albania’s willingness to contribute, through its policies on monetary and financial stability, to maintaining a better climate of sound development of the financial and banking activity, as a condition for a greater financial support to business development in the country. I think that this forum will make a valuable contribution to setting some concrete development policies and projects, about which, I believe that the Black Sea Trade and Development Bank will offer its own support and expertise. Wishing success to the proceedings of this forum, I thank you for your attention! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Philip Lowe: Inflation – the recent past and the future  Keynote address by Mr Philip Lowe, Assistant Governor (Economic) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to BankSA “Trends” Business Luncheon, Adelaide, 24 June 2011. *      *      * I would like to thank Patrick D’Arcy, Hugo Gerard, Christie Lewis and Shalini Shan for assistance in preparing this talk.  Good afternoon. I would like to thank BankSA for the invitation to speak in Adelaide today. It is a pleasure to be here.  The topic that I would like to talk about this afternoon is inflation, which ties in very nicely with the main theme of BankSA’s quarterly bulletin which is being released today. First, I will talk in some detail about the distinct cycle in underlying inflation that we have seen in Australia over the past six years or so. After that, I will discuss the lessons that we might take from this cycle, as well as the broader lessons we have learnt from the past two decades of inflation targeting in Australia.  The Recent Cycle in Inflation I would like to start with the cycle in underlying inflation that began in the mid 2000s (Graph 1).  Graph 1  Across a range of measures, this cycle has been the most pronounced since the introduction of inflation targeting in the early 1990s. Between 2005 and September 2008, underlying inflation rose by more than 2 percentage points from around 2½ per cent to just above 4½ per cent. Then, since late 2008, underlying inflation has steadily declined to be around 2¼ per cent over the year to March 2011.  As the RBA discussed in the latest Statement on Monetary Policy, this decline in underlying inflation looks to have now run its course and a gradual rise is expected over the next couple 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches of years. Given this, it is timely to look back and to review what caused the recent cycle and what lessons it holds for our understanding of the inflation process.  Before doing this it is worth noting that a cycle in headline CPI inflation is less obvious (Graph 2). This largely reflects the quarter-to-quarter volatility in the prices of fuel and fruit & vegetables. This volatility has been especially pronounced over recent years, partly because of the effects of Cyclones Larry and Yasi on banana prices.1 This volatility is also one reason that we often use the various underlying measures when assessing the ongoing inflation pressures in the economy.  Graph 2  At a general level, the fact that underlying inflation picked up between 2005 and 2008, and then subsequently declined, is hardly surprising. In the period immediately prior to the North Atlantic financial crisis, global commodity prices were rising strongly, the unemployment rate in Australia had fallen to its lowest level in more than three decades and there was considerable pressure on capacity in the economy. The result was a pick-up in inflation. Then when the slowdown occurred, pressures on capacity eased and global commodity prices fell. Again, not surprisingly, the result was a moderation in inflation.  What did, however, surprise us somewhat was the amplitude and the timing of this cycle in inflation. Within the RBA, the staff run a number of standard “workhorse” models based on historical relationships to help explain and forecast inflation.2 While these models are all consistent with a pick-up, and then moderation, in inflation, they have difficulty explaining the amplitude of the recent cycle. This is obvious from Graph 3 which shows the average fitted values of four of these models, along with the trimmed mean measure of underlying inflation. In mid 2008, for example, underlying inflation was around ¾ of a percentage point higher than can be explained by the average of these models, and none of the models can explain                                                  1 There has also been considerable volatility in the price of financial services due to the effect of the financial crisis.  2 For a discussion of these models see Norman D and A Richards (2010), “Modelling Inflation in Australia”, Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper No 2010-03.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 why underlying inflation reached over 4½ per cent. In contrast, during the period 2005 to 2007, inflation was mostly lower than can be explained by these models.  Graph 3  The general picture that one gets from this analysis is that underlying inflation in Australia was slower to pick up than suggested by the historical relationships, but when it did eventually pick up, it did so more quickly, and by a larger amount, than suggested by these relationships.  When we look closely at the details of the CPI, it is clear that this pattern is largely accounted for by the prices of services. This can be seen in Graph 4 which shows the inflation rate for manufactured goods in the CPI separately from that for non-manufactured items. Over the past decade, movements in the prices of manufactured goods are reasonably well explained by import prices, the exchange rate and labour costs. In comparison, over this period, the historical relationships do less well in explaining the inflation rate for non-manufactured items; the models over-predicted inflation in the middle years of the decade and then later under-predicted inflation.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Graph 4  This overall pattern of surprisingly stable inflation for a few years and then a sharp pick-up is evident in the RBA’s own inflation forecasts over this period. In late 2006 and early 2007, the outcomes for underlying inflation were surprisingly well contained. At the time, we and others wondered whether something had changed significantly in the inflation process. But not long after that, the inflation outcomes were turning out to be considerably higher than we had expected. In fact, the difference between the RBA’s 18-month-ahead forecast for underlying inflation and the actual outcome over the year to September 2008 was the largest over the inflation-targeting period.  In trying to understand this experience, there are three specific issues that I would like to touch on: the evolution of unit labour costs; the impact of housing-related costs on the CPI; and the role of international factors.  Unit labour costs In the long run, movements in unit labour costs – i.e. average labour costs per unit of output – have an important bearing on the rate of inflation. Over the inflation-targeting period, unit labour costs have increased at an average annual rate of 2.6 per cent and the CPI inflation rate has averaged 2.7 per cent.3 The fact that these two numbers are so close to one another is no accident. If the profit share is to remain relatively steady over time, average growth in unit labour costs needs to be consistent with inflation target.  Of course, in the short run, the link between unit labour costs and inflation is not nearly as tight. In the recent cycle, growth in unit labour costs picked up in 2004 and remained high until late 2008 (Graph 5). This was the result of both faster growth in average labour costs and slower growth in productivity.                                                   3 This calculation excludes the estimated effects of the introduction of the GST on the price level, as well as interest charges which were included in the CPI prior to September 1998.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Graph 5  The pick-up in labour costs in the middle years of the 2000s is evident in a wide range of measures. Not only was there a lift in annual wage increases as the labour market tightened, but there were reports of many firms upgrading positions in an effort to retain and attract staff, with the upgraded positions attracting higher rates of pay. Some firms also increased the bonuses and other benefits paid to their staff.  This increase in labour costs coincided with a period of slower growth in labour productivity. Since 2005, estimated labour productivity growth has averaged less than ½ per cent per year, compared with average growth of 2 per cent over the 1990s. The reasons for this slowdown are not fully understood, although it may partly be a result of the high commodity prices that have allowed lower quality and/or more costly mines to be developed. In any case, productivity growth will need to pick up again if our living standards are to improve at the rate we have become accustomed to over the past two decades. This is a major challenge facing both the private and public sectors.  Looking back to the recent cycle in inflation, it is clear that developments in unit labour costs had a significant role, both in contributing to the increase in inflation and then to its decline. But they provide only a partial explanation, and alone cannot explain why inflation picked up so sharply in 2007 after having been stable over the preceding few years. One possible explanation for this pattern is that there is some threshold in capacity utilisation which when crossed causes inflation to increase very quickly. An alternative explanation is that the short-run dynamics of underlying inflation were influenced by other factors during this period. It is difficult to formally test these two explanations, but other factors do appear to have played a significant role. Of these, developments in housing costs were perhaps the most important.  Housing cost inflation Currently, housing-related costs – including rents, utilities and the cost of building new dwellings – account for around 20 per cent of the CPI, the largest share of any single group. Broadly speaking, the housing component of the CPI shows the same general pattern as that in underlying inflation, although the recent moderation is less pronounced (Graph 6).  
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Graph 6  A couple of factors are important in explaining this general pattern.  The first is that the large run-up in Australian house prices that was driven by the adjustment to low inflation ended in late 2003. When the housing boom came to an end, building cost inflation came down and growth in rents was subdued for a few years. These outcomes helped hold down overall inflation rates during this period. But by 2007, the cycle had again turned, with building costs rising more quickly and growth in rents accelerating. This faster growth in rents reflected the changing balance of demand and supply in the rental market, with strong population growth coinciding with relatively slow expansion of supply.  The second factor has been utilities prices. During the middle years of the 2000s utilities prices were increasing at an average rate of 4 per cent, which was slightly lower than that in the previous few years. Then from 2007, utilities price inflation accelerated sharply. The proximate cause was the regulatory decisions allowing double-digit price increases, partly to help fund infrastructure investment, particularly for the distribution of electricity. But a deeper cause was the low levels of investment in previous years, which meant that the capacity of the system to distribute electricity had not kept pace with the growth in demand, particularly during hot weather.4  While these developments in rents and utilities do help explain the particular dynamics of inflation over the recent cycle, they also demonstrate that when the economy is operating up against supply constraints, all sorts of prices – and not just the price of labour – start rising more quickly.  International factors The third issue that I would like to touch on is the role of international factors.  Looking at headline inflation rates across countries over recent years, there is a deal of similarity in the movements (Graph 7). Many countries in both Asia and the North Atlantic experienced increases in headline inflation rates in 2007 and 2008 and many experienced                                                  4 For further details, see Plumb M and K Davis (2010), “Developments in Utilities Prices”, RBA Bulletin, December, pp 9–18.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 declines in late 2008 and in 2009. This co-movement partly reflects the large changes in global commodity prices over recent years. When global oil prices went up, they boosted the CPI in almost all countries, and when they went down during the financial crisis, they led to CPI inflation falling almost everywhere. Movements in food prices had a similar global effect.  Graph 7  In terms of underlying inflation, we also see some co-movement across countries over recent years, although somewhat less than in headline inflation (Graph 8). When underlying inflation in Australia was rising, so too were equivalent measures of underlying inflation in the United States, as were exclusion-based measures of core inflation in most Asian countries.5 Similarly, measures of underlying inflation fell almost everywhere in the aftermath of the financial crisis, although there has been more dispersion recently. These common movements reflect the correlation in the business cycle across countries, as well as the flow-on effects of the large changes in global commodity prices to the prices of a wide range of final goods and services.                                                   5 Trimmed mean measures of underlying inflation are not available for most countries in Asia.  
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches Graph 8  Movements in the exchange rate have also influenced inflation outcomes over recent years. In particular, the trend appreciation of the Australian dollar from 2002 has helped hold down the prices of many imported manufactured goods. For example, the price index for household electrical appliances is 8 per cent lower than it was nine years ago. Over this same period, clothing prices have fallen 10 per cent, the price of shoes by 13 per cent and the price of manchester by 24 per cent. These are all large price declines.  Around the trend appreciation of the exchange rate there have, however, been significant swings. In particular, the large depreciation of the currency as a result of the financial crisis saw the prices of many manufactured goods increase in 2009. These increases slowed the moderation in underlying inflation during this period. More recently, the subsequent appreciation of the currency has led to quite large falls in the prices of many manufactured goods. Overall though, these swings in the exchange rate have played only a relatively minor role in explaining the recent cycle in underlying inflation which has been primarily driven by domestic factors.  Some Lessons So to summarise, an important lesson from this recent experience is that inflation responds to the changing pressures on capacity in the economy. When demand is high relative to the economy’s capacity to produce goods and services, the cost of labour and raw materials tend to rise and firms’ mark-ups tend to increase. Conversely, when demand is low relative to the economy’s capacity to produce goods and services, these pressures ease and inflation tends to fall.  It is also clear that the dynamics of the recent cycle in inflation were influenced by capacity pressures in the housing market and by developments in utilities prices. They were also influenced by capacity pressures in the global markets for commodities. But these factors alone fall well short of fully explaining the cycle, with the upward pressure on prices in 2008 being very widespread. At that time, around three-quarters of the 90 individual items in the CPI were increasing at faster than their average rate of the previous two decades (Graph 9). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 Similarly, the deceleration of inflation since September 2008 has been widespread, with the prices of relatively few items currently increasing at faster than their average rate.  Graph 9  Looking at the experience over the past six years as a whole, it is clear that the protracted period of above-average growth in unit labour costs did eventually lead to higher inflation and this was compounded by a variety of other capacity pressures in the economy. Subsequently, the slowing in unit labour costs during the downturn and the easing of these other capacity pressures saw inflation moderate significantly.  But looking beyond this recent cycle, the past 20 years carry a broader and more important lesson. And that is the economy works better with low and stable inflation, and that the monetary policy framework matters.  In the 1970s and 1980s we saw the consequences of high inflation rates. Inflation eroded the value of people’s hard-earned savings. It made long-term planning difficult. It added to uncertainty. It distorted investment decisions. And as the late 1980s showed it made leveraged asset purchases an easier path to wealth than hard work. The end result was slower growth and greater economic volatility.  High inflation also meant high interest rates. In the 1980s, the inflation rate averaged 8 per cent, and the mortgage rate averaged 13 per cent and peaked at 17 per cent. In contrast, since 1993 inflation has averaged just a little above 2½ per cent and the mortgage rate has averaged 7½ per cent. And the volatility of both inflation and interest rates has also been lower under the inflation targeting regime. The clear lesson here is that changes in the average inflation rate ultimately lead to changes in average interest rates, including those on mortgages.  Today, most people take low inflation as a given, as a permanent part of our economic landscape. Inflation expectations are well anchored and the possibility of a rapid increase in the general price level is not something that most people worry about. This is how it should be. There are enough uncertainties in today’s world, without adding uncertainty about the average rate of inflation to the list.  For all these reasons, there is broad community acceptance that the main contribution that the Reserve Bank can make to strong sustainable growth in the Australian economy is to 
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches maintain low and stable inflation. In concrete terms, our objective is to keep the average rate of inflation over time somewhere between 2 and 3 per cent. We have achieved this over the past two decades, and this has been one of the key building blocks for Australia’s strong economic performance.  Importantly, we have had from the start a flexible inflation targeting regime focusing on medium-term outcomes, which is what ultimately matters to both households and businesses. Under this framework, inflation has been both below, and above, the  2–3 per cent range. The framework allows us to respond to one-off events and to large changes in world relative prices in a way that promotes economic stability and the framework has been important in anchoring inflation expectations.  Looking ahead, as the Bank has discussed recently, the current environment is a particularly challenging one. In the central scenario, we are looking at a significant boom in investment in the resources sector at a time when the overall economy has relatively little spare capacity. While conditions are very strong in parts of the economy, other parts are finding things very difficult because of either the high exchange rate or the ongoing restraint in household spending and borrowing. And to add to the complications, global commodity prices are undergoing a structural shift as hundreds of millions of people in Asia enter the global economy.  It is not easy to navigate our way through this difficult environment. The new realities of the global economy have improved Australia’s medium-term prospects. At the same time though, they are causing considerable structural change in the economy which is leading to difficulties in a number of areas. As Australia takes advantage of its new opportunities and manages the process of structural change the task for the RBA is to keep inflation low and stable. By doing this, we can help promote sustainable growth in jobs and as well as economic and financial stability. Over the past 20 years, low inflation has been a key ingredient to Australia’s economic success and maintaining that record will help us meet the challenges that lie ahead.  Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’  speeches 1 Thomas J Jordan: Financial Stability Report – potential risks and actions Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas J Jordan, Vice Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 16 June 2011. *      *      * In my introductory remarks today, I would like to present the most important points from our recently published Financial Stability Report, in which we consider potential risks to financial stability and identify where action may be needed. General economic and financial conditions for the Swiss banking sector improved further in 2010. Overall, global economic growth was stronger than expected last year, despite the expiry of fiscal stimuli. In Switzerland, too, economic development was robust and growth was high in an international comparison. Against this background, the profitability and capital situation of both big banks improved further, and remained good for banks with a domestic focus. However, the economic environment remains fragile, and a renewed, sharp deterioration over the next twelve months cannot be ruled out. In the short term, the prevailing uncertainty primarily affects the two big banks, which are still exposed to considerable credit and market risk relative to their loss-absorbing capital. For domestically focused banks, by contrast, the risks are largely of a medium-term nature, and are related to potential adverse developments on the Swiss real estate and mortgage markets. In view of these risks, all Swiss banks should ensure that they have a broad and high-quality base of loss-absorbing capital. For the big banks, in particular, it is crucial that a sufficient capital base be laid down as soon as possible, so that losses can be fully absorbed. The SNB welcomes the fact that, in 2010, both big banks already took important first steps in this regard, and we would like to encourage them to keep up the pace of their capital expansion. The capitalisation of most domestically focused banks is good by historical standards. However, a combination of high interest rate risk exposure and strong mortgage lending growth has been reported by a number of banks. In order for these banks to bear the risks in the medium term, it is important to ensure that their capital base is strong enough. I would now like to take a closer look at the situation of the two big banks, before turning my attention to the situation of the domestically focused banks. Situation of big banks Compared to 2009, the two Swiss big banks saw a marked improvement in their profitability and capital situation last year. In 2010, these institutions reported combined net profits of around CHF 13 billion, as opposed to roughly CHF 4 billion in 2009. This positive development was driven by UBS, whose situation improved further over the course of last year. In addition, both UBS and Credit Suisse continued to increase their regulatory capital ratios (ratio of Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets), which were already very high by international standards. Moreover, their financial strength ratings also improved. According to rating agency assessments, the big banks’ intrinsic financial soundness improved significantly last year. However, two aspects should be borne in mind when assessing the big banks’ situation: First, their exposure to credit and market risk relative to their capital remains considerable. Although credit quality abroad has improved slightly, it still remains at historically low levels, particularly in the US and Europe. In view of this, lower-than-expected economic growth or a deepening of the debt crisis in Europe could potentially lead to a further deterioration in the creditworthiness of individual countries. Yet, the big banks’ exposures to sovereign debt in 
2 BIS central bankers’  speeches peripheral euro area countries are only moderate. Should the debt problems in the already vulnerable international banking system or in other sovereigns become amplified, however, these banks could face considerable losses.  Second, the big banks’ economic capital situation is less comfortable than their very high regulatory capital ratios under Basel II might suggest. A considerable portion of both institutions’ regulatory capital is made up of capital components that proved to be not fully loss-absorbing during the recent crisis. These include, for instance, deferred tax assets, which are only realised if a bank is profitable, or certain hybrid Tier 1 capital instruments, which only become loss-absorbing in the event of bankruptcy. Thus, such capital components will no longer be recognised under Basel III and will be phased out by 2019. The transition period granted to banks gives them sufficient time to meet the new requirements. However, in view of the risk exposures and the prevailing uncertainties in the economic environment, it is crucial that the big banks build up a sufficient base of loss-absorbing capital as swiftly as possible during this transition period. After adjusting for the not fully loss-absorbing components, the big banks’ remaining capital buffers are still thin in light of the aforementioned risks. Despite some improvement, leverage for both UBS and Credit Suisse is still high by international standards. Taking only fully loss-absorbing capital into account, the average capital ratio of both big banks amounted to less than 2% of total assets. Against this background, both big banks have already made major strides towards expanding their loss-absorbing capital base. To this end, Credit Suisse issued contingent convertible bonds (CoCos), while UBS retained its earnings. These important first steps have already significantly strengthened the big banks’ loss-absorbing capital base. They also show that the big banks should be in a good position to build up the necessary, additional capital buffer.  Situation of domestically focused banks Allow me now to discuss the situation of banks with a domestic focus. The capitalisation of domestically focused banks was almost unchanged in comparison to 2009. The short but sharp recession in Switzerland in 2009 did not have any noticeable impact last year either. Write-downs and provisions were at a historical low. In a long-term comparison, profits remained at a high level overall. Likewise, the capitalisation of domestically focused banks hardly changed in 2010 and remains good in relation to both risk-weighted assets and total assets. However, the fact that capitalisation is high overall does not take into account that the regulatory capital requirements do not fully capture certain risks. For example, the interest rate risk and credit risk associated with potentially adverse developments in the real estate and mortgage markets are not taken into account, or only partially accounted for. Yet these risks are especially pronounced in the current environment. On the one hand, interest rate risk for all domestically focused banks continues to remain at a historically high level. Since there is a maturity mismatch between assets and liabilities, a rise in interest rates would result in losses for the banks. The overall high level of interest rate risk is driven by Raiffeisen and cantonal banks.  On the other hand, credit risk at domestically focused banks continued to increase. This is because the mortgage lending volume, which is closely linked to developments in the real estate market, continued to grow.  The situation in the Swiss real estate market has deteriorated slightly since last year’s Financial Stability Report was published. Even though they varied widely, most real estate price indices suggest that prices also rose substantially in 2010. There is still no indication of a general overvaluation based on the current price level, yet several indicators suggest that overheating is already becoming apparent in the owner-occupied apartment and apartment 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 3 building segments. There are also considerable regional differences, although there are signs that, already now, real estate prices in some regions are no longer justified by fundamentals. Should real estate prices continue to rise at the current pace and move away from the level justified by fundamentals, a significant price correction is more likely in the medium term. Such a price correction, together with a significant rise in mortgage loan defaults, would pose a threat to financial stability. Overall, however, there is some uncertainty about banks’ risk exposure. Given this uncertainty and signs of potentially adverse developments in the real estate and mortgage markets, there is a need for action in many respects. Therefore, the SNB and FINMA have already taken the first steps and intensified their monitoring of the mortgage market. For this purpose, at the beginning of 2011, the SNB launched a comprehensive quarterly survey of banks. In this survey, detailed information is collected on key risk indicators such as loan-to-value ratios and affordability criteria in the granting of mortgage loans. The survey results, which are expected from the autumn of this year, should contribute to a better analysis of the vulnerability of the Swiss banking sector and close existing gaps in data.  Moreover, a detailed analysis should be made as to what extent banks with a combination of high interest rate risk exposure and high mortgage lending growth are able to bear those risks. This is mainly a microprudential task, which is performed by FINMA.  Furthermore, a revision of the self-regulation guidelines for mortgage-backed loans by the Swiss Bankers Association might make a substantial contribution to preventing the development of significant imbalances in the real estate and mortgage markets. It might be worth considering the inclusion of quantitative “best practice” standards as a complement to the qualitative guidelines.  Ideally, microprudential supervision and self-regulation will prevent the build-up of systemic risk. Should the growth momentum currently being observed in mortgage lending and real estate prices continue, or even accelerate, further measures would have to be considered. Such measures should be countercyclical, thereby making a preventive contribution to financial stability.  At best, the SNB’s monetary policy can only make a minor contribution to financial stability in this respect. First, monetary policy’s primary objective is to ensure price stability. Second, monetary policy always affects the economy as a whole. Thus, its effect cannot be directed only at specific areas of the economy.  However, additional macroprudential tools, which would be much better suited to targeted intervention are currently not at the disposal of the Swiss authorities. In the recent past, both the SNB1 and the International Monetary Fund (IMF)2 have emphasised that there is a need for action in this area. For this reason, the SNB welcomes the Federal Department of Finance’s decision to set up a commission of experts to draw up proposals on macroprudential oversight and to determine the associated institutional responsibilities.                                                  1 SNB’s comment on the recommendations made by the business audit commission of the National Council and the Council of States. 2 IMF Country Report No. 11/115 within the framework of the Article IV Consultation of May 2011. 
Jean-Pierre Danthine: Market developments, Swiss monetary policy and foreign exchange reserve management Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 16 June 2011. *      *      * In my remarks, I would like to examine three topics. First, I will comment on developments in the international financial markets. Then I will briefly address the situation in the Swiss franc money market and the implementation of monetary policy. Finally, I will talk about the management of the foreign exchange reserves. Developments in the international financial markets Developments in the international bond, share and foreign exchange markets are mixed and, as before, characterised by relatively high volatility. The relatively favourable global economic developments and the fact that the balance sheets and the liquidity situation of corporations outside the financial industry are in relatively good – in some cases very  good – shape are having a positive effect. By contrast, the balance sheets of many governments reflect the consequences of crisis measures and increasing structural debt problems. Thus, in recent quarters, the financial markets have presented a mixed picture. Signs of an improvement in the prevailing mood have been followed by setbacks attributable to the serious impending challenges. At the beginning of the financial crisis, these were mainly concentrated in corporations’ balance sheets. Since then, the market has increasingly shifted its focus towards the risks associated with government debt. Such fundamental changes in investor risk assessment influence not just the prices of the affected bonds. They also impact on other investment categories and, therefore, as I will explain later, on the financial markets in general.  Allow me to begin by addressing the most serious developments. The European sovereign debt crisis is far from over. In comparison to last year, it has again worsened. Thus the credit risk premia of euro countries with large debt burdens continued to rise; compared to the previous year’s average value, the risk premia have approximately doubled. That the debt problem in the euro area has worsened is apparent not just on the bond markets. On the foreign exchange market, the CHF/EUR exchange rate, in particular, reacted strongly, attaining new all-time high levels. Since, at the same time, the US dollar was still tending lower, the CHF/USD exchange rate also climbed to extreme levels. The weak dollar has to do with doubts about the robustness of the US economy in the wake of diminishing fiscal and monetary policy stimuli, as well as worries about US public debt. Since the Swiss franc also recorded historical exchange rates against other currencies, its value, on a real and trade-weighted basis, is now well above its long-term level.  Investor appetite for bonds considered to be secure helped to push down capital market yields on US, German and Swiss ten-year government bonds to the level last recorded in December 2010 of around 3% (US and Germany) and 1.7% (Switzerland). By contrast, the risk premia for bonds of particularly burdened euro economies – namely those of Greece, Ireland and Portugal – continued to rise. Overall, the risk premia of certain European sovereign borrowers remain very high, and latent threats of contagion continue to exist. In the global equity and commodity markets, the mood during recent quarters was cautiously positive. In the equity markets, the gratifying corporate results had a strongly supportive effect. In the US, for example, around two-thirds of the most important corporations reported better results than were expected by the market. In the commodity markets, healthy economic conditions – especially in the emerging countries – assisted a continuation of the BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
upward movement, although here, too, price volatility remained high. However, there were also factors weighing on the markets, like the political unrest in North Africa and the Middle East, the catastrophe in Japan and, finally, the indications of a global economic slowdown in the markets.  To summarise, the situation in the international financial markets presents a mixed picture, despite the fact that economic developments are relatively favourable. This reflects the fact that the burden inherited from the economic and financial crisis continues to be very significant.  Implementation of monetary policy The financial crisis was characterised not least by turbulence on the money market. While uncertainties in the international financial markets persist, the situation in the Swiss franc money market eased last year, and has been very relaxed since the beginning of 2011. The Swiss franc money market is still in a position of structural liquidity surplus vis-à-vis the Swiss National Bank (SNB). Consequently, our focus is on liquidity-absorbing open market operations. Currently, a large proportion of the surplus Swiss franc liquidity is being absorbed through SNB Bills amounting to around CHF 110 billion and daily repo auctions (reverse repos) of around CHF 25 billion. The volume being absorbed has not been increased over recent months. Consequently, the total sight deposits of domestic banks have, at approximately CHF 25 billion, remained almost unchanged. This is a significantly higher level than before the financial crisis. It exceeds the minimum reserve requirements many times over. As a consequence, interest rates on the Swiss franc money market are still close to zero. Despite the fact that interest rates are still very low, the volume of activity on the secured Swiss franc money market remains at a relatively high level. By contrast, the volumes traded on the unsecured Swiss franc money market are still markedly lower than their pre-crisis level. The management of the three-month Libor is, however, not affected by this, and can still be guaranteed. The management of the foreign exchange reserves  Allow me to conclude with a few words on the management of our foreign exchange reserves. First, let me stress that the increase in the foreign exchange reserves in 2009 and 2010 was a direct consequence of monetary policy measures. It had nothing to do with the pursuit of investment goals. With interest rates close to zero, the SNB created additional Swiss franc liquidity through foreign exchange market interventions. This prevented the rise in the value of the Swiss franc from leading to what at the time would have been an undesirable tightening of monetary conditions. The foreign exchange reserves therefore surged from around CHF 50 billion at the end of 2008 to a good CHF 200 billion by the end of 2010. A direct consequence of our much larger balance sheet is the increase in the financial risks associated with our foreign exchange reserves. These risks have materialised in the last 12 months, and have led to significant losses for the SNB. They hold the potential for further losses. Just as the increase in our foreign exchange reserves was determined by the demands of monetary policy under the exceptional circumstances that prevailed in 2009 and 2010, monetary policy considerations will continue to dictate our actions in the future. This means, in particular, that selling our foreign exchange reserves (and buying Swiss francs) is not an option at the moment. Monetary policy also dictates that our currency risks not be hedged. In effect, hedging the exchange rate risk using derivatives would be equivalent to buying Swiss francs against foreign exchange for forward delivery. The effect of hedging on the market is thus comparable to the direct sale of foreign currency. The only option for the SNB is therefore to 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 diversify its risks as efficiently as possible with a view to limiting the exchange rate, credit and concentration risks of its foreign currency investments. The SNB had already begun diversifying its investments in the late 1990s. The SNB foreign currency investments are considerably more diversified than those of many other countries, with many central banks investing their foreign exchange reserves mainly in US Treasuries, that is, in public debt titles and in dollars. While the SNB also holds the large majority of its portfolio in the form of government securities, it also currently holds as many as 10% of its reserves in equities and 5% in corporate bonds. In order to limit credit risk, the large majority of our public debt holdings have the highest (AAA) or second-highest rating (AA). In effect, our current allocation corresponds to 86% AAA-rated and 13% AA-rated public debt holdings.  The SNB diversification strategy is, however, subject to limits. These spring from the stringent requirements with regard to the security and liquidity of the investments. Many investment markets are too narrow, and do not meet the SNB’s liquidity requirements. The SNB’s investment universe – and thus its scope for diversification – is therefore limited. The bulk of the worldwide supply of highly rated public debt instruments is denominated in euros and US dollars. It is thus due to the instruments available on the market that the largest part of our foreign currency investments is in euros (55%) and in US dollars (25%). The remainder of our investments is composed of yen (10%), Canadian dollars (4%), pounds sterling (3%) and other currencies (3%). Finally, taking a general and somewhat longer-term view, the following point should be noted. The SNB’s currency reserves are made up of foreign currency investments and gold. In a risk-averse environment, losses tend to occur on foreign currency investments and profits on gold, while in a risk-friendly environment the opposite is true. Consequently, diversification of a portfolio to include gold and foreign currency helps to stabilise earnings over an entire risk cycle.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Emsley Tromp: Towards a regulatory framework for the utility sector of Curaçao – lessons from international experiences Speech by Dr Emsley Tromp, President of the Central Bank of Curaçao and Sint Maarten, on the occasion of the follow-up energy symposium with the theme “A regulatory framework, making it good for everybody”, Willemstad, 18 May 2011. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen good afternoon, It was with a great deal of pleasure that I have accepted the invitation to address you this afternoon on the topic of utility regulation. Aside from the fact that this topic has been on the forefront of the National Agenda for some times now, it has been my passion since my academic years. Indeed, the topic of my doctoral dissertation in 1985 was: “The Impact of Regulation on Electric Utility Pricing: An Econometric Test of Ramsey Pricing.”  I developed and applied an econometric model capable of estimating the extent to which prices deviate from marginal cost pricing in the electric utility industry. This allowed me to estimate the magnitude of the potential efficiency gain to be derived by moving to the optimal set of prices. It has subsequently been extended to examine the pattern of inefficiency observed in different regulatory environments.  Ladies and gentlemen, I have not been asked though to elaborate on my model but to review with you recent economic developments and their implications for the topic at hand. I will however, expand on the issue of utility pricing given the importance of prices in a market economy to guide the allocation of resources among alternative uses to achieve economic efficiency. Thus, the issue of regulation as a substitute for market forces is critical for economic development and hence economic growth.  Ladies and gentlemen, recent economic developments in Curaçao cannot be seen in isolation. Given the openness and size of our economy, our economic developments are largely a reflection of economic developments in our main trading partners. As the global economy is estimated to expand in the aftermath of the 2008 great recession, the outlook for growth in our region is projected to improve.    
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches While Curaçao fared relatively well during the international financial and economic crisis owing to the debt relief in the context of the constitutional arrangements, it did record a contraction in 2009. In 2010, economic growth is estimated to be a mere 0.2 percent.  Growth in 2010 can be attributed to an upturn in the wholesale & retail trade and financial services sector and the public sector. The expansion in the public sector was due mainly to more outlays on wages & salaries and goods & services. Activities in the wholesale & retail trade sector rose, reflecting gains in domestic and tourist spending. By contrast, decreases in the manufacturing, construction, and transport, storage & communication sectors mitigated the upturn in the wholesale & retail trade and financial services sectors. The unfavorable development in manufacturing was due mainly to a drop in value added by the Isla refinery due to the prolonged shutdown of the refinery. Also, activities in the ship repair industry shrank. Construction investment activities also were down in 2010, but less than in 2009.  Meanwhile, Curaçao’s real GDP is projected to reach 0.3% in 2011. The 2011 growth will be backed by domestic demand, owing to gains in private demand and public investment. However, the decline in net foreign demand will moderate somewhat the increase in domestic spending.  Inflationary pressures were however led by developments in international oil and food prices. It is estimated that headline inflation will remain high by historical standards as a consequence of commodity price increases and increases in demand by countries such as China and India. To insulate our economy from those effects, it is important that we put in place a program to look for alternative energy sources. Given the topic of this conference, I think it is propitious to underscore this subject. Ladies and gentlemen, during the last two decades, public finances in the Netherlands Antilles have been characterized by structural deficits and the consequent build up of public debt. Various attempts to implement structural adjustments programs to achieve fiscal consolidation derailed and led to a debt-to-GDP ratio of over 80%. To address this imbalance and to give the newly formed country a good starting position, the Netherlands agreed to pay off 70% of the outstanding public debt. As a consequence, our debt-to-GDP ratio has been reduced to 35%. Given the debt relief, which was coupled with budgetary rules and norms to ensure balanced budgets, the fiscal situation in Curaçao can be characterized as sound. The overall balance of the Curaçao budget was a surplus of NAf.323.3 million in 2010 and is estimated to record a surplus of NAf.3.2 million in 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3   The deficit on the current account of our balance of payments widened in 2010 compared to 2009 due mainly to a decline in net exports of goods and services. The latter was related to an increase in imports combined with a decline in exports. The increase in imports can be ascribed to higher international average oil and food prices. Meanwhile, exports dropped, as a result of among other things, a decline in re-exports by the freezone companies to particularly Venezuela. Also, the fee for refining operations in Curaçao dropped significantly in 2010 because of the temporary shut-down of the refinery. Furthermore, oil storage fees received from abroad contracted as a result of a decline in oil storage activities. In contrast, foreign exchange revenues from the tourism industry rose.   
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches It should be noted that over the past couple of years, the deficit on the current account of the balance of payments has been increasing rapidly. This situation has however been masked recently by the implementation of the debt relief program that resulted in increased net current transfers from abroad. Without the debt relief program, the situation on the current account would have been worse at this moment.  Given the importance of the utility sector for the economic performance of Curaçao, it is important that the price setting mechanism adopted by the government provides the necessary incentive structure to maximize allocative efficiency. Therefore, before elaborating on the regulatory framework, it is important to understand the importance of the signaling function of prices in our market economy as it applies to the complexity of a natural monopoly. Ladies and gentlemen, a major function of prices in a market economy is to guide the allocation of resources among alternative uses to achieve economic efficiency. In general, an efficient outcome is one where, by reallocating the available resources, no one can be made better off in terms of his preferences without making someone else worse off in terms of his preferences. Under certain conditions, perfectly competitive markets throughout the economy can achieve an efficient allocation of resources. Situations however do exist where competitive market forces are not likely to allocate resources efficiently. For example, if a product is produced under technical conditions that give rise to extensive scale economies relative to the size of the market, perfect competition will not result in a socially optimal allocation of resources. The natural outcome of competitive market forces under these conditions is a single firm dominating the market. That is, competitors are not naturally attracted to such a market and are incapable of survival even if the incumbent firm does not resort to predatory measures. This condition is referred to as a natural monopoly. In sum, extensive scale economies lead to market failure. This provides the “economic logic” that motivates government intervention in the marketplace and, in particular, regulation of prices in the utility industry. In addition, freedom of entry carries the risk of excessive duplication of facilities and only temporary competition at best, because any firm that increases its scale will have lower average costs than its rivals and will ultimately “price them out of the market”. The existence of one firm, left unregulated, will then lead to monopoly prices. To avoid the “twin evils” of wasteful competition and market prices which exceed minimum long-run average cost, public regulation is often used instead of market competition. A possible flaw in the economic rationale for government regulation is the notion that a natural monopoly provides a logical basis for monopoly prices. Even though efficiency considerations dictate that only one firm exists in a natural monopoly industry, the use of some form of competitive bidding will force the unregulated firm to charge a competitive price. The co-existence of monopoly power and monopoly structure is possible only if the costs of negotiating are differentially positive for potential rivals and if the rivals do not have the same access to the necessary inputs at market prices. Franchise bidding for public utility services, however, are likely to encounter the same problem associated with regulation. First, given the long run nature of the assets employed by public utilities, long run considerations are important in franchise bidding. Writing contracts that ensure reasonable performance over the contract life would be very costly. Second, since it is not possible to incorporate every single detail explicitly in a contract, renegotiation over time is necessary. The necessity for contract renegotiation implies that franchise bidding would come to resemble conventional regulation. Thus, extensive scale economies relative to the size of the market make a monopoly the natural outcome of competitive market forces – a case of market failure due to economies of scale. Because of market failure, the price system no longer conveys the necessary information to ensure efficiency. Given this assumption, an unfettered market cannot be relied upon to produce an outcome with any particular optimality properties. The alternatives 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 are for the government to either regulate the industry (public regulation) or nationalize the industry (public monopoly) or do nothing (laissez-faire). The usual normative prescription has been government regulation. Substituting a regulatory agency for the free market is premised in part on the belief that a regulatory agency can, at a relatively low cost, determine an efficient set of prices. Hence, optimal pricing is an integral part of any discussion of the role of government regulation. Ladies and gentlemen, the critical issue in designing rate structures is to establish rate-making criteria that will lead to an efficient outcome. If the general criterion is marginal cost pricing, socially efficient consumption and production decisions will result because marginal cost is the correct measure of opportunity cost, that is, the value of society’s forgone alternatives. Setting prices equal to marginal cost insures that, at the margin, the value of the resources used to produce a given commodity is the same as their value in the next-best alternative employment. However, it is not a rule to be followed absolutely and in all events. Marginal cost pricing, is “a principle to be followed (only to the extent that) it is compatible with other desirable objectives and from which deviations of greater or lesser magnitude are to be desired when conflicting objectives are considered”. A conflict with the strict application of marginal cost pricing arises when the technological assumption of a well-behaved production is violated – for example, the existence of economies of scale. If there are economies of scale throughout the region of possible industry outputs, then marginal cost pricing will yield negative profits.  Subsidizing this loss from tax revenue generally will not help unless the tax leaves all marginal allocation decisions unchanged. Even then, subsidies may distort the subsidized firm’s behavior leading to excessively high costs of production. Because of the problem created by economies of scale, rates must be guided by a set of principles that are broader than marginal cost pricing. In general, the “guiding principles” in designing a rate structure in the utility field are: (a) to allow utilities to meet their revenue requirement; (b) to allocate cost of service among customers; and (c) to provide incentives for efficient consumption and production. These first two principles are discussed next. First, revenue requirement. Ladies and gentlemen, the revenue requirement is defined as the total number of guilders required to cover operating expenses, to service debt, and to provide reasonable contribution toward funds for expansion. Determination of the revenue requirement is usually the first step in the regulatory process of setting prices for utilities. A test year is first selected in order to examine a firm’s existing revenues and costs. Until recently, the test year usually was the most recent year for which historic accounting records were available. Recent inflation, however, has forced regulators to give consumers price signals that place greater weight on current cost. Use of a future test year (that is, cost and revenue projections) in the regulatory process is now common. Once the test year has been selected, the firm’s operating expenses, annual depreciation, annual taxes, and allowed profit are evaluated. The revenue requirement is determined by adding up these items. The second guiding principle is cost allocation. Cost allocation refers to the distribution of costs among consumer classes. Utility service is produced for different customer classes using the same facilities. As a result, it is difficult to indentify separate marginal costs for each customer class because a large part of the costs are common or joint. However, utility is produced for different customer classes in variable proportions, and separate marginal production costs can be identified as the increment to the total cost of the joint production process when output to one customer class is increased by one unit, holding the output of other customer classes fixed.  Various factors influence customer costs, including voltage differences, distances between generation points and consumption points, and customer-density. Recognition of these factors has led to the development of cost allocation formulas that approximate the actual costs for which each customer class is responsible. In addition to being simple, the use of cost allocation formulas may reflect a desire to favor certain groups in terms of the prices 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches they have to pay. Cost allocation methods are broadly classified into two groups: (1) peak allocation methods and (2) energy allocation methods. Peak allocations methods distribute cost responsibility to the various customer classes on the basis of their proportionate share in total demand placed on the system. Meanwhile, energy allocation methods distribute costs to the various customer classes on the bases of the amount of energy used to serve each class. In contrast to the peak allocation method, this method takes load factors into consideration and therefore benefits low-load factor customer. As can be seen there are various ways and methodologies to price utility services. It is not an easy and clear cut as sometimes one may want it to appear. This issue is further complicated when one takes into considerations the various interest group that try to make the rates reflect their own objectives such as consumers advocate, environmentalists and industry lobbyists.    Ladies and gentlemen, before 1984 public ownership of utility companies was justified by the argument that these companies were natural monopolies. Governments owned utility companies because it was not possible to prevent the abuse of market power under private ownership, because of economies of scale, competition in these industries would result in the inefficient duplication of assets.  In the mid 1980s. a changes occurred in this view. The focus became more on increasing efficiency in the utility companies. In addition, there was a growing realization that while a considerable part of the activities carried out by the utility companies had monopolistic characteristics, certain activities did not. The latter could in fact be provided in a competitive environment. Hence, the utility industry or parts of it were liberalized by allowing competition. In addition, the ownership of certain companies was transferred from public to private hands. Regulation was now aimed at facilitating the introduction of competition or “creating a level playing field”.  The privatization of the UK energy sector in the 1980s triggered a wave of privatization attempts in other countries. Although many countries opted to customize the UK’s privatization principles to fit their own specific circumstances, the common denominator in these approaches was the separation of the transmission and distribution of electricity from the production and retail sale thereof. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  However, the liberalization of energy markets has not always led to lower consumer prices, as expected. According to certain studies, prices might have only shifted between market segments, or even increased compared to prior to the liberalization. Some studies indicate that energy prices dropped after the liberalization of the energy market, but only for businesses. Private consumers, in contrast, ended up spending relatively more on their energy bill. In California, consumer prices rose following the liberalization of the energy market, while the number of power outages increased substantially. According to some energy market experts, liberalization on its own does not guarantee lower consumer prices. If private suppliers retain the possibility to ration their production and as such cause shortages, they can influence the price of electricity in their favor anyway. Hence, they retain certain monopolistic powers, despite the liberalization of the market.  These developments have slowed down the trend towards liberalization in recent years, and even spurred calls for the re-regulation of some liberalized energy markets including: (1) The prevention of market abuse in case of a monopoly and (2) The establishment and regulation of structures to facilitate competition in potentially competitive sectors. Furthermore, independent regulatory agencies were established to execute these tasks. As a monopoly service provider, Aqualectra until now has not been subject to economic regulation as there is not a body which has responsibility for regulating competition, controlling prices and protecting consumers in the water and electricity supply industry.   In the past, the department of economic affairs used to advice the government on the tariffs of water and electricity. This task is now being fulfilled by the bureau of Telecommunications and Post (BT&P).  
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to turn now to the best practices that have evolved during the last several years. For effectively regulating the water and energy infrastructure services some form of regulation is needed. Best practices in recent years point at the creation of autonomous and independent institutions. This is only possible if there is a political commitment to facilitate this development as the regulatory decision making powers are transferred from the government (Minister) to an independent regulator, sourced out through a regulatory contract or to an expert panel. The commitment of the government should be shaped in a constitutional and legislative framework.    The aim of establishing an independent regulatory board is to encourage efficient, low-cost, reliable service provision, to ensure financial viability and to facilitate new investments. Furthermore, it will insulate tariff setting from political opportunism and make decisions more transparent and predictable.    One of the constraints of setting up independent regulatory agencies is the institutional capacity. It is often difficult to find a competent institution and staff. In this and next sheet, I will give an overview of the status of energy policies in selected Caribbean countries. A number of Caribbean islands already have depoliticized the decision making process and instituted regulators.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9   In Barbados – we often mirror ourselves against this Caribbean island – a regulatory body exists since the middle of last century. From 1955 till 2001 the Public Utilities Board was responsible for regulation. On January 2nd, 2001, the Fair Trading Commission was established with a much broader mandate than its predecessor. Its duties include among other things: determining principles, rates and standards of service for regulated service providers; monitoring general business conduct; investigating possible breaches of the acts that it administers; educating and informing businesses and consumers about the requirements of these acts; and taking enforcement action when needed. Ladies and gentlemen, choosing a regulatory framework for Curaçao’s energy and water sector is not an easy task. However, we can draw upon international best practices and the experiences of our neighboring Caribbean islands to help us making the right decisions. We must keep in mind though that best practices do not mean that we should simply apply these concepts to our environment. We have to adapt them to our own specific circumstances.  Thank you for your attention.   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Population ageing, macroeconomic crisis and policy challenges Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 75th Anniversary Conference of Keynes’ General Theory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 20 June 2011. *      *      * 1.  Introduction: macroeconomic crisis and long-run fundamentals I am honored and thrilled to participate in this conference commemorating the 75th anniversary of the publication of Keynes’ General Theory. In particular, being an academic-turned-central banker, the opportunity to participate in this panel on policy responses to macroeconomic crisis, is a great privilege. The task before me, as a central banker, is to describe the responses of central banks to the macroeconomic crisis of 2008, especially their “unconventional policies”. In addition, I hope to add some color to our discussion on the consequences of the financial crisis by drawing on the Japanese experience, which suggests a long and winding road in the post-crisis period. Having set the parameters of my presentation, I would like to start my presentation by expressing my uneasiness over the smugness that I sense among commentators on macro theory and policy. Very often, I hear that the worldwide asset market bubbles and resulting macroeconomic crisis of 2008 was due to financial excess, and therefore macroeconomic fundamentals have not changed, either before the crisis, or since. Financial excesses in the bubble years accumulate on the balance sheets of those who leverage heavily, and the prevalence of such problems may become a drag on economic recovery for some time, but eventually time will heal the wounds and everything will be back to normal. In other words, the issue at stake is maintaining financial stability, and all that is required of economic theory and policy is to supplement their theoretical and policy toolkits by adding measures to check financial excess before it builds up and to control systemic damage when bubbles burst. Lord Keynes, who laid the foundations of macro theory and policy three-quarters of a century ago would most certainly have challenged such a view, if he were attending this conference. In fact, just one year after the publication of the General Theory, in a speech whose theme still resonates today, he has alluded to the issue at the root of my uneasiness1. So let me stand on his shoulders and explain. There is a remarkable correlation between asset market bubbles that cause macroeconomic crisis and demographical changes. In Figures 1.1 and 1.2, I show Japan, the United States, Spain and Ireland as examples of countries affected by the financial crisis2. In these countries, the formation of bubbles in asset markets seems to coincide with a growing inverse dependency ratio, which is the ratio of the working population to the non-working (dependent) population. Meanwhile, busts in asset markets seem to happen when the inverse dependency ratio declines noticeably. Moreover, there also seems to exist a relation between asset market bubbles and demographical changes at the international level, which, borrowing from Lord Keynes, could be described as the demographic consequences of globalization. In the past decades, once                                                  1  Keynes, J. M., “Some Economic Consequences of Declining Population,” Eugenics Review, Vol.19, April 1937, pp.13–17. 2  I presented this correlation elsewhere some time ago (see Nishimura, K. G., “This Time May Truly Be Different: Balance Sheet Adjustment under Population Ageing,” a speech presented at the 2011 AEA Annual Meeting, Denver, January 7, 2011). Appendix updates and expands the figures, showing this correlation using newly available data on world population prospects. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches non-market economies such as Russia and China were folded into the global market economy. As a consequence, the working population of the “market-economy world,” which once consisted largely of the so-called industrialized economies, has expanded dramatically, since the aggregate working population of China and others is much larger than that of the industrialized economies. Against this background, we witnessed a truly global asset market boom, synchronously involving many regions, and which culminated in the crisis of 2008. Real property prices across a wide area of the globe surged nearly threefold within a decade.  The significant point for us here is that the bubble we have experienced coincided closely with the turning point in demographic trends. Such demographic perspective casts serious doubts on the view that little has changed in the fundamental character of the global economy even after the crisis of 2008. It will form the core of my argument in this presentation. The perspective directs us to recognize the fact that we are in the midst of a balance sheet adjustment process after the worldwide financial bubble burst, at a time when the population is ageing. This is not the balance sheet adjustment of the past, which took place when the population was young and growing. This is a balance sheet adjustment when the demography is rapidly tilting toward the old. With the change (though gradual) in demography, which is one of the long-run macroeconomic fundamentals, between the pre-crisis and the post-crisis era, macroeconomic policy challenges are also likely to have changed accordingly. In Section 2, I consider the acute impact of demography on asset prices. Assets such as residential property and company shares are stores of value enabling the transfer of purchasing power from one period to the next, as well as productive resources creating goods and services. I concentrate on the former characteristic of assets, namely, their role as stores of value. A simple, rather mechanical overlapping generation model suggests a correlation between residential property prices and the inverse dependency ratio, which is in fact found in many of the countries suffering financial crisis. When applied to the market-economy world as a whole, this simple model also suggests that globalization of the scale we have experienced over the past decades is likely to produce unprecedented increases in asset prices. Moreover, the example also suggests that the go-go age of asset booms has passed, and ageing populations imply that the rate of return on assets will be substantially smaller in the post-globalization era than in the globalization era. In fact, it will be even smaller than in the pre-globalization era. In Section 3, I begin by examining the process of balance sheet adjustment after the bursting of a bubble and when the population is ageing, juxtaposing Japan in the 1990s and the United States in the 2000s. Then, I summarize the consequences of severe, prolonged balance sheet adjustment under population ageing. I identify the multi-faceted challenges central banks may face as a consequence of carrying out balance sheet adjustments under population ageing. There I explain unconventional policies to tackle these problems, taking the Bank of Japan’s efforts as an example. In the final section, I will give some thoughts on the population issue in the tradition of Cambridge, especially with respect to technological innovation. 2.  Background of financial crisis: population ageing and globalization Population growth and longevity after 1955 Let me first examine the changing characteristics of population dynamics. Table 2.1 shows population growth estimates for selected countries in selected years, based on the most recent United Nations population figures. As an illustration, I take the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, France, Italy and Japan to comprise the Developed area of the market-economy world. I take China and Russia to represent the former communist countries that have become incorporated into the market-economy world. In this table, they represent the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Emerging area of the market-economy world. Table 2.2 depicts population longevity for the same countries. These tables illustrate three facts. First, looking at each country’s population growth and longevity, we see simultaneous declining population growth and increasing longevity. This implies that many countries face a sizable increase in working-age population up to a certain point in time, when the population then begins to age rapidly, with no exception, at least for the countries in this table.  Second, if you compare the size of the Emerging population with that of the Developed, the huge impact of globalization is immediately apparent. In 2005, the Emerging area was more than twice as populous as the Developed. This table illustrates a big jump in the “market-economy world population” when the Emerging is incorporated into the market-economy world. As is apparent, it is the China factor that drives these dynamics. Third, however, the incorporation of the Emerging area through globalization does not help halt the population ageing of the market-economy world. Population growth in the Emerging area is actually expected to be lower than that in the Developed area. Conceptual framework: simple overlapping-generation model with pure store of value Although ageing populations may have a sizable effect on the economy, current sophisticated mainstream models are not particularly suited to examining the impact of the brute force of demographic factors, globalization and ageing, on asset prices as stores of value.3 To tackle demographic factors squarely, I take the other extreme of simplicity. Specifically, I use a skeleton form of an overlapping generation model, in which there is only one type of asset of no intrinsic value, and this serves as a pure store of value.  As in familiar overlapping generation models in introductory economic theory, I assume people live in two periods, and that there are the Young and the Old at any point in time. The Young produce one unit of non-storable consumption goods, which are the sole goods in this world. There is only one type of asset, called Pure-Store-of-Value (PSV) assets. They yield nothing and thus have no intrinsic value, but they are the only stores of value in this world. That is, PSV assets are the only means to save, or to transfer purchasing power from one period to the next. The quantity of PSV assets is fixed and constant over time. People accumulate PSV assets in exchange for the consumption goods they produce when they are young, and trade them for consumption goods when they are old.  To make the analysis even more transparent and mechanical, I make the extreme assumption that the Young are constrained not to consume but to save. Thus, unlike usual overlapping generation models, there is no utility maximization of the Young: the Young produce the consumption goods, trade them with the Old to get PSV assets, and save them for the next period. In this economy, there is only one market, in which the consumption goods produced by the Young are traded for PSV assets possessed by the Old. The supply of consumption goods is equal to the number of young people, since one young person produces one unit of the consumption goods and, by assumption, she does not consume it. The supply of PSV assets                                                  3  These sophisticated models (e.g., dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models), which are now the popular workhorses of macroeconomic analysis, typically assume life-long utility-maximizing representative agents who live infinitely (or in more sophisticated settings, decease probabilistically with a constant proportion) and are endowed with ability to form true-model-consistent own macro econometric models in an economy with the rest of the world as exogenously given. Because of these settings, it is not easy to analyze the effects of the unexpected incorporation into the market-economy world of former communist countries with huge populations, and the subsequent rapid ageing of the market-world population, that is, the increase in the Old as a proportion of the population. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches possessed by old people is fixed by definition. Thus, the purchasing power of PSV assets, or the price of PSV assets in terms of the consumption goods is:  Price of the PSV Asset = (Number of the Young) divided by (Quantity of the Assets) Since the quantity of PSV assets is fixed, the change in the number of the Young determines the change in the price of PSV assets. Consequently, the PSV asset price inflation rate is: PSV Asset Price Inflation Rate = (Ratio of the Young to the Old Population) – 1 This model is admittedly simplistic: specifically, it is stripped of consumption and saving decisions (optimization), capital stocks (including human capital), and technological progress. More realistic models may bring smoother generational consumption/ rate-of-return paths through capital stock formation, and so on4. However, the demographic factors explained in this simple example are brute and forceful, and it seems unlikely that incorporation of inter-temporal optimization and other adjustment processes would completely undermine the basic results. Closed economy: inverse dependency ratio and “boom and bust” in property markets Let me now apply this model to the real world. Assets such as residential and commercial property, equities and even art objects are essentially all “long-term stores of value,” that is, means of transferring purchasing power from the present to the immediate as well as distant future. And among these long-term stores of value, residential property is usually the most popular in many countries for various reasons including preferential tax treatment. So if the model has a reasonable explanatory power, we expect movement in real residential property prices5 to coincide with that of the inverse dependency ratio (i.e., ratio of working-age (15–60) population to the rest), which corresponds to the ratio of the young working population to the old non-working dependent population in the simple OLG model, abstracting from child-age population.  Figure 2.1 shows real land prices in Japan (national average, for all purposes) juxtaposed with the inverse dependency ratio from 1955 to date. This figure shows, firstly, that the relative abundance of young people coincided with sharply higher property prices. Secondly, in contrast, the relative abundance of old people seems to be leading to lower property prices. It should be noted here that declining property prices greatly aggravated the balance sheet adjustments of Japanese corporations, as will be explained later. The US case is illustrated in Figure 2.2. In the United States also, an increasing inverse dependency ratio seems to have coincided with the property bubble. After the bubble burst of 2007, property prices seem to have followed the long run movement of the inverse dependency ratio, although it would be premature to draw any conclusions from this at the moment. How about the European experience? Figure 2.3 shows the situation in Ireland. A sharp ascent in property prices coincided with an increase in the inverse dependency ratio, and then we see a free fall. This free fall suggests a painful adjustment is coming. Spain is shown in Figure 2.4. Again, a sharp increase in property prices coincided with an increase in the inverse dependency ratio, and then prices declined. Germany, having no bubble in 2008, is                                                  4  If the Young are not constrained to save, they then face inter-temporal optimization of consumption allocation. Introductory economic theory tells us that in such a case there may be multiple equilibria. However, the thrust of the following argument is generic and likely to be carried over to each of these multiple equilibria. 5  More precisely speaking, the model implies that generation-to-generation real asset price inflation is determined by the inverse dependency ratio. This means that current generation-period real asset prices are higher than previous if the inverse dependency ratio is increased from the previous generation-period. Typically, one generation-period is considered as 25 years or longer. Thus, in order for this relationship to hold within this long generation-period, we expect a positive correlation between real property prices and the slow-moving inverse dependency ratio. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 shown in Figure 2.5, where property price movement is depicted after 1995, when data are available. In contrast with Ireland and Spain, property prices in Germany had already begun to decline in 2010, coinciding with the population ageing that the country has experienced for some time. Recovery of property markets to the previous peak seems far away in an ageing society. Globalization: from exuberance to stagnation in global asset markets Let me now consider the effects on asset prices of globalization, in particular marketization6 of former communist countries into the market-economy world. To do this, we apply the simple overlapping generation model just described, as if the market-economy world were one big economy. Thus, I ignore productivity differences between regions, immigration and emigration, uncertainty, and in particular, exchange rate adjustments. I illustrate the possible impact of globalization by using the numerical example of Table 2.3, which is based on the United Nations population estimates of Table 2.1. To make the analysis as simple as possible, I take 25 years as a one-generation period postulated in the overlapping generation model described before. We will consider three periods: the Cold War (Period 1, represented by 1955), pre-globalization (Period 2, by 1980), and globalization (Period 3, by 2005). Also, to simplify the analysis but to add a realistic flavor, we take population numbers of respective years in Table 2.1 as those of the young population.7 These two assumptions lead to the figures in Table 2.3. I also assume that the quantity of PSV assets is fixed at, say, 100 million in the market-economy world. Suppose that in the Cold War and pre-globalization periods (Periods 1 and 2), the market-economy world consists solely of the Developed area of six industrialized economies, as shown in Table 2.1. Then, in Period 1, the market-economy-world Young population is the same as that of the Developed area, about 473 million. The Old population in the Cold War period is that of the Developed area, and as a whole they possess 100 million PSV assets. The Young population trades 473 million units of consumption goods for 100 million PSV assets that the Old population possesses. Consequently, the price of PSV assets is about 4.73 units of consumption goods in Period 1. A similar situation holds true in the pre-globalization period, where the price of PSV assets is about 5.90 units of consumption goods. Consequently, the asset price inflation rate in the pre-globalization period is 0.89% per annum. Then, consider globalization. The Emerging area (that is, Russia and China) is incorporated into the market-economy world in the globalization period (Period 3). I assume throughout a fixed exchange rate between the Developed area and the Emerging one. Thus, there is one free worldwide market of consumption goods traded for PSV assets. Like the Young in the Developed area, the Young in the Emerging area produce one unit of consumption goods, and sell it to the Old to obtain PSV assets for their retirement. The Old only exist in the Developed area in the worldwide consumption goods market, since the Old in the Emerging area have no PSV assets and cannot buy consumption goods in the worldwide market. The Old in the Emerging area are therefore ignored in the following analysis. (They are assumed to be outside of the market-economy world.) The Young population of the market-economy world is then the sum of that of the Developed and of the Emerging area, about 2.14 billion. The Young populations of both regions want to trade their consumption goods of about 2.14 billion units for 100 million of PSV assets.                                                  6  Merriam-Webster’s Online Dictionary defines marketization as “the act or process of entering into, participating in, or introducing a free market economy.” 7  This simplifying assumption overstates the actual young population, but it does not qualitatively affect the following analysis. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Consequently, the price of PSV assets is about 21.4 units of consumption goods in the globalization period (Period 3), a huge increase from 5.90 in the previous period. The price of PSV assets is nearly four times higher in the globalization period (Period 3) than in the pre-globalization period (Period 2), leading to asset price inflation of 5.28% per annum.  The number of young people in the market-economy world, who are saving for future retirement, increases substantially in the period of globalization. Thus, we have a global “savings glut,” which leads to substantial asset price inflation globally. In the example of Table 2.3, the asset price inflation rate accelerated substantially, from 0.89% to 5.28% annually for twenty-five years. What will happen once the boom is over? Let me extend Table 2.3 to include the post-globalization period, in Table 2.4. Here the post-globalization period is represented by 2030, and all population figures are the United Nations population estimates given in Table 2.1. If we look at Period 4, the post-globalization period, we see that the market-economy world population will grow by only 0.28% annually from 2005 to 2030. Under my simplified assumption, the young population in the market-economy world will produce about 2.29 billion units of consumption goods, while there will be 100 million PSV assets. This means the price of the assets will be about 22.9 units of consumption goods in the post-globalization period, meaning that asset price inflation decelerates quite sharply. The asset price inflation of the post-globalization period is a mere 0.28%. In fact, the rate is lower even than the 0.89% of the pre-globalization period. Summing up So far, I have suggested that the brute force of compositional change in population might be in the background of asset market bubbles and their subsequent bust, especially those which caused the global macroeconomic crisis of 2008 and after. To close this section, I would like to draw two observations from this exercise. First, I am not suggesting this demographic factor is the cause of the crisis, but pointing out that this favorable demographic background (increasing inverse dependency ratio) might have been fertile ground for the excessive optimism that led many economic agents to take a highly leveraged position to multiply their returns. By the same token, the eventual sharp reversal of the ratio made resolution of accumulated financial excesses particularly difficult, resulting in the prolonged, severe balance-sheet adjustment that followed the crisis, and which is still under way.  Second, the aftermath of globalization is likely to imply a substantial slowdown in asset price inflation, and ultimately in the rate of return on these assets. Moreover, the post-globalization-period rate of return is noticeably lower even than that in the pre-globalization period, because of increased population ageing. 3.  Post-crisis world: multifaceted challenges and unconventional policy Severe and prolonged balance sheet adjustment under population ageing Let me now consider the post-crisis world. In order to determine the effect of balance sheet adjustments after the bursting of a bubble, I first clarify who leveraged during the bubble periods. In Japan, it was the corporate sector, especially small to medium-sized firms, which for the first time gained access to large banks after the so-called financial liberalization. The corporate sector’s loan-to-GDP ratio increased by 29 percentage points in the ten years before the bubble burst in 1991. In the United States, it was the household sector that leveraged, especially in housing. The household sector’s housing loans-to-disposable 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 income ratio jumped by 39 percentage points in the ten years before the bubble burst in 2007.8 These sectors were interest-sensitive and thus constituted the “transmission gears” of the ordinary monetary transmission mechanism in the periods before the bubbles burst. That is, these leveraged sectors had been sensitive to policy rate reduction in business cycles. However, after the bubbles burst, these leveraged sectors became insensitive to policy rate reduction, because of the acute balance sheet adjustments. Large legacy shortfalls must be compensated for by current profit or income, period by period, and this process is slow and painful. This leads at least to a breakdown in the ordinary monetary transmission mechanism of policy rate change. What then are the long-term consequences of severe and prolonged balance sheet adjustment under population ageing? Three adverse consequences can be identified. Long-term consequence 1: declining mobility/flexibility First, mobility declines, or in other words, the economy becomes “inflexible”. Since de-leveraging firms or households have to pay back all their debts before “moving” from their current position, they are often stuck with an “underwater” property. Population ageing strengthens this tendency. In the case of Japan, de-leveraging took place in the corporate sector, and thus firms became less mobile between industries and regions. In the United States, the household sector is de-leveraging, and thus household mobility has been reduced. Figure 3.1 depicts declining entrepreneurial mobility in Japan. This figure shows the creation and destruction of enterprises between pre-bubble (1981–1986), bubble (1987–1991), and post-bubble (1992–1996). It can be seen in this figure that the creation of new enterprises was sharply reduced after the bubble burst of 1991. In contrast, the increase in the rate of destruction was relatively mild. These two imply a “sticky industry structure,” a tendency to hang on to the past. Declining mobility is found in the household sector in the United States. Figure 3.2 shows changes in the householder mobility rate between 2005 and 2009. A sharp decline is found across all age groups. Since there is no such change in renters, this sharp decline suggests that the housing crash reduced householder mobility rates.9 Long-term consequence 2: loss of non-tangible/human capital The second consequence of severe and prolonged balance sheet adjustment is the loss of non-tangible or human capital. De-leveraging firms and households suffering long under-utilization or under-employment tend to lose their non-tangible or human capital. In Japan, this has been observed especially in small to medium-sized enterprises: loss of entrepreneurship, loss of human networks in skilled manufacturing, and loss of access to technological advances. In the United States, the long-term unemployed or underemployed risk losing their human capital.                                                  8  See Figures 2.1 and 2.2 in: Nishimura, K. G., “This Time May Truly Be Different: Balance Sheet Adjustment under Population Ageing,” a speech prepared for the Panel “The Future of Monetary Policy” at the 2011 American Economic Association Annual Meeting, Denver, January 7, 2011. 9  It has been debated recently whether the negative equity of some homeowners significantly influences their mobility in the United States. (See, for example, Schulhofer-Wohl, S., “Negative Equity Does Not Reduce Homeowners’ Mobility,” Working Paper 682. December 2010, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.) However, the results based on past data are not yet conclusive, since in the past, negative equity was a relatively rare, idiosyncratic phenomenon. New data including the period after 2008 are needed to answer this question. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches Long-term consequence 3: problems in financial intermediation The third consequence of severe and prolonged balance sheet adjustment is the deterioration in financial institutions’ efficient functioning as financial intermediaries. This was most acutely observed in Japan during the several years after the bubble burst: a pile-up of non-performing loans seemed to lead to a breakdown in the “market selection mechanism” around 1997. Figure 3.3 shows the result of a large-scale panel analysis of Japanese firms, in which the total factor productivity of exiting and surviving firms is compared. Survival of the fittest is a basic premise of the natural selection mechanism. Thus, if the market mechanism works well, the productivity of successful and surviving firms should be higher than that of failing and hence exiting firms, at least on the average.  In this figure, the shaded areas show cases where the productivity of failing and thus exiting firms is higher than that of surviving firms, which is an anomaly. In fact, the shaded areas are rather exceptional most of the time. However, if we look at the period 1996–97, the period of the financial crisis, we see many shaded areas indicating that more productive firms were exiting in many industries. This strongly suggests a breakdown in the natural selection mechanism. Post-crisis reality So, what will the post-crisis reality look like once the consequences of acute balance sheet adjustment under population ageing have taken effect? Some of the post-crisis reality can be seen in the Japanese situation in the 2000s.  (1) Decline in prospects for growth and investment returns First, growth prospects decline. Average real GDP growth in Japan fell from 5% to 4 % in the 70s and 80s, to around 1% in the 90s and 2000s. This implies the expected rate of return on investment in the 2000s is low, especially for those small to medium-sized firms that depend on domestic demand. In contrast, money (bank deposits) becomes relatively attractive as a store of value, given the price-stability pledge of the central bank. Ironically, this leads to an apparent breakdown of the historically-proven quantity-theoretic relationship between real activity and money stock.10 Moreover, not only is the policy rate very low, but so too are longer risk-free rates, judged by historical standards. Conventional monetary policy through the overnight policy rate is not as effective as before, and this means the economy is more vulnerable to a downside shock. The change is not only macroeconomic but also microeconomic and structural. The demand structure shifts from homogenous, mass markets for the young, to more segmented and heterogeneous markets for the old. Thus, continued focus on the young may entail ever-declining demand and overcapacity, and could miss the opportunity of exploiting the potential demand of the old. Here the microeconomic and structural failure of firms and banks to accommodate new demand may have macroeconomic consequence as well. In many discussions over the past two decades, this dramatic decline in growth and investment prospects has often be attributed to the supposedly unique nature of the Japanese economy, whatever that may be. However, if the demographic factors outlined in the previous section do indeed shape the future, then declining prospects for growth and investment returns may have more global relevance.                                                  10  The quantity-theoretic relationship presupposes that non-interest-bearing money is dominated by other positive rate-of-returns assets as a store of value. However, when price is stable and expected risk-adjusted return on investment is very low, the clear rate dominance of the other assets over money may no longer hold. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 (2)  Coordination failure in the financial system Second, there are signs of coordination failure. Banks’ lending is sluggish, partly because of their inadequate functioning as expert relationship bankers. Here a vicious circle seems to be working. To begin with, banks lack the expertise to assess investment in new fields, suffering as they are from problems with non-performing loans and under-investment in their loan officers’ human capital. Consequently banks do not lend. This means that new investments and new enterprises cannot get funding, and thus new markets falter. Then, banks miss the opportunities to accumulate new expertise, bringing them right back to the starting point of this vicious circle. Another coordination failure is found in capital markets, in the form of excessive risk aversion. Fearing unknown unknowns, investors shun investing in riskier securities. Their market then becomes thin and vulnerable to non-fundamental shocks. This means they themselves become prone to turning into unknown unknowns, thus the original fear is self-fulfilling. These two types of coordination failure in financial markets result in an apparent lack of “animal spirits”. (3)  Piling-up of public debt Third, we see a piling-up of government debt. This is partly the result of the substitution of public debt for private debt in the process of balance sheet adjustment, and partly due to the substitution of public demand for private demand during this period of declining growth. According to the OECD’s Economic Outlook, Japan’s General Government Gross Financial Liability-to-GDP Ratio in 2010 was 198%, compared with 93% in the United States. However, it should also be noted that, because of low long-term rates, the Government Net Debt Interest Payments-to-GDP is 1.2% in Japan, compared with 1.7% in the United States.  Three challenges and unconventional policy Let me now examine the challenges that central banks face in the post-crisis world. The first challenge is that of “cycle stabilization”: ensuring a return to sustainable growth with price stability, when the policy rate is near zero and longer-term risk-free rates are also very low compared with their historical average. The second challenge is to enhance the growth trend, or strengthen the foundations for growth. In other words, the challenge is to raise long-term growth prospects, especially in domestically-oriented growth. This should be done by solving the coordination failure in banking and capital markets described above. The third challenge is to avoid causing problems in national debt management. We should design and execute carefully measures to cope with the first and the second challenge, taking appropriate account of the current national debt situation as explained before, as well as general economic conditions. To tackle the first and second challenges, many central banks have introduced unconventional policies, which differ from region to region depending on the particular problems they face. Here as an example, I will explain the Bank of Japan’s recent attempts at unconventional policies, namely, the Comprehensive Monetary Easing (CME) in October 2010, and the Growth Foundation Strengthening Facility (GFSF) in June of the same year.  To meet the challenge of cycle stabilization, the first part of the CME changed the guidance for the policy rate from 0.1% to the range between 0 and 0.1%, making clear the Bank’s Virtually Zero-Interest Rate Policy (VZIRP). For the second part of the CME, the Bank clarified its policy duration commitment: the Bank will continue its VZIRP until it judges price stability to be in sight on the basis of the Policy Board members’ understanding of price stability. With Policy Board members’ announced forecasts for two years ahead, this is similar to “forecast targeting” though not specific in numbers.  
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches The third part of the CME is the Asset Purchase Program, which is also designed to meet the cycle stabilization challenge. The first half of the Asset Purchase Program aims to influence downward longer-term risk-free rates. That is, the outright purchase of JGBs with remaining maturity of 1–2 years and T-bills is to reduce the term-premiums of risk-free rates. The scheme to provide 3- and 6-month funds at the overnight rate already instituted was aimed at lowering rates longer than the overnight rate, and has been continued and included in this program. These are unconventional, but can be considered as a natural extension of conventional monetary policy through policy rate changes. However, the second half of the Asset Purchase Program is truly unconventional, in that the Bank purchases riskier assets than it bought before: BBB-rated corporate bonds, and  a-2 CPs. It also purchases ETFs and J-REITs directly from the market. The purchase is designed to act as a catalyst to induce investment in riskier assets, and thus help solve the coordination failure I described earlier. In other words, it is aimed at breaking another vicious circle in capital markets, that caused by excessive risk aversion. When there is grave anxiety about the future of the economy, as when there is so-called Knightian uncertainty, there is a tendency that aversion to risky assets such as stocks and real estate becomes “excessive” and demand for those assets declines, resulting in the risk premiums of those assets remaining high.11 This excessive “flight to quality” may greatly impede economic activity.12 Meanwhile, there is the possibility that as Knightian uncertainty increases, demand concentrates on assets whose risks are considered to be simple and small, thereby lowering the risk premiums of those assets. This is known as the “flight to simplicity,” which is different from the flight to quality. Whatever name it has, excessive flight to simplicity also distorts the market. In these cases, there is a possibility that the central bank’s purchase of risky assets will lead to it playing the role of “catalyst” to alleviate the tendency to excessive flight to quality and to simplicity.  To tackle the second, “trend-enhancement” challenge, or to strengthen growth potential, the Bank of Japan instituted its Growth Foundation Strengthening Facility (GFSF) in the form of preferential fund-provisioning to support financial institutions’ own initiatives in lending and investing in new growth areas.  It should be made clear here that it is not the Bank of Japan but participating financial institutions that determine which investment projects should be funded using this GFSF. Thus, the GFSF is designed to be a catalyst to induce banks to find new firms or new investment projects in their perceived growth areas. In this way, the GFSF is targeted at solving the coordination failure in the financial system mentioned earlier, by breaking the vicious circle of no lending resulting in no new markets and thus no demand for lending to start with.  Recently the Bank of Japan expanded the GFSF to include the new function of promoting more effective lending methods. Banks in Japan play a central role in financial intermediation, and small companies in particular rely on banks for most of their funding. In the high growth era, Japanese banks responded to strong demand for funds, using their “expert eye” to monitor closely the business performance of companies and examine their ability to meet repayment obligations. However, through the hard process of disposing of                                                  11  Here, in order to facilitate understanding, I intentionally and informally use the term “excessive” risk aversion as representing “(Knightian) uncertainty aversion” or “ambiguity aversion” over and above conventional risk aversion. For a survey of this literature of Knightian uncertainty/ambiguity, see Gilboa, I., and M. Marinacci, “Ambiguity and the Bayesian Paradigm”, mimeo., April 12, 2011. 12  For reference, please see (1) Nishimura, K.G., and H. Ozaki, “Search and Knightian Uncertainty”, Journal of Economic Theory, 119 (2004), 299–333.and (2) Nishimura, K.G., and H. Ozaki, “Irreversible Investment and Knightian Uncertainty,” Journal of Economic Theory, 136 (2007), 668–694. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 non-performing loans in the 1990s, banks began to rely more heavily on credit protection measures in the form of real estate collateral and personal guarantees.  Unfortunately, this increased reliance on real estate collateral and personal guarantees weakened banks’ ability to monitor client firms. The value of real estate and personal assets pledged to banks as collateral bears no direct relation to changes in the client firm’s business cash flow. Thus, there is a risk that financial institutions may overlook changes in the cash flow of a borrower’s core business and suddenly be faced with its business failure. Moreover, too great an emphasis on protection by real estate or personal asset collateral makes loan officers focus on loans to companies with a long business history and abundant assets, rather than providing funds for new companies and new business areas. Taking these problems into consideration, the Bank of Japan decided to use this GFSF facility to promote lending methods that do not rely on real estate collateral and personal guarantees. When implementing these measures to cope with cycle stability and trend-enhancing challenges, it is very important to take appropriate account of the third challenge, that of avoiding causing problems in national debt management. Specifically, it is crucial to avoid creating an impression of the “monetization” of government debt. Otherwise, the large scale purchase of JGBs may lead to a substantial and lasting ratcheting up of long-term rates, which would pose a serious problem for economic recovery and the financial position of the government. Taking this point into consideration, the Bank of Japan has already purchased about 22 trillion yen in JGBs annually, beside the Asset Purchase Program. By the same token, we should be very careful about the possibility that asset purchases may lead to capital losses, which could tarnish the credibility of the central bank. 4.  Concluding remarks: Keynes, population ageing and innovation Let me return to where I started this presentation. As I mentioned in the Introduction, it was Keynes who, in his Eugenics Review speech, placed population once again at center stage of macroeconomic policy in the framework of his General Theory. While in the Malthusian tradition, growing populations and inadequate food production to feed them are the major issue, Keynes was concerned with declining populations and inadequate capital investment for full employment. Life expectancy was not particularly long in the time of both Keynes and Malthus, and so population ageing was not an issue at all. Moreover, rapid technological innovation has at least partially solved the problems they had faced for some time. The problem we now face stems from population change, but with a different twist. Here composition of population has changed, inducing a large swing in asset prices as a store of value. With this in the background, we have witnessed asset prices bubble and then collapse spectacularly in some countries, leaving us with severe balance-sheet problems and diminished expectations on investment returns. One may then ask the question: Can our problems also be solved by technological innovation, as they were for Keynes and Malthus? If so, we need not be particularly worried about the present stagnation.  I do not have an answer, but I would like to make three remarks about the possibilities presented by technological innovation. First, the ageing society might impose unique challenges on technological innovation. When the population is growing rapidly, as it was in the past, the demands of the young always dominate those of the old. Thus, successful technological progress has a tendency to be youth-oriented and quantity-oriented. In contrast, when the population is ageing rapidly, the demands of the old dominate the market. The characteristics of technology demanded by the old may differ substantially from those demanded by the young, and current youth-oriented technological progress may prove to be not as value creating as before. 
12 BIS central bankers’ speeches Second, if the ageing world implies a substantial fall in asset returns, it would induce curtailment of new investment, leading to a worsening of economic conditions. To prevent investment shrinking further, we might need a new source of investment, which is not based on high private returns. It should be noted that there are many socially desirable projects that carry a low private rate of return, such as urban renewal projects, which might have been crowded out in the age of high private returns. To counter possible shortfalls in private investment, we might be obliged to adopt some form of public-private partnership to mobilize these innovation-based projects.13 Third, in an ageing world, the financial needs of an older population are often very different from the risk and return profiles of existing assets. We would then need financial innovation, as one form of technological innovation. Specifically, securitization might be helpful in tailoring financial products to the particular needs of an older population. However, recent experience in securitized products markets has shown the need for care in the design of such securitization, to ensure the necessary regulations and adequate oversight for prospective practitioners of these schemes.  Now it is time for me to stop here. Thank you for your kind attention.                                                  13  Some years ago, I proposed a scheme elsewhere for this purpose called Socially-Oriented Investment Trusts. See: Nishimura, K. G., and M. Saito, “On Alternatives to Aggregate Demand Policy to Revitalize the Japanese Economy”, Asian Economic Papers 2:2 (2003), 87–126. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 13   
14 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 15   
16 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 17   
18 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 19   
20 BIS central bankers’ speeches Appendix: Financial crisis and inverse dependency ratio – an update In a speech in January 2011,14 I presented some telling figures on the correlation of financial crisis, or so-called bubbles, and the inverse dependency ratio in Japan, United States, Greece, Portugal, Spain, Ireland and China. The figures were based on the 2008 revision of the United Nations World Population Prospects. Since then, the United Nations has published its 2010 revision. This appendix updates these figures and expands on them by including more European and Asian countries. The Japanese inverse dependency ratio peaked around 1990, and it was in the very next year, 1991, that the Japanese Bubble peaked. The peak of the US ratio was between 2005 and 2010, and the peak of the US Subprime Bubble was 2007 (Figure A.1 [same as Figure 1.1]). The economically troubled countries of the eurozone present a similar pattern to Japan and the United States. The ratios for Greece, Portugal and Spain have almost the same time profile, and all of them peaked around 2000–2005. The peak of the Spanish property boom was just after the ratio’s peak, and the financial problems of Greece also started at the same time. A particularly interesting case is Ireland, which showed a sharp rise in the ratio until around 2005. The bursting of the country’s property market bubble was just a few years around the corner (Figure A.2). How about other European countries? The so-called Core Europe, Germany, France and Italy, passed the peak 10+ years ago, and seemingly, did not have any particularly alarming property bubbles around 2010 (Figure A.3). However, new and potential members of the eurozone show similar patterns to Greece, Spain, Portugal, and Ireland (Figure A.4). Their ratios peaked around 2005–2010, and some have their own problems. In contrast to advanced countries, emerging Asia has shown remarkable resilience against the financial crisis of 2008. In fact, their inverse dependency ratio is still rising, as exemplified by China’s ratio (Figure A.5). The inverse dependency ratios of many other Asian countries have a quite similar time profile to that of China (Figure A.6). However, their ascent will be checked in a relatively short period, and the peak will be around 2010–15 in many of these countries. After that, the ratio will fall as rapidly as it is now rising.                                                  14  See footnote 2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 21   
22 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 23   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Mugur Isărescu: Economic governance in the European Union Speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the Conference “Economic Governance in the European Union”, jointly organized by the European Commission, the Ministry of Finance and the National Bank of Romania, Bucharest, 10 June 2011. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, Distinguished audience, It is a pleasure be the host of the Conference on “Economic Governance in the European Union”, an event jointly organized by the European Commission, the Ministry of Finance and the National Bank of Romania.  We are glad to welcome you all and our special guests: Mr. Gheorghe Ialomiţianu – the Romanian Minister of Finance, Mrs. Elena Flores, Director for Policy Strategy and Coordination in the European Commission’s DGECFIN, Mr. Theodor Stolojan, Member of European Parliament and former Prime Minister of Romania, Mrs. Iuliana Dascalu, Director in the Finance Ministry of Romania, Mr. Hans Martens, chief executive of the European Policy Centre Think-tank and Mr. Daniel Dăianu, Economics Professor, former Member of European Parliament and Finance Minister of Romania. A special note of thanks to my colleagues Deputy Governor Cristian Popa and the Chief Economist Valentin Lazea, who, together with our special guests, have responded to the challenge of debating a hot topic.  In these challenging times, economic governance was brought to the spotlight by the recent global economic and financial crisis. Governance may be seen as the manner in which power is exercised in the management of a country’s social and economic resources for development. We all know that good governance involves setting adequate policies, programs and regulations, which then have to be translated into legislation. As I often say, sustainable development hinges on the consistency of economic policies – there is no substitute for consistent, sound and stability-oriented economic policies.  In this context, institutions are central to the way a country is governed and these are the formal and informal rules in a society. As the Nobel Prize winner Douglas North pointed out “the formal rules are set by the state through laws and regulations, while the informal rules come from the culture, history and experience of each society”.  Only in the last 10–15 years most economists have discovered good governance – with its four pillars: transparency, accountability, predictability and participation – as a major determinant of economic growth. Thus, economic governance implies the need to ensure stable, transparent and predictable rules that encourage competition and fair access to public services. It is achieved through a country’s public and private sector institutions and the civil society. Moreover, the recent international crisis has underscored the need for an in-depth reform of economic governance at both European and global levels. As the European Central Bank president, Mr. Jean-Claude Trichet has recently underlined “the international interdependencies are too large for purely national or regional rules to be optimal and there is a clear need to strengthen global governance, in particular in the financial field”. In the case of the European Union, the crisis has exposed fundamental weaknesses of the European economy, revealing growing internal imbalances. The functioning of the European 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Monetary Union has been under particular stress as the existing surveillance procedures proved to be not comprehensive enough.  Therefore, more effective economic governance in the European Union and the euro area is seen as achievable through five main pillars: fiscal discipline, broader economic surveillance, closer coordination, a robust framework for crisis management, stronger institutions and rules-based decision making.  At this point, let me say that just recently the European Union has taken important decisions to ensure that Member States coordinate their economic policies more closely. The new economic governance is therefore based on three main responses to the crisis: • reinforcing the common economic agenda with closer European Union surveillance • safeguarding the euro area stability  • and repairing the financial sector As a result of these decisions, the EU’s interdependent economies will be better placed to chart a path to growth and job creation.  To conclude, I would like to emphasize here that economic governance is a topic that concerns us all. I would say it is all about discipline – particularly fiscal discipline, and a changing culture.  I am sure that, under the umbrella of this complex topic, all these issues are full of substance so that I strongly encourage participants to debate on the challenges the European Union, in general, and countries like Romania, in particular, face when it comes to economic governance. I wish you success and invite Mr. Gheorghe Ialomiţianu, Romania’s Minister of Finance, to deliver his address. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Javier Aríztegui: The financial crisis and the restructuring of the Spanish banking system Speech by Mr Javier Aríztegui, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the APIE (the Spanish Association of Economics Journalists) – UIMP (Menéndez Pelayo University) Course, Santander, 17 June 2011. *      *      * Let me begin by thanking the APIE (the Spanish Association of Economics Journalists) and the Menéndez Pelayo University for inviting me to deliver the closing address at this seminar, which has discussed matters of great interest for our economy and financial system. This is the third year I have come to Santander for this session, and the second year running that I will be briefly reflecting on the financial crisis and the restructuring of the banking system. That I should be here again is no strange occurrence. Indeed, it was foreseen by the organisers since we are experiencing the deepest and most extensive crisis in recent decades, and we face a far-reaching restructuring and reform of savings banks.  But my address today is from a different perspective than that of my last visit. In June 2010 the Royal Decree-Law that created the Fund for the Orderly Restructuring of the Banking Sector (FROB by its acronym) had been in force for a year. One of its aims was to boost integration processes to create sounder and more efficient institutions. At that time the main negotiations between savings banks to draw up the new map of the sector had already taken place, and the FROB had committed its first aid in this connection. But some of the key elements to entrench the reforms and restore external confidence in our financial system were still pending.  In fact, only a month later, in July 2010, the results of the stress tests of credit institutions, co-ordinated at the European level, were published; the Banco de España agreed to amend the regime governing accounting provisions; and the government approved a key reform on the legal regime of savings banks. Then, in February 2011, the Royal Decree-Law on the reinforcement of the financial system was enacted, and its rules are currently being applied. This year we can roundly state that the restructuring of savings banks has moved into its final stage. Thereafter, we will have a smaller set of institutions (from 45 original savings banks there are now 18) and one that is more efficient and better capitalised, capable, along with the rest of our banking system, of providing the intermediation services our economy needs for the recovery to take root and to contribute to our citizens’ well-being.  *     *      * The road is undoubtedly proving to be a long and complex one. Far behind us now is the summer of 2007, when the sub-prime mortgage crisis broke, spreading its risks across agents and markets through securitisations and credit derivatives. That episode, which did not initially impact Spanish banks as they had no investments in those products, was actually the trigger for a chain of events and effects on the world economy and financial markets that would soon be felt in Spain.  The first symptom seen was the deterioration in financing and liquidity conditions. The authorities responded to this with support measures, such as the programmes for the purchase of financial assets and the backing of debt issues, and the European Central Bank set in place its new and ample liquidity provision criteria. In late 2008 the Spanish economy went into recession. The decline in output and rising unemployment placed upward pressure on bank and savings-bank doubtful assets ratios and the subsequent need for loan loss provisions. This combined with the increase in financial 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches costs owing to growing dependence on wholesale funding and to sudden difficulties on these markets. Moreover, many institutions, highly concentrated in the real estate development and construction sector, were faced with the housing market grinding to a halt.  What’s more, savings banks had a singular legal regime, associated with their legal status, that entailed clear limits on their ability to raise top-quality capital and to set in place the governance rules needed to retain the confidence of third-party investors as to their future.   Given this outlook, there was an evident need to restructure the sector and to support the process with an instrument that would help strengthen the solvency of those institutions that decided to pursue plans to improve their efficiency by means of mergers or other integration operations. In July 2009 the FROB was duly created. And over the course of 2010 it granted – or committed itself to – aid amounting to €11.6 billion for eight integration processes (although one of these did not finally go ahead when the initial Banco Base project collapsed) and for the restructuring of a non-viable institution, CajaSur, and its integration into BBK. The other savings bank officially intervened due to its lack of viability, Caja Castilla-La Mancha, received aid from the Deposit Guarantee Fund, at a time when the FROB had not yet been created.  The year 2010 also saw successive episodes in which the public debt of euro area countries whose finances looked weak was punished. In spring we witnessed the Greek crisis and, at the end of the year, the Irish crisis. Although Spain’s macroeconomic indicators were not in the least comparable with those of Greece and Ireland, these episodes affected Spanish public debt spreads, owing to the uncertainty and to the difficulty ever-present in these situations of correctly assessing the information available. Later, into 2011, the country affected was Portugal, although at this stage of market tensions Spain was able to distance itself from the eye of the storm thanks to its resolute reforms policy. During 2010 the Banco de España also pursued a series of initiatives to help generate much-needed confidence. Firstly, in July it took transparency to a new level with the publication of the results of the stress tests, both because of the high proportion of institutions analysed (representing 95% of the system, compared with the figure of 50% required in Europe) and the degree of detail of the information provided. Secondly, it reformed the provisioning system that same month, to ensure appropriate balance-sheet write-downs. And thirdly, it urged institutions to provide the market with highly accurate information on their exposures to the real estate development and construction sector and on their financial structure and liquidity position.  Likewise in July 2010, Parliament approved the savings banks reform, included in Royal Decree-Law 11/2010. This paved the way for a new legal structure for savings banks, under which the pursuit of their banking activity may be through a bank, to which the bulk of assets and liabilities are transferred. This corporate model, conceived for adoption on a voluntary basis, although it has become obligatory for savings banks that receive further aid as I shall mention later, is imposing itself extensively on the sector owing to its advantages in terms of the ability to tap the markets for capital, to promote best management practices and to generate the necessary confidence on the part of customers and investors.  As initially stated, we are in the final stage of the savings bank restructuring process, implementing the strategy envisaged in Royal Decree-Law 2/2011 approved by Parliament in February. Underpinning this legislation are three pillars. First, a very significant increase in solvency. All institutions shall comply with a core capital ratio, in which only top-quality instruments are eligible, of 8%, rising to 10% in the case of institutions that rely on wholesale markets for at least 20% of their funding and none of whose share capital or voting rights are placed with third parties.  Second, FROB backing for those institutions that do not reach these new minimum capital levels by their own means.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Third, new arrangements for the instrumentation of FROB aid, which now ceases to be provided as preference shares, taking rather the form of subscription to shares in the bank resulting from the conversion of the savings banks concerned. *     *     * On 10 March 2011 the mechanisms envisaged in the new regulations were set in train with the publication by the Banco de España of the situation regarding institutions’ capital. Twelve banks (four commercial banks and eight savings banks) did not reach the figures required to comply with the ratio, needing an aggregate additional amount of €15.15 billion. Finally, the number of institutions with a shortfall rose to 13 following the collapse of the Banco Base Institutional Protection Scheme (IPS).  Under the new regulations, institutions with a shortfall submitted their strategy and compliance timetable to the Banco de España, which were approved on 14 April. The following day the FROB agreed to the strategies submitted, undertaking to provide the funds needed to those institutions which, as a priority option or alternative, had decided to resort to FROB aid to comply with the new ratio.  The four banks that did not attain the required minimum opted, in the case of the two subsidiaries of foreign banks, to be capitalised by their parents, and the two Spanish banks, to issue instruments eligible as core capital. Depending on the strategy chosen, two groups can be distinguished among the nine savings banks indicated. The first, comprising four institutions, has opted for an IPO or raising private capital. The second, made up of another four savings banks, has opted to be capitalised by the FROB. There is a fifth savings bank that has proposed FROB backing as an alternative to a possible merger with another institution. In all these instances, the Banco de España received the recapitalisation plans ahead of the scheduled deadline.  The situation concerning the four savings banks or groups of savings banks that have considered raising private capital is as follows. The four already have banks through which they are indirectly going to pursue their financial activity, and in three cases the transfer to the new bank of financial assets and liabilities has concluded following the approval of their respective assemblies and their mercantile registration. These four institutions have submitted on a precautionary basis their recapitalisation plans to the FROB should they not be able to obtain private capital, although this is a possibility they consider unlikely in pursuing their strategies.  Two of them, Bankia and Banca Cívica, are taking steps for a future market launch. If the plans proposed come to fruition, in less than 30 days these institutions will be listed, the process envisaged under the new regulations will have concluded, and they will operate with capital higher than the minimum requirement set in the new legislation.  Another two banks, Mare Nostrum and Effibank, are also negotiating placing their capital in private hands, and they intend to conclude the operation within the schedule set, placing the proportion necessary to obtain the level of own funds required to meet the new core capital ratio. In both cases, the avenue being explored, without ruling out other alternatives, is the direct placement of capital with wholesale investors.  Turning now to the other four savings banks, all of them have submitted their recapitalisation plans, a pre-requisite for applying for aid.  The plans are in two parts: a business plan, with projections for profitability, leverage, liquidity and efficiency (among other variables); and a series of specific commitments regarding corporate governance and cost-cutting. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches These plans will be – and indeed are already – subject to scrutiny by various parties: by the Banco de España, which must give final approval; by the FROB and its external advisers, who may demand inclusion of commitments on top of those proposed, considering these as an essential input in the process of setting the price to be paid for the shares in which the FROB invests; and by the European Commission, as the aid provided must be compatible with the European criteria on “State aid” and budget deficits. All three institutions are currently analysing the plans received.  The savings banks, for their part, are taking the necessary steps remaining to adjust their structure to the new requirements. In some cases they have already created the new bank to which they will transfer their banking activity, and in others the necessary procedures are at different stages of completion. Subsequently, in July, their assemblies will adopt the resolutions segregating their assets and liabilities and definitively transferring their financial business to the new bank.  A key aspect will be the setting of the price at which the FROB will participate in the capital of the new banks. As an initial step, the leading audit firms hired in this connection are performing both financial due diligence (to confirm the reliability of the institution’s financial statements) and business plan due diligence (the reasonableness of the plan). Both provide relevant information for the economic valuation of the new bank. This work is conducted using methodological and procedural approaches devised and published by the FROB late last May, following advice from a panel of experts in order to include best market practices. Under these approaches, financial due diligence must pay particular attention to loans and receivables, real estate assets and the investment portfolio, along with potential one-off transactions envisaged, and to potential areas of risk from a legal, tax and labour-related perspective. Business plan due diligence will focus on the reasonableness of macroeconomic assumptions, growth, revenue, doubtful assets ratios and provisioning, costs, synergies and disposals.  Based on the institution’s financial statements, on the business plan and on the due diligences, three independent experts – all acknowledged authorities in their field – hired by the FROB will deliver their opinion on the institution’s market value and the percentage of capital to which the new investment is equivalent. To ensure the quality of the result, the FROB will use the conclusions of three experts, although it will not take into account valuations that deviate by more than 15% from the resulting mean value.  Determining the economic value of the institution is thus being done with the utmost care since, as the FROB indicated in its methodological note, this is of paramount importance from three standpoints: from that of Community competition rules, to ensure that public aid is granted on an arm’s length basis; from that of the proper use of public funds, so that they are disbursed in accordance with rigorously set subscription prices; and from that of the institution itself and of the “interested parties”, because the market value will also determine the FROB’s actual stake and, consequently, that of the former stakeholders in the resulting capital and in the institution’s governing bodies.  On conclusion of this process, before 30 September 2011, the FROB will have taken a stake in the capital of these institutions and will vote on the decisions of their boards of directors on a scale proportionate to the economic valuation.  Thereafter, the FROB will participate directly in their management with the mission to monitor fulfilment of their business plans. It shall remain in the institutions only temporarily, and never any longer than the maximum term of five years in which the shares it holds must be disposed of to third parties through a competitive procedure.  *     *     * In sum, we are at the last stage of savings bank restructuring. The aim is that by 30 September the various steps outstanding should have been completed. This is the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 timeframe set by the Royal Decree-Law on the reinforcement of the financial system, although an exceptional three-month extension for operational reasons and a further three months in the event of an IPO would be possible.  In recent years our banking system has made a very intense balance-sheet write-down drive (equivalent to 9% of GDP in the three years from 2008 to 2010), it has evidenced unprecedented transparency in respect of its most problematic exposures, and it has recapitalised drawing on private funds and also with relatively limited public aid when compared with other countries. In turn, Spanish legislation has risen to the challenges posed by the crisis with a raft of measures. These include most notably, due to their intended durability, the establishment of new solvency requirements, the modernisation of the legal regime governing savings banks and the creation of more flexible and efficient banking crisis-resolution instruments.  We trust we will move into autumn with all our homework completed. Thank you very much. 
Mugur Isărescu: International Financial Reporting Standards – international experience and implementation by the banking sector in Romania in 2012 Opening speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the IFRS conference “International experience and implementation by the Romanian banking sector in 2012”, Bucharest, 20 June 2011. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen,  Distinguished audience,  It is an honour to have the opportunity to open the proceedings of the Conference titled “International Financial Reporting Standards: International Experience and Implementation by the Banking Sector in Romania in 2012”. This is a topical and, at the same time, a hotly-debated issue that we are going to discuss together with the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW).  Economic and financial developments tending towards internationalisation of banking operations in the context of globalisation of financial markets have highlighted the importance of financial information provided by companies, especially in terms of assessing and presenting the results and risks attached to their activity. Moreover, in the aftermath of the past years’ financial crisis, stronger pressures for harmonising accounting rules worldwide as a basis for the published financial information have emerged.  Under the circumstances, the National Bank of Romania, in its capacity as the regulatory and supervisory authority of the Romanian banking system has steadily sought to harmonise its rules and practices with the best practices in the field so as to increase transparency and ensure comparability of information across the entire banking sector. The actual implementation of the International Financial Reporting Standards is part of the central bank’s area of concerns, since relevant and adequate assessments of credit institutions’ assets, debts and shareholders’ equity are essential prerequisites for the calculation of real prudential indicators. In order to fulfil this objective, the NBR has steadily cooperated with the commercial banks and the Romanian Banking Association and has enjoyed the support of leading consulting and audit firms in Romania.  The Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, an institution famous for its rich experience regarding International Financial Reporting Standards, has recently provided the NBR support to carry on/complete the implementation of financial reporting standards. Today, its experts will present useful information and recommendations to accurately comprehend and implement the International Financial Reporting Standards.  Within the process of accounting reform intended for credit institutions in Romania, following the transposition of the EU acquis – given that European standards did not establish any rules –, the NBR has contributed to the enlargement of the European regulatory framework by adopting solutions consistent with the principles of International Financial Reporting Standards. Thus, the implementation of these standards at individual level by credit institutions in Romania has taken a graduated approach.  At consolidated level, i.e. banking groups, the International Financial Reporting Standards have been transposed via a seamless approach; the NBR exerted its national options embedded in the acquis, but included all credit institutions, not only the listed ones, in the scope of applicability.  In 2010, the National Bank of Romania adopted the Strategy for IFRS Implementation by credit institutions starting with the 2012 financial year. For its implementation, the updating of the accounting regulatory framework was completed and steps were taken to ensure BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches transition towards the new standards. Thus, credit institutions will prepare and present action plans whose implementation will be monitored by the central bank throughout the remainder of this year. Also in the first half of 2011, the financial reporting framework suiting the needs of the supervisory authority was updated.  The National Bank of Romania, in its capacity as an authority responsible for prudential supervision of the banking system, has recently prepared and sent for public consultation the bills needed to elicit accounting figures reported by banks so that they match the banks’ prudential objectives.  I trust this endeavour aimed at broadening the scope of applicability of such standards, serving as the basis for accounting and for preparing individual financial statements by credit institutions in Romania, should be seen as a sine qua non condition to secure effective supervision of the Romanian banking system.  Let me stress that the importance of implementing the International Financial Reporting Standards by credit institutions in Romania is also reflected by the new financing agreements signed with international institutions (the European Commission, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank).  I am confident that you experts have now a good opportunity for an in-depth analysis of the evolution of the international accounting system and the problems arising in the implementation of International Financial Reporting Standards, as well as for a useful projection of the major challenges to implementing the new accounting standards by the banking sector in Romania, given its importance in achieving a modern and efficient accounting system.  Let me reiterate on this occasion our institution’s willingness to cooperate with stakeholders in the implementation of International Financial Reporting Standards by the banking sector. I trust that any problems relating to the introduction of the new accounting rules will be resolved in a timely manner so that the current transition ends successfully.  Last but not least, my appreciation goes to the representatives of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales for their effort to ensure that world-acclaimed IFRS experts and representatives of leading consulting and audit firms in Romania, with which the NBR maintains close cooperation ties, are participating in this event.  I trust that today as many as possible issues related to the implementation of the International Financial Reporting Standards will be discussed and clarified. Finally, let me wish all of you every success.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Glenford Ysaguirre: From the global financial crisis to more robust regulatory frameworks and resilient financial systems Feature address by Mr Glenford Ysaguirre, Governor of the Central Bank of Belize, at the Caribbean Group of Banking Supervisors XXIX Annual Conference, San Pedro Town, 16 June 2011. *      *      * A pleasant good morning to Mr. Cleviston Haynes – CGBS Chair; representatives from the Association of Supervisors of Banks of the Americas (ASBA), the Office of the Supervisor of the Currency (OCC), the US Department of the Treasury, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC); members of CGBS; participants of this, the twenty-ninth annual CGBS conference. Ladies and gentlemen, let me join my staff in welcoming you to Belize and to the, warm, friendly and scenic location of San Pedro, Ambergris Caye. It is indeed my pleasure to have this opportunity to address this gathering today.  I understand that you have a very heavy agenda so my intent is to be very brief and not to stray from the script as is often my wont. As leading entities charged with the supervision of the financial sector, we all carry an enormous responsibility and one that ought not to be taken lightly. Today, I see the work of the CGBS as one of the few shining examples of a regional institution that does not seem to be afflicted with that, oh so common and familiar malady I call the CARICOM MALAISE. This is that common condition where we meet a lot, talk a lot, agree on a lot, debate a lot, and then we resolve not to do a damn lot. Let me give you an example: Take our attempt to get members to adopt a single draft model Banking Act across the region. While unanimously agreed to almost six years ago, it languishes in suspension as formal acceptance by a few jurisdictions is as yet forthcoming with no explanations for the protraction.  But, my purpose here today is not to dwell on the negative, but rather to plant an idea whose time I think has come. I hope it will pique your interest sufficiently for you to forgive my departure from the normal feature address format.  The theme for today’s conference is very fitting and timely:  “From the global financial crisis to more robust regulatory frameworks and resilient financial systems”  I like this theme because it is forward looking and is in perfect consonance with the idea I am about to propose. This theme is saying to me that we must not be too engrossed in the business of analyzing the past lest we forget to look ahead toward unchartered waters we must yet traverse. I think that after three and one half years of meetings and conferences we are all fatigued with an overload of hind-sight wisdom that offers perfect explanations for the 2008 global financial crisis that none or very few saw coming. The irony is that very few of us saw the coming of the 2008 crisis because we were too busy analyzing the crisis before that one. Now, the fact that the Caribbean went relatively unscathed from the global financial crisis, except for the CLICO and BAICO experiences, is by no means an indication that we were any better prepared; in my view it was mere lucky happenstance and this is what we need to address in the future.  I am sure Caricom Heads of Government at their June 2009 meeting in Georgetown, Guyana had this near miss catastrophe squarely in their rearview mirrors when they agreed on the urgency of putting in place a strong framework for regional financial stability. Citing, among other things, the CLICO and BAICO experiences, they tasked the Committee of Central Bank Governors to prepare a proposal for the creation of a regional architecture for financial stability for final consideration by the Council for Finance and Planning (COFAP). The mandate was to accelerate the construction of a robust regional financial stability framework.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches The Committee of Central Bank Governors set about this task diligently. First, they secured funding from the Inter-American Development Bank for a Regional Financial Risk Assessment Project under the aegis of the Caribbean Centre for Money and Finance (the CCMF). Then, a three-day workshop for regional regulatory stakeholders was held in Port of Spain, Trinidad on 3 to 5 March 2011 to discuss the requirements and actions needed to develop the framework and to agree on the outline of the terms of reference for the planning and implementation of a financial architecture that supports regional financial stability.  From all accounts, the workshop was well attended and yielded several recommendations on governance and operational structure of a regional financial stability board. However, progress on this project recently stalled as governors remain fundamentally at odds over a few of the major recommendations, in particular:  • The recommendation for the CCMF to become the central reporting body for financial stability;  • The legality of regional regulators sharing sensitive confidential information with a non-regulatory body outside of members’ jurisdictions; and  • The methodology and approach for the Regional Financial Risk Assessment Project.  On the matter of the CCMF serving as the central reporting facility, there were questions as to its appropriateness, ability and capacity to manage such a task:  • Does it have the necessary financial and human resources?  • Do they have the required expertise, bearing in mind that this is a research institution?  • How will the issue of legality and confidentiality be resolved?  From recent discussion and exchanges between governors at and after the 27 May 2011 Governors’ caucus held in Bridgetown, Barbados it does not appear that we are anywhere near to resolving these issues and a sub-committee of Governors was appointed specifically to look into these issues, among others. So, when I was tasked by my supervision department to make this feature address, these were some of the issues that governors were still hotly debating and I became fearful that this very important project may also fall victim to the dreaded CARICOM MALAISE.  It then dawned on me that the CGBS and not the CCMF may be the only salvation and the ideal rescue vehicle for this project. In 1983, CARICOM Central Bank Governors envisaged the need for an entity to spearhead the enhancement of regional banking supervision practices in line with internationally accepted standards. Hence, the birth of CGBS, an institution charged with charting the way forward for supervisors to maintain above-board practices and equilibrium in regulating financial sectors across the CARICOM region. Since then the CGBS has grown and accomplished much, and as I mentioned earlier, is one of the few CARICOM institutions that actually produces real work in the true spirit and meaning of regional integration. It is the obvious choice to be the central reporting facility and should be the home of the financial stability project; financial stability review falls naturally within its bailiwick.  What I am saying is that the time has come to legally establish the CGBS as CARICOM’s supranational financial regulatory authority. Such a structured CGBS would eliminate all the concerns Governors now have about the appropriateness of the CCMF for this role in particular the concerns on the legality of regional information sharing. Presently, the conduct of CGBS members towards each other has been guided by a protocol based on mutual respect and trust. There is a Members’ Handbook and a recently signed Memorandum of Understanding for regional cooperation though none of these are legally binding. In the absence of proper legal authority, there is no real enforcement or disciplinary mechanism 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 and we must rely solely on peer pressure or moral suasion for compliance with the rules of engagement.  While this structure may have been adequate in more prosperous and disciplined times, indications already are that it will be severely tested in today’s crisis prone environment. The time has thus come for the CGBS to take on an even more substantive role. It must be given the authoritative muscle in order to fulfill its mandate of establishing regional conformity to international principles and best practices. The truth is that some of us already recognized this need when we recently requested that the CGBS establish some form of mechanism to resolve conflicts and disputes that may arise between members.  Accordingly, I would like to propose that the CGBS consider, among other things:  1. Establishing itself as a formal legal entity with bylaws, a Memorandum and Articles of Association to which members must legally and financially subscribe. This would provide substantial financing since almost every jurisdiction in the Caribbean is a member of the CGBS.  2. Establishing a permanent secretariat with a dedicated staff. This can be accomplished by us either agreeing to merge with or subsuming the financially embattled CCMF. This move would reduce the need for regional Central Banks to finance two separate institutions and provide the CGBS with a permanent staff capable of handling the macro-prudential requirements of a financial stability review. Currently, all CARICOM members participate in CGBS whereas only a dwindling handful subscribe to the CCMF.  3. Establishing conditions for the entry and exit of countries as members of this body. This would promote more disciplined behavior throughout the region and facilitate orderly progress in adopting international best practices.  4. Establishing a mechanism to impose sanctions on members for non-compliance with agreed standards.  5. Establishing an implementation plan for BASEL II across the region and the establishment of financial stability boards by members, and  6. Establishing a Council to deliberate on disputes between members.  While this venture would require much acuity, it is the uncharted waters that we must traverse. I am confident that it is doable; it is the natural progression for the CGBS and an idea whose time has come. Having made my pitch, ladies and gentlemen, I must now respectfully take my leave and allow you to get on with the business of the day. But before I go I would welcome your thoughts and feedback on the proposed new role for the CGBS as I intend to present this suggestion to the Committee of Governors for consideration.  Lastly, please allow me to thank you for your time and patience and wish you a productive and successful conference.  Enjoy the rest of your stay in Belize and may God bless you.  
Charles I Plosser: The US economic outlook and the normalization of monetary policy Speech by Mr Charles I Plosser, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at the Society of Business Economists Annual Conference, London, England, 9 June 2011. *      *      * The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. Introduction Good morning. Thank you for this opportunity to speak before your Society. As business economists, you are well aware of the extraordinary economic times in which we live. A financial crisis and arguably the worst global recession of the post-war era have challenged policymakers in the U.S. and abroad. In many nations, monetary and fiscal authorities undertook extraordinary actions to mitigate the damage, and for most of the hardest hit countries, the recession trough has passed and a moderate recovery is underway. Yet the actions taken leave a legacy of huge government budget deficits, short-term interest rates at record lows, and central bank balance sheets of unprecedented magnitudes. Even as our economies recover, policymakers face some daunting challenges as we try to unwind these extraordinary actions and rebuild confidence and credibility in our monetary policy frameworks. Today I would like to discuss my outlook for the U.S. economy and some thoughts about ways to begin the normalization of U.S. monetary policy. I believe there are several steps the Federal Reserve can take to ensure a successful exit from this period of extraordinary accommodation, including taking a page out of the Bank of England’s book by announcing an explicit numerical goal for inflation. As always, my remarks reflect my own views and do not necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve Board or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Economic outlook  Let me begin with an update on the U.S. economy. We are nearly two years into a moderate, sustained recovery from financial crisis and the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression. In the fourth quarter of last year, the level of real GDP finally passed its pre-recession peak, but it did so with some 7½ million fewer workers, a reflection of strong productivity growth. This year’s first-quarter GDP growth, at just below 2 percent, was somewhat disappointing. But I believe that this weakness will likely prove to be a temporary soft patch and that the underlying fundamentals remain in place for the economy to resume growing at a moderate pace in the second half of this year, and to strengthen a bit more next year. Such soft patches are not that uncommon. Indeed, last year we experienced just such a bump in the road. Yet, after what I described as the summer doldrums, the economy picked up momentum to give us just under 3 percent growth for the full year. I think the slower growth in the early part of this year has similarly been influenced by a number of temporary factors. In particular, severe weather, uncertainty surrounding the aftermath of the disaster in Japan, political events in the Middle East and North Africa, and higher food and energy prices, all have weighed on growth. Oil and commodity price increases and supply chain disruptions from the devastation in Japan may have some carryover into the second quarter, but I believe any loss of momentum is likely to be transitory. BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
Of course, the drama being played out in Congress over debt and spending has provided yet another source of uncertainty for the economy. Progress in that arena would undoubtedly improve confidence going forward and reduce uncertainty. Monetary policy cannot and should not be viewed as a substitute for sound fiscal policies. As I have argued many times in the past, monetary policy is not the silver bullet that many would like to think it is. It cannot solve all of our economic ills, and attempting to do so can be quite dangerous for economic stability.1 I anticipate moderate but above-trend growth of around 3 to 3½ percent for the remainder of this year and next. The overall strength in some sectors will more than offset persistent weaknesses in others, so that the recovery will be sustained and more broad-based as it continues. Improvement in household balance sheets and better labor market conditions will support moderate growth in consumer spending. Solid growth in corporate earnings will support continued healthy advances in business spending on equipment and software. Housing, however, will likely remain a weak spot in the U.S. economy, with flat to slightly falling prices and little new construction. Outside of recent supply disruptions in the auto industry, I anticipate that growth in manufacturing will remain a source for optimism. The Philadelphia Fed’s Business Outlook Survey of manufacturers has proven over the years to be a useful barometer of national trends in manufacturing. In April and May, the measures of current activity saw some pull-back from the very high numbers of February and March, but the numbers show that activity in the manufacturing sector continues to expand. Moreover, the survey’s indicators of future activity, a measure of firms’ expectations for activity six months from now, also signal continued expansion. Consumer spending, which makes up about 70 percent of GDP in the U.S., is also increasing. Like GDP, real consumption has surpassed its previous peak and appears to be growing at a moderate pace. Households continue to pay down debt and rebuild some of the net worth that was destroyed during the recession. Higher energy and food prices have been a drag on recent consumer spending. But more important than gas prices for the health of the economy and the strength of consumer spending is job growth. So let me turn to labor markets. Labor markets  Overall, conditions in the labor markets continue to gradually improve. But the path has not been a smooth one nor has it been as robust as one might like. In May, nonfarm payrolls expanded by 54,000 jobs, after growing by 232,000 jobs in April and 194,000 in March. The U.S. economy has added over 780,000 jobs since the first of the year. The private sector has managed to increase payrolls by more than 900,000, but government employment has been shrinking, thus dragging net hiring down below 800,000. May’s uptick in the unemployment rate to 9.1 percent was a bit disappointing, but even with that, the unemployment rate has fallen by 0.7 percent since last November. Despite these modest improvements in labor market conditions, millions of Americans remain unemployed. So we have a long way to go. But as the economy strengthens this year, I expect that businesses will continue to add to their payrolls. With continued growth in employment, I expect to see modest declines in the unemployment rate, to about 8½ percent by the end of this year, and then to a range of 7 to 7½ percent by the end of 2012.                                                  1  See Charles Plosser, “The Scope and Responsibilities of Monetary Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Annual Report 2010. 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Inflation Inflation has risen in recent months as the prices of energy and other commodities have surged. These prices have been extremely volatile of late, and despite some recent retrenchment, they remain considerably above their levels of just over six months ago, when the Fed embarked on its plan to purchase $600 billion of long-term U.S. Treasuries. While headline inflation has risen markedly, there has been less of an increase in the so-called core measures of inflation, which exclude food and energy prices, but even they are up noticeably over the same period. There are signs that firms are becoming better able to pass along some of their increased costs to their customers. For example, in response to a special question in our Business Outlook Survey in February, over 56 percent of manufacturers said they had already put through price increases. Nearly 60 percent of all respondents said they had planned to increase prices over the next three months. Our survey’s prices paid index, an indicator of firms’ input costs, has been at high levels for the past six months. And the prices received index, an indicator of the prices that firms are charging their customers, turned positive last fall and continues to suggest that firms are likely to be testing their pricing power. In the May survey, 20 percent reported higher prices for their own goods, while just 3 percent reported price reductions. As commodity prices stabilize, headline inflation should come back down. However, I see the inflation risks in the U.S. as being clearly to the upside. In an environment with very accommodative monetary policy, a key to keeping commodity price increases from passing through to other goods and services and creating more general inflation is to ensure that longer-run inflation expectations stay anchored. So far, that seems to be mostly the case. But, of course, expectations are well-anchored until they are not. So it is somewhat troubling to me that expectations of inflation in the medium to longer term are moving up and down as much as they are. It suggests that the public and the markets may not have as much confidence in the Fed’s ability, or willingness, to deliver on its price stability mandate. When we think about oil prices and inflation, we must keep in mind that inflation is a monetary phenomenon. In looking back to the Great Inflation of the 1970s, we learned it was not high oil prices per se, but easy monetary policy in response to high oil prices that caused the rise in general inflation. Accommodative monetary policy allowed the large increase in oil prices to be passed along in the form of a general increase in prices. As that happened, people and firms began to expect higher inflation – they lost confidence that the central bank would keep inflation in check – and those expectations influenced their decisions, making it that much harder to reverse the rising tide of inflation. Thus, a key lesson from the 1970s is that the credibility of the central bank’s commitment to maintaining price stability must be preserved. Once that credibility is lost, it is very difficult to regain, and economic outcomes are worse as a result. My colleagues and I on the FOMC are committed to ensuring that does not happen again. Yet we must be willing to do more than just talk about our commitment. We must be willing act – that is, undertake the necessary and difficult policies to ensure that medium- to longer-run inflation expectations remain stable and our credibility remains intact. This includes taking the right actions at the right time to exit the extreme accommodative policy that is now in place. Normalization of monetary policy During the last three years, the Federal Reserve, like many other central banks around the world, has taken extraordinary actions to mitigate the impact of the financial crisis and support the return of economic growth. Our traditional instrument of monetary policy, the federal funds rate, has been near zero for about two and a half years. The Fed’s balance sheet has grown more than threefold, from nearly $900 billion before the crisis to about $2.7 trillion today, and its asset composition has shifted significantly from mostly short- to BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 
medium-term Treasuries to longer-term Treasuries, mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and agency debt. As our economy recovers, we must normalize our monetary policy framework.  Some people have questioned whether the Federal Reserve has the tools to exit from its extraordinary positions. We do. But the question for the Fed and other central bankers is not can we do it, but will we do it at the right time and at the right pace. How central banks manage the exit from such extraordinary policies will be the key to preserving our credibility and the public’s confidence in our institutions. Our success in coping with this challenge will be at least as difficult and perhaps as important for our future economic well-being as our actions during the crisis. Of course, the exact way policy is normalized will vary from central bank to central bank. I will focus my discussion on the U.S. and the elements that I believe will be critical for the Fed. Yet the principles that guide my thinking on these matters are important and apply more broadly to a range of policy discussions. I want to stress three key elements to the normalization effort. The first is clearly defining what we mean by normalization of our policy framework. The second is developing a systematic and credible plan for how policy will be conducted to achieve this normalization. The third is effectively communicating to the markets and the public about our intended policy framework and our plan to get there. I believe, as part of its communications, the Federal Reserve would do well to adopt an explicit numerical inflation goal, just as the Bank of England and many other central banks do. This type of clarity will reduce uncertainty and limit discretion that may lead to greater instability. Let me discuss each of these three elements of exit. For the U.S., I believe normalization should be a return to a framework in which the federal funds rate is the FOMC’s primary policy instrument and the Fed’s balance sheet is composed predominantly of short- to medium-term Treasury securities, as it was before the crisis. This means the Fed will need to sell assets from its balance sheet and shrink the volume of excess reserves to a level that allows the federal funds rate to trade above the interest rate the Fed pays on excess reserves and below the Fed’s primary credit rate, the lending rate the Fed charges for discount window loans. This framework is generally referred to as a corridor system and is fairly common among central banks around the world, including the Bank of England and the ECB.  As I mentioned, the Fed’s balance sheet is currently three times larger than it was before the crisis and is composed of longer-term Treasuries and longer-term mortgage-backed securities and housing agency debt. Normalization will require returning the composition of the Fed’s portfolio to predominantly Treasuries with a significantly shorter duration. In my view, the central bank should not be in the business of allocating credit to specific sectors of the economy, such as housing. That credit allocation should rest with the markets and the fiscal authorities should they choose to intervene, not the central bank. By mingling monetary and fiscal policies, the Federal Reserve puts at risk the independence of its monetary policy and therefore the desirable economic outcomes it is capable of delivering. We should make it clear to the public that normalization of monetary policy will mean a return to the federal funds rate as our primary policy instrument and that means a much smaller balance sheet, dominated by Treasury securities. Policymakers should also develop and articulate a coherent and credible plan for normalization. In late March, I proposed a systematic, rule-based approach that would involve the Fed’s selling assets from its portfolio as it increased its policy rate, with the pace of sales dependent on the state of the economy. The plan would get us back to a normal operating environment in a timely manner, with the Fed’s balance sheet reduced to a size that would again allow the federal funds rate to be the primary policy instrument. An alternative plan might be to set the balance sheet on something like a pre-determined glide path that would shrink the balance sheet steadily over time. In general, changes to the path would face a high threshold. 4 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Perhaps more important than the details of any approach to exit is the very establishment – and communication – of a systematic plan to do so. Of course, monetary policy will always be dependent on the evolution of the economy, but the more we can articulate how we will conduct policy during the transition to a more normal policy framework, the more we will reduce uncertainty and contribute to stability. Indeed, transparency is always an important ingredient in sound monetary policymaking, but as we exit from the period of extraordinary policy, it is even more important. Given the large amount of liquidity present in the U.S. banking system, it is reasonable for the public to be concerned about inflation. As we normalize the policy framework, we, as policymakers, need to do all we can to ensure that the public’s expectations of inflation remain stable. The majority of monetary economists and central banks, including the Bank of England, now consider some form of inflation targeting a best practice. It is time for the Fed to adopt this practice, as I have advocated for nearly 20 years. Some argue that because the Federal Reserve does not have a single mandate for price stability as other central banks do, it should not set an explicit inflation objective. I disagree. The U.S. Congress set the Fed’s mandate to conduct monetary policy to “promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” Adopting an inflation objective does not mean controlling inflation at the expense of economic stability. On the contrary, most economists, myself included, agree that focusing on price stability is the most effective way for monetary policy to promote all parts of its mandate. Moreover, committing to a stated goal to keep inflation low and stable can help to reduce market uncertainty and enhance the credibility and accountability of our central bank. During the transition from a very accommodative policy stance to a more normal operating environment, it is especially important that the public have confidence in the Fed’s commitment to do so in a manner that does not let inflation accelerate. Thus, in my view, this would be an opportune time for the Fed to commit to an explicit numerical inflation objective. It is noteworthy that just within the last year or so, the public discussion in the U.S. has swung from concerns that the U.S. might face a period of sustained deflation to concerns that monetary policy and rising commodity prices could produce higher-than-desired inflation. These swings in public concern indicate how much uncertainty there is in the lookout for inflation. We should seek to ensure that this does not translate into a lack of confidence in the Fed to maintain price stability. As we work to exit from this period of extreme monetary accommodation in a way that neither leads to higher inflation nor risks undermining the recovery, the public’s confidence in the Fed’s commitment to price stability will be crucial. For this reason, it would be highly desirable for the Federal Reserve to publicly commit to a clear and explicit inflation objective. While an inflation target is not a panacea for all the challenges facing monetary policymakers, it is an important element in a credible program for monetary and economic stability. Conclusion In summary, my forecast is for the economy to continue to expand at a moderate pace and for inflation to move back down from its current level as oil prices stabilize. Despite weakness in the first quarter, I expect annual growth to be 3 to 3½ percent over the remainder of this year and next. As the economy strengthens, prospects for labor markets will continue to improve, with the unemployment rate descending to between 7 to 7½ percent by the end of 2012. As the economy evolves, the Federal Reserve remains committed to its long-run statutory goals of price stability and maximum employment. We must carefully watch for signals of inflation and altered expectations to ensure that monetary policy stays ahead of the curve. As BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches we move forward in this time of change, clear communications regarding our actions and objectives will be of the utmost importance. I believe we can be most successful in exiting from this period of extraordinary accommodation and nontraditional policies if we communicate a systematic plan that describes where we are headed and how we will get there. Such a plan would be strengthened if the FOMC adopted an explicit numerical objective for inflation, which would help ensure that inflation expectations remain well anchored. 
Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Innovative financing for transformation Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Langkawi International Dialogue 2011: Innovative Financing for Transformation, Putrajaya, 19 June 2011. *      *      * The world is transforming. Our motivation for accelerating our own pace of transformation is to ensure that we will be able to effectively participate in this new economic and financial environment, and in the process, maximize our potential performance. Central to this is having a well functioning financial system and the right financial policies. The recent financial crisis in the developed world has shown that when things have gone wrong in the financial system, the consequences have been catastrophic. Instead of creating wealth – it destroys wealth, instead of generating employment – it results in job losses, instead of facilitating economic progress – it derails growth and development. It is my great honour and pleasure to speak at this 2011 Langkawi International Dialogue on Innovative Financing for Transformation. The overarching objectives of economic transformation is surely to generate sustainable and balanced growth, to improve living standards, to create employment opportunities and to achieve a more inclusive development. This decade has however seen how innovative financing in several of the developed economies have fuelled excessive levels of leverage that have resulted in deeply indebted private and public sectors, which in turn have become highly destabilizing to their financial systems and to their economies. The challenge before us is how then should the financial system be developed and regulated so that these pitfalls will be avoided while at the same time remaining dynamic and innovative so that we can push our frontiers and gain the progress that we aspire. While innovation remains essential to economic progress, it needs to be within the context of stronger governance and sound risk management practices. Positive innovation can make enormous contributions to economic performance. The financial system has to deliver the essential financial services that would cater to the financial needs of all sectors of the economy – from households, small and medium enterprises, including to micro enterprises and to the corporate sector. The financial system also has to take into account the fundamental changes taking place in the global economy and the growing participation of emerging economies in the global economy. As we become more interlinked, financial systems also need to become more internationalized to facilitate and reinforce this trend. The role of the financial system is essentially to effectively intermediate and to meaningfully mobilize funds including from across borders to be channeled to productive economic activity. Such intermediation must be firmly anchored and aligned to the objective of generating sustainable and balanced growth, raising the standards of living, creating employment and promoting development. With clarity in the role of the financial system and the importance of its link to the economy, the range of the financial solutions offered needs to meet these highly differentiated and changing requirements. For the households, the financial system provides a means to optimally spread their income and consumption over their life cycle. Accumulating wealth via saving, investment and borrowing in the initial years, and de-accumulating of the wealth during the later years, such as through pension products and annuity schemes during retirement. This is particularly important as a population matures. The absence of these products will impose tremendous burdens to the government fiscal position and the overall standards of living. The Malaysian experience has been to encourage diversity of financial product offerings to ensure that the needs of all segments of the population are met. This includes, from having basic banking products at negligible cost for lower income groups, to the wider range of BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
savings, investment and protection products for the middle income groups and for the higher income groups, wealth management and comprehensive advisory services. In the area of financing, a key priority for any country is financing to promote home ownership. This is to meet an important basic need of society and to encourage wealth accumulation among households. Malaysia approached this by initially establishing Cagamas, a national mortgage corporation, which enables banks to source long-term funding to match long-term housing loans. The national mortgage corporation has continued to evolve to promote the secondary market for housing loans via securitization and mitigating risks in mortgage financing through the provision of mortgage insurance. A recent innovative arrangement introduced this year is the risk-sharing arrangements between the government and banks to provide opportunities for the lower income and younger segments of the population to own homes and thus accumulate wealth at an earlier age. Another important form of wealth accumulation is the collective investment schemes such as unit trusts. The pooling of savings provides economies of scale, access to professional investment managers, as well as a diversified investment portfolio. In Malaysia, this was initially promoted through the establishment of government sponsored national savings scheme (Amanah Saham Nasional). Participation of the average household has now paved the way for the growth in the private unit trust industry. The formation of such national savings schemes has also contributed to the development of an institutional investor base in Malaysia that has been able to mobilize substantial volumes of savings. The mobilization of these funds provides the potential for funding of businesses and the corporate sector and for project financing including for infrastructure development. As SMEs and micro enterprises form the majority of business enterprises in most countries, and as they contribute significantly to GDP, employment and wealth creation, efficient access to finance is critical. The Malaysian experience to address this has been the establishment of the Credit Guarantee Corporation to assist viable SMEs with inadequate track record to access financing by providing guarantees and credit enhancements for SME financing. The credit evaluation is carried out by banks, and by the CGC. For countries where SME-credit evaluation skills are scarce, the centralisation of expertise using such an arrangement would be able to facilitate this as banks build their capacity. There have also been a wide range of innovative financial products and services to support this agenda. A highly successful programme in Malaysia has been the RM2 billion SME Assistance Guarantee Scheme which was established in February 2009 to ensure that viable SMEs adversely impacted by the economic slowdown would have continued access to financing. Under this scheme, SMEs are able to obtain financing with an 80% guarantee cover provided by the Credit Guarantee Corporation. The cost of the guarantee was borne by the Central Bank. This scheme has assisted about 10,000 SMEs from all sectors of the economy in sustaining their businesses and preserving employment.  Venture capital and private equity funds are required to provide early stage financing for innovative SMEs. Due to the highly specialised focus of such funds, it is common for fund-of-funds to be established as a pooling mechanism for the purpose of risk diversification. However, the success of these forms of financing depend very much on the enabling environment in terms of availability of talent as well as deep and relatively well developed equity market for early stage investors to “exit”. Finally, micro financing is important to provide access to funding for micro enterprises. There are now many highly innovative schemes to achieve outreach, including by mobile banking and agent banking. Critical to the success of such financing is pricing and accessibility. The world has seen different degrees of success of such financing. Critical to their success is the enabling environment of which equal attention has to be accorded. This includes the institutional arrangements, the business model for such financing, the regulation and policies and the supervisory oversight. This will ensure its sustainability as a form of financing. 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Another important segment of businesses is the corporate sector. Established corporates will require efficient sources of financing for expansion as well as advisory services to maximise enterprise value. A deep and liquid bond market with good information flow and modern infrastructure will allow for efficient pricing of corporate issuances – from short term commercial papers to support liquidity and working capital, to longer term bonds for project financing. Treasury services are also important to manage the funds of larger corporations to achieve higher returns as well as access to risk management and hedging instruments to manage foreign exchange, commodity price and other forms of market risk. As economies develop, governments will need to increasingly shift from being a driver of growth towards having a facilitating role and to promote the private sector as the driver of growth. Malaysia has leveraged on the comparative advantage of the public and private sectors through Public Private Partnerships for infrastructure projects. The objective is to optimise on the cost efficiency and sustainability of the financing model, so as to enhance the financial viability of the infrastructure project. This is achieved as risks are transferred to parties that can best manage those risks. Hence, the public sector can provide the regulatory risk guarantees and incentives to ensure adequate demand, whilst the private sector will raise financing as well as technical expertise. This model was successfully implemented for the biggest highway concessionaire in Malaysia. PLUS operates and maintains 973km of expressways in Peninsular Malaysia, stretching from the border of Thailand to Singapore and linking all major cities on the west coast of Peninsular Malaysia.  Financing for infrastructure development is equally important as this has implications on the fiscal position. To structure the most competitive and efficient financing for each stage of the infrastructure project schedule, several options can be considered – including direct funding from the budget, the issuance of long-term Government bonds, the issuance of long-term Government-guaranteed bonds, the securitization of works completed, and the issuance of long-term bonds backed by the Government’s undertaking to make deferred payments. The actual funding mix adopted needs to be based on the Government’s fiscal position and on economic conditions. By adopting a mix of strategies over the overall duration of the project, the Government can optimise on the funding costs. Another major area of financing that has been a challenge both in the developed and emerging economies is for health care. The structure of healthcare provision requires a balanced socialised element to avoid both the market failure of a largely privately driven system (e.g. as experienced in US) and the inefficiencies of fully public systems (e.g. several European countries). Social health insurance schemes based on earnings contributions is a means by which such funding sources can become a complementary source of funding to public sector. Such an institutional arrangement should provide high quality basic healthcare for the population whilst private health insurance can have a complementary role in providing higher level care for those that have the means to absorb these costs. In developing a financial sector that will deliver innovative financing for economic transformation throughout the different phases of development requires several supporting elements. These include: a. Having strong financial institutions that are resilient to withstand the economic cycle; b. Establishment of a credit information system; c. Development of a domestic bond market for financing large investments for both the public and private sectors. This includes the necessary infrastructure to facilitate the functioning of the bond market; d. Having the talent pool in the financial services industry; e. Financial literacy has to be advanced aggressively; f. Effective structure to ensure sufficient supervisory oversight to ensure soundness and stability of the financial system; BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches g. Mechanism for resolution of debt problems including for public and private sector; h. Potential to leverage on technology. This in particular enhances distribution channel and outreach; i. Consumer protection framework needs to be in place; and j. Surveillance mechanism needs to be in place. Finally, I would like to discuss the importance of Islamic finance as an important mode for financing economic transformation. Islamic finance requires financial transactions to be supported by an underlying productive economic activity that will generate legitimate income and wealth. This gives rise to a close link between financial transactions and productive flows. Therefore, the growth in Islamic financial assets is generally in line with the growth of underlying economic activities, thereby ensuring that the financial system is always grounded to the real economy. Other inherent features arising from risk sharing also contribute to the stability and integrity of Islamic finance. Thus, Islamic finance, embraced in its entirety, is supportive of sustainable economic growth. Islamic finance offers an extensive range of innovative financial products and services from consumer financing, asset and wealth management to Islamic insurance and capital markets. The sukuk market has become a highly competitive fundraising option for large scale projects and infrastructure development. With an annual growth rate of 40 percent, sukuk instruments are fast emerging as an attractive new asset class for investors, while evolving to become a preferred financing and capital raising option for issuers. In Malaysia, the sukuk market now accounts for more than fifty percent of our bond market, drawing the participation of not only our own corporates but also a wide range of international corporations and multilateral agencies. In Malaysia, a comprehensive Islamic financial system operates in parallel to the conventional financial system. This is now internationalized to enhance our interlinkages with other emerging economies and traditional markets.  The emerging economies will be the key drivers of economic transformation over the next decades, both within and across borders resulting in a more integrated global economy. It is therefore imperative that efforts are increased in ensuring collaboration and sharing of experience for the common good. The Langkawi International Dialogue continues to be an important platform for such exchanges and it is a great honour for me to have this opportunity to be here today.  Thank You. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Erkki Liikanen: Economic and Monetary Union – lessons from the recent crisis Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the European Economics and Financial Centre (EEFC), Distinguished Speakers Seminar, London, 16 June 2011. *      *      * It is a special pleasure for me to speak here in London and I thank professor Scobie for the kind invitation. The Bank of Finland has had close contacts with the City for a very long time. Actually, we should now be celebrating 150 years of that relationship, since it was in 1861 when the Bank of Finland first opened correspondent accounts with the London bank, N.M. Rothschild & Sons. A very special relationship exists also between the national central banks of the two countries, the Bank of Finland and the Bank of England. This was recently highlighted by the Governor, Mervyn King, when he spoke at the 200th anniversary conference of the Bank of Finland in Helsinki last month (yes, the Bank of Finland turns 200 this year). I was impressed to hear that Governor King had actually gone through the Old Lady’s archives and had found some interesting evidence of how close the relationship between the two central banks was already in the 1920’s and 1930’s. That was the time when Risto Ryti, a well known anglophile was Governor of the Bank of Finland. Governor Ryti travelled regularly to London and got to know well his British counterpart, the famous Montagu Norman. A particularly vivid example of Governor King’s findings is a letter from Governor Ryti to Cameron Cobbold, then a Bank official and later Governor, dated 18th June 1935, which discussed the forthcoming visit of Cobbold and another official, Humphrey Mynors, to Finland. Ryti wrote: “I shall have great pleasure in receiving you and Mr Mynors at the Bank of Finland at which I shall arrive on 4 July at 11:00 a.m. from the countryside, where I will be spending my summer holidays at that time. Permit me to invite you and Mr Mynors to a luncheon at the Bank after your arrival. I propose that we, after having discussed matters of mutual interest, start for a little trip to some nice places in South Finland, where I shall arrange for fishing possibilities or other summer enjoyment in which you and Mr Mynors might be interested”. On the letter is a handwritten comment by Mr Cobbold to Mr Mynors “this sounds like real central banking cooperation! What are your summer sports?” To which Mr Mynors responds by saying “Does this mean bringing a mosquito net?” At the time of that innocent letter, the world was gradually recovering from the Great Depression, the worst financial disaster of the century. That recovery was undermined by a surge of global protectionism and growing political instability in Europe towards the end of the 1930’s. The fledgling attempts at international economic policy cooperation under the League of Nations and the new Bank for International Settlements were not effective enough to solve those problems. Much has changed since that letter was written 76 years ago. However, we are once again recovering from a global economic and financial crisis. This time, economic cooperation, especially between central banks, enabled us to prevent the crisis from developing into a spiral of deflation and depression. However, as all of you know, the situation continues to be difficult and even precarious. The foundation for a sustainable recovery is far from ready and much more needs to be done. My topic today is the economy of the euro area. I propose to discuss the current state of the EMU and its challenges and prospects. I will approach my topic from the perspective of a central banker. Thus I will start with monetary policy – the very core of the central bank’s 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches responsibility – and move then on to broader issues of financial markets and budgetary and economic policy. Monetary policy evaluation By what measure should we judge the performance of the EMU? When the monetary union was designed, the most important concern was how to ensure the stability of the value of money. The stability of the Deutsche mark and the monetary policy of the Bundesbank were important role-models in the construction of the whole euro area, and even for central banks elsewhere. There was a strong consensus that the common currency should be as stable as the Deutsche mark had been. At the time when the Maastricht Treaty was signed in February 1992, the signatories knew that the German inflation rate over the previous 10 years had been 2.4 % per annum on average. This admirable stability was desired for the whole monetary union. How have we done in this respect? The ECB adopted a target for price stability: inflation should be less than but close to 2 % in the medium term. This objective has been achieved. As Mr. Trichet has been able to note, during the twelve years of EMU, the average inflation rate in the euro area has been 1.97 % per annum. So, judging by the primary objective, we can say that the common currency has not disappointed the expectations of 1992. It must be emphasized that price stability has also been maintained relatively well during the recent financial crisis. In the early phase of the crisis, there was an imminent danger of a financial collapse and ensuing deflation. To keep the monetary situation under control, the ECB complemented its interest rate policy with a variety of unconventional or non-standard measures. These improved the liquidity of the banking system and the bond markets. The measures included, among other things, the much discussed bond purchases under the so-called Securities Market Programme. These actions should be judged by the results. The euro has remained strong, the financial meltdown has been avoided, and inflation expectations have remained consistent with the ECB’s price stability objective. So, the crisis of the last years has not been a crisis of the euro as a currency. The currency has remained stable, and also strong in the international context. This achievement is remarkable, but it does not mean that there is cause for complacency. Present challenges to monetary policy In the area of monetary policy, our fundamental task is to ensure that euro area citizens and the economy can put their trust in the euro, also in the future. In this task, there are two major challenges. The first challenge is the worldwide rapid increase in prices of raw materials and energy. This is quickly reflected in the inflation statistics, and monetary policy cannot do very much to stop it. But what monetary policy must do is to ensure that the cost impulses from the raw materials prices do not trigger second-round effects in domestic costs. In order to avoid second-round effects, it is crucial to keep inflation expectations well anchored to the ECB’s price stability objective. This is all about trust. ECB policy and the supporting communications must inspire public trust in price stability. The more firmly the inflation expectations can be stabilized, the better monetary policy can support recovery of the euro area economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Communications are really effective only if monetary policy lives up to its commitment to price stability. And this is why the independence of the ECB is important. Central bank independence was the key to the success of the Bundesbank, it has been the key to the success of the ECB, and it must be the key to future success. The second and more acute challenge to the EMU is economic divergence across the euro area. Some countries are now growing well and moving towards a satisfactory economic equilibrium. In others, the economic situation is still very fragile and shows little, if any, signs of improvement. In this respect, the situation is clearly more difficult now than it was during the first ten years of the euro. In a sense of course, economic divergence among the euro area countries is beyond the reach of the ECB. Monetary policy is formulated for the whole area of 331 million people. And they all equally deserve price stability, which it is the task of the ECB. However, the problem of growing economic divergence is very serious for the EMU as a whole and therefore, it is a matter of concern also for the ECB. The monetary union can work well only if there is sufficient convergence in economic policy and economic performance across the euro area countries. The financial system Let me now turn from monetary policy to the financial system: that is, to banks and financial markets. The good health of the banking system is an important condition for sustainable economic recovery. This is the case throughout the world, also for the euro area. Perhaps this task is especially urgent for the euro area, because uncertainty regarding the health of banks aggravates the negative effects of economic imbalances and divergence in the area. A clear strengthening of the banks’ capital base is long overdue. This should be the task primarily of the shareholders of the weaker banks, who should refrain from taking dividends or should inject more capital if needed. In some cases, government investment in bank equity may also be necessary. Coming from Finland, I understand very well the political problems involved in cleaning up the banking system. In the 1990’s, after the Finnish banking crisis, the Finnish government had to support an asset management company that handled the banks’ problem assets, in amounts that at one point reached about 10 per cent of GDP. Most of this money was later recovered, but in the meantime taxpayers were furious. The public frustration with the costs of the banking crisis has not been forgotten in my country. Despite the short-term discomfort it entails, the resolution of banking problems is necessary for us to move forward to a lasting recovery. On the one hand, the recapitalization of the weaker but viable banks is necessary to restore confidence. On the other hand, the well-managed closure of unprofitable banks is necessary, so that they do not distort the market for the viable banks. Another challenge is to improve banking practices and banking culture. Reform of banking regulation is part of this change. Apart from stricter capital requirements, the new regulatory framework will also gradually develop stricter standards for bank liquidity. The risks of making long-term commitments with excessively volatile funding have been amply revealed during the recent crisis. I regard improved regulation as an absolute necessity after the experiences of the last four years. At the same time, we must acknowledge that regulation alone is not enough. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Therefore, what the ongoing reforms really aim for is a change in the culture of banking. Banking must renounce the excessive adventurism of the last decade and develop a stability culture of its own, so that citizens will once more see banking as an engine of solid economic progress rather than a conduit for short-term speculation. Macroprudential policy One of the key lessons of the latest global financial crisis is that central banks – and other authorities – need to pay much more attention to financial stability and macroprudential oversight. New institutions in which central banks play a key role have been created to identify systemic risks and to take appropriate action. Examples of such institutes include the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) in the EU, the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) within the Bank of England and the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) in the United States. Macroprudential policy is still in its formative phase. But it is clear that new tools need to be developed in order to complement the more traditional instruments of monetary policy. These tools will pertain to capital standards, lending practices, and liquidity management of credit institutions. And the tools must work in relation to the changing financial market situation, preventing the development of excessive systemic risks and contagion. The recent financial crisis painfully showed how quickly financial crises can spread over national borders in a world of integrated financial markets and systems. Because of the ever-deepening financial integration, financial cycles are likely to be highly correlated across countries also in the future. In such a world, a successful macroprudential policy in any country entails positive externalities in the form of reduced financial risks in other countries. Conversely, erring on the side of inaction produces negative externalities to other countries, as financial problems will spread across national and currency borders. I argue that in the absence of effective international coordination, national policymakers are likely to fail to internalize these positive externalities. This could lead to national macroprudential policies that are overly passive and dangerously weak at preventing the future global financial crises. Let me elaborate a bit on this idea. Consider a strong upturn of an international financial cycle, during which asset prices climb rapidly, leverage increases excessively and prices of risk decline simultaneously in many countries with interconnected financial markets. This scenario of course resembles the developments in the years preceding the latest global financial crisis. To prevent these risks from materializing into a systemic crisis, national authorities should tighten their macroprudential policies and possibly other economic policies. Now, consider the decision-making problem of a macroprudential authority or body in an individual country. This authority may find it difficult to tighten the national macroprudential policy for two reasons. First, there is the well known problem of “taking the punch bowl away in the middle of the party”. It has been pointed out that this political difficulty is likely to be even worse in the macroprudential context than in terms of monetary policy: there is at least some constituency that dislikes inflation, but probably none that dislikes the intoxicating feeling of getting richer as asset prices climb higher. Second, as I mentioned earlier, a country that tightens its macroprudential policies in isolation would internalize only a part of the financial stability benefits of macroprudential tightening while bearing all the perceived costs in terms of a loss of competitiveness for its financial industry. This may lead to a first-mover disadvantage problem, where no country is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 willing to be the first to tighten its macroprudential policy unless it knows that other countries are committed to doing the same. Unless properly addressed, these disincentives to pursuance of active national macroprudential policies may lead to a bad equilibrium, where global macroprudential policies become stuck in an overly passive stance. This implies that the identification of effective macroprudential instruments – which in itself is a formidable task – does not guarantee that these instruments will be used efficiently. What can we do to avoid this bad equilibrium? I have three suggestions. First, to relieve the extensive political pressure not to take action, we should try our best to develop and improve rules-based macroprudential policy. Instruments such as dynamic loan loss provisions used in Spain and the capital conservation buffer of the Basel III framework, could work as automatic stabilisers that do not require continuous discretionary policy decisions. The countercyclical capital buffer requirement included in the Basel III framework also includes a rules-based element, as national authorities are advised to use an indicator developed by the Basel Committee as a benchmark in their national buffer decisions. Economists at the Bank of Finland have done some preliminary analysis on the feasibility of rules-based loan-to-value requirements. I urge the research community to intensify its efforts to develop simple and robust rules-based macroprudential instruments. Second, national macroprudential authorities need sufficiently robust mandates, independence and legitimacy to make their discretionary macroprudential policy decisions. Efficient macroprudential actions will be highly unpopular. The costs of these actions are immediate whereas their benefits become visible only over periods of years. The weaker the macroprudential authorities, the more likely they are to bow to intense political pressure not to intervene when systemic risks are mounting. Third, we need adequate international coordination of national macroprudential policies. In the EU, the European Systemic Risk Board should take this coordinating role. We must remember that all EU countries are part of it; Governors are voting members and supervisors are present at the meetings. Without doubt, this is a difficult task. The ESRB has to strike the right balance between directing its recommendations on macroprudential policies to individual authorities or making collective recommendations to a larger group of authorities. Individual recommendations may be more effective in alleviating the first-mover coordination problem but may, at worst, be regarded by national authorities as accusations that they have failed to do their job properly. In such a case, their response may be defensive rather than constructive. Collective recommendations, in turn, would largely remove the stigma related to individually targeted recommendations but may be blunter and hence less appropriate to deal with more localized problems. Finding a workable solution to this trade-off will be one the key challenges for the ESRB in the coming years. Government finances and economic policy Finally, let me turn to an even broader category of the current challenges, the challenges to economic policy. When the monetary union was planned in Europe, there was much debate about the degree of economic convergence between countries that is necessary for forming a monetary union. Some people thought that a high degree of economic convergence was a necessary precondition, whereas others argued that membership in a monetary union and the necessity to hold on to it would perforce bring about the necessary adjustments and convergence. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Because of the insistence of Germany and others, emphasis was placed on economic convergence when the monetary union was established: reasonable entry criteria were set for membership in the union, and members’ behaviour was regulated by the Stability and Growth Pact. Now we know that this emphasis on convergence did not carry enough force. Shaken by the steep recession of 2008, several countries got unexpectedly to the danger zone. Now, we need even tighter economic convergence, and we need better economic governance within the EMU. The “Euro Plus” pact recently signed by the European Council is a step in the right direction. The challenges which the economic crisis poses to economic policy in the EMU are twofold. First, the government finances of the problem countries must be stabilized. This takes tough measures, – expenditure control, tax increases, and sales of government assets – and it takes some time. Second, we need a tighter convergence of competitiveness of the member countries of the EMU. The convergence of competitiveness is needed to get the problem countries to grow again, and to return their finances to a clearly sustainable trajectory. As regards stabilization of the problem countries, it has been necessary to support their stabilization programmes via temporary financing from the other partner countries, and from the IMF. I believe this support has been necessary in order to buy time for adjustment, and to avoid a very risky illiquidity situation, with the possibility of contagion. At the same time, it is important to understand that this financing is only temporary. Moreover, these loans can only be made under strict conditionality, most importantly in the context of an adjustment programme which will restore market confidence in the medium term. We must strengthen economic governance mechanisms in the euro area to minimize the risk of additional crises in government finances in the future. I especially welcome the initiative on fiscal norms. These nationally implemented norms could help “internalize” the fiscal discipline in each country and render the matter less of an issue of EU policing of the countries’ current fiscal actions. In the Finnish case, for example, we have good experiences with medium-term budgetary frameworks. This system has made it easier to follow a planned fiscal policy and resist one-off pressures for increasing government spending. And even the Finnish system of budgetary frameworks can and should be developed further, of course. I should add at this point that I do not see the financial support arrangements for Greece, Ireland, of Portugal as steps leading to a “transfer union”. Transfer union would mean one-way subsidies from some governments to cover other governemts’ deficits. This would not be consistent with the underlying principles of the EU. As Mr. Trichet has put it, “it is fully recognised that this economic union must be one where countries that wisely follow a virtuous economic path are rewarded, and those that pursue unsustainable policies have to internalize the costs of their actions.” I fully endorse this view. Politics We have now moved well into the area of politics. Let me say a few more words about my own country in this context. Finland was in the political spotlight recently. This happened because the financial support to Portugal became a focus of the electoral campaign during the parliamentary elections in April. Parties sensed – or feared – that voters would not easily accept continued support operations to stabilize the finances of the weaker euro area countries, and the issue became heated. There were even worries that Finland would prevent EU support for Portugal. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 This happened although the euro has enjoyed relatively strong support in Finland. According to the Eurobarometer survey conducted last November, 78% of Finns supported the common currency and less than 20% were negative about it. And of course, Finns have been much more positive about the euro than the other Scandinavian nations, for instance. For Finland, joining the monetary union meant two things: a seat at the table where decisions are made, and the promise of more stable money. We wanted to avoid a repetition of the traumatic currency and banking crisis of the 1990’s. We put our trust in the euro as a guarantor of monetary stability. After the fiscal crisis erupted a year ago in Greece, when support had to be provided to that country and to other countries in difficulty, there was a sense of disillusionment in Finland. People remembered how Finland exerted a huge effort to put its own house in order after the economic crisis of the early 1990’s, and then qualified for monetary union. Having gone through that, many people ask, why should we now support others who apparently have not followed the commonly agreed rules? And what was the responsibility of banks and other investors who had carelessly underestimated the risks involved in lending to these countries? We may understand the reasons for such frustration. But I for one do not accept any narrowly nationalistic or anti-EU undertones which sometimes accompany the expressions of that frustration. Responsible politicians in every European country should use their leadership to ensure that the idea of constructive participation prevails over the temptations of the nationalistic approach. Political fragmentation would weaken the prospects of recovery and would make it considerably more difficult to solve the challenges to the economic and monetary union. Concluding comments I want to conclude with some remarks about the outlook for the euro area. The beginning of this year was encouraging in terms of the average growth. The year-on-year growth rate, 2.5 per cent, was the highest we have seen since the onset of the last recession. However, this positive early phase of the year was dimmed by the fact that growth differentials between countries continued to be large and that inflation exceeded our expectations. Looking ahead, I expect the recovery to continue. Still, there are many reasons why uncertainties to the economic outlook are larger than usual. According to the eurosystem staff projections published a week ago, GDP growth in 2011 should be in the range 1.5 to 2.3 per cent. That is a wide range. Next year’s forecast range is even wider, between 0.6 and 2.8 per cent. Part of the uncertainty regarding growth prospects emanates from the global economic situation. The growth of the world economy shows continuing momentum and appears increasingly self-sustained. This helps euro area exports and is of course a positive factor. On the other hand, the global expansion of demand is largely based in the emerging economies, many of which are running at full capacity and facing the risk of overheating. This fact makes the situation somewhat precarious, and a more balanced growth pattern in the world economy would clearly be better for stability. The very rapid growth in the emerging economies is also one of the causes of high energy prices. The high cost of energy and raw materials hurts euro area recovery by eating into real incomes and thus weighs down private consumption. In that way, the energy-intensive nature of present global growth is a risk for the euro area. Mostly because of energy, inflation in the euro area is projected to stay above the 2 per cent threshold in 2011. The range in the Eurosystem staff projections was 2.5 to 2.7 per cent. For 2012, inflationary pressures are projected to weaken. Ultimately, it is the responsibility of monetary policy to ensure that this moderation will take place. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches The higher-than-expected consumer price inflation poses further risks to growth as well. One of them relates to the danger of wage inflation. Presently, the euro area recovery is driven mainly by exports and private investment. However, if energy prices are transmitted into higher wage demands, then profitability and competitiveness of the euro area economy will weaken, and this would hurt both exports and investment. In addition to the global factors, internal tensions within the euro area economy continue to be a major source of uncertainty for growth. In the current situation, disruptions to the workings of financial markets might easily spill over to the real economy, depressing the demand for goods and services, and so damaging banks and hurting government budgets. Even more than usually, growth in the euro area cannot now be taken for granted. It is highly conditional on the success of economic policy, in bringing about a more balanced economic landscape within the EMU. The policy agenda which I have reviewed in this talk is a large one. It is also a difficult agenda, not least because it must be realized in a cooperative effort by the EU and euro area governments. While policy makers and market observers are well aware of the difficulties, I think that they are also aware of what is at stake. Therefore, I am confident that the challenges now facing the EMU will be successfully tackled and a foundation will be gradually laid for sustainable growth in Europe. Thank you for your attention. 
Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Presentation of the 2010 Annual Report Testimony of Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, to the Parliamentary Committee on Economic and Financial Affairs, on the occasion of the presentation of the 2010 Annual Report, Madrid, 21 June 2011. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, I appear before you today on the occasion of the presentation of the 2010 Annual Report. As was the case last year when I gave testimony, the circumstances surrounding us remain complicated. It would not be overstating the case to say we are at a crucial crossroads for the future of the economic and monetary union and for the anchoring of the recovery in Spain. The crisis that broke in the summer of 2007 has gone through various phases and is bringing major consequences to bear. A year back, before this Committee, I spoke of the events that had shaken the euro area in the spring of 2010, with the emergence of the sovereign debt crisis, the response of the authorities with the approval of the financial assistance programme for Greece, and the first steps towards the reform of the euro area governance mechanisms. The effects of the crisis on the Spanish economy were very serious, but economic policy responded with an ambitious fiscal adjustment plan, fresh impetus to the financial restructuring process and the launch of structural reforms in various fields. Set against the serious circumstances then facing Spain, it may be said that the right approach was chosen, and the initiatives adopted helped mitigate the risks that had materialised. Despite this favourable change of course, the situation twelve months on remains complex, both from the European perspective and from the domestic standpoint of the Spanish economy. The European sovereign debt crisis is the most serious episode to impact the euro area since the single currency was founded. Its very nature and the difficulties in tackling it have, moreover, highlighted the shortcomings of the institutional framework of the euro. These include most notably the insufficient degree of fiscal discipline imposed by the Stability and Growth Pact, the absence of mechanisms to check the build-up of macroeconomic imbalances and the lack of tools with which to manage crisis situations such as those witnessed. Yet we must also acknowledge that there has been significant progress in recent months in these three areas. There have been various legislative initiatives to reinforce the Stability and Growth Pact, to establish arrangements for the prevention and correction of macroeconomic (other than fiscal) imbalances and, finally, to address crisis situations with the so-called European Stability Mechanism.  But beyond the necessary reform of the economic governance of the euro, the difficult position of the Irish, Portuguese and, above all, Greek economies must be redressed. Tensions are at a peak and the outcome of the situation may have very important consequences for the euro area as a whole. It is often acknowledged that European construction has been forged through the overcoming of recurrent episodes of crisis, from which the project has always emerged strengthened. Let us hope this is true this time and that the European authorities’ decisions will rise to the challenge. The Spanish economy was particularly affected by the sovereign debt crisis when the Greek and Irish economies had to resort to adjustment programmes. Conversely, when the same happened with Portugal in April this year, the impact was less, despite our closer economic, trade and financial ties with this country. This was due to the set of measures that had been BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
adopted previously to speed the approval of some reforms and thus tackle confidence problems. In any event, the Spanish economy remains under the scrutiny of the markets, which continue to demand an unjustifiably high level of sovereign risk premia. In past weeks we have witnessed the effect caused by the recent discussions in Europe on the potential participation of the private sector in the bail-out of the Greek economy, while doubts resurfaced over the seriousness of Spain’s commitment to pushing through outstanding reforms. The spread of the sovereign debt crisis to Spain was ultimately due to the presence in our country of certain factors of vulnerability as a result of the imbalances that had built up during the previous upturn. And these were compounded by the factors that had emerged during the crisis, such as the high unemployment rate and the burgeoning budget deficit. The main imbalances accumulated in the phase of strong growth were attributable to a sharp expansion in demand that gave rise to a substantial increase in private-sector debt, excesses in the real estate sector, and price and cost increases that tended to crowd out domestic output in favour of imports, systematically raising the external deficit.  The unfolding of the economic crisis further complicated the situation. Firstly, because it gave rise to severe job destruction, as a result of shortcomings in the workings of the labour market. At 21%, the unemployment level has not only highlighted the need to reform the institutional framework of this market; the figure also raises doubts about the Spanish economy’s capacity to restore its potential growth and ensure the sustainability of its public finances. In this respect, the rapid fiscal deterioration has been one of the factors that has increased our country’s exposure to the euro area debt crisis. Our starting point was a healthy one, with a budget surplus in 2007 and a low public debt ratio. But the deterioration was so sharp that, in the space of scarcely two years, the deficit climbed above 11% of GDP and debt moved into a delicate dynamic just as the financial markets began to worry about the expansionary deviation of public finances in other countries. In this climate of nervousness, the high levels of private-sector debt, the need for balance-sheet write-downs in the financial sector and the difficulty the economy faced in growing at a sufficiently high level all weighed on the perception of the sustainability of our public finances.  Moreover, the banking system, which had negotiated the first wave of the international financial crisis without excessive difficulties, came up against bigger problems when the main elements of the underlying macroeconomic crisis began to be felt at banks. Combining with this was the tightening of financing conditions for credit institutions raising funds abroad, as a result of the prevailing instability on financial markets. Faced with all these circumstances, it was vital to firmly show that matters could be turned around and that Spain was not bound to follow the path of instability of other countries. To do this, the change in economic policy stance last spring was essential, since it demonstrated a willingness to react to and redress the imbalances.  Given the source of the tensions, the priority was to right the trajectory of public finances. To this end, an ambitious fiscal consolidation plan was approved in May last year. It brought forward the bulk of the adjustment to be made to the years 2010 and 2011. In parallel, there was a patent and pressing need to tackle the labour market shortcomings that were hampering the absorption of unemployment and the adjustment of the economy. Hence a labour market reform was launched. Finally, in the financial field, the restructuring initiated a year earlier was accelerated to overhaul the savings bank sector. Thanks to these measures, the recovery of the Spanish economy remained on track, although it continued at a slow pace, due to the very need to undertake unavoidable adjustments. In this respect, the weight of real estate activity in output continued to decline and the external deficit was also further corrected. There was no significant progress in inflation, but this was due to the influence of temporary factors, such as the rise in VAT in 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
July last year and the hike in oil and other commodities prices. Once these effects have worked through, inflation should fall again in the coming months, although for this to happen it will be vital no second-round effects should come about, as these would harm the economy’s competitiveness.  Write-downs of the balance sheets of non-financial corporations and households have continued, with a slight decline in the outstanding balance of credit extended to these agents. In the case of non-financial corporations, behaviour has differed across the productive sectors, with modest increases in financing to companies other than those in real estate development and construction. In the case of households, deleveraging will no doubt be slower, insofar as the bulk of household debts are in mortgage loans extended over long terms, whereby repayment will be gradual.  Adjustment of the imbalances in the economy is vital in order to soundly underpin medium and long-term growth, although in the short run, balance-sheet write-downs in the general government sector, at credit institutions and in households and firms may check any take-off in spending. Fortunately, the sluggishness of domestic demand is being offset by the buoyancy of external demand. The thrust of exports has been substantial and should continue to be so, whereby attaining further gains in competitiveness will be vital. This is the key variable for making the adjustment of the imbalances compatible with the firming of a more dynamic recovery.  If this combination of adjustment and growth were to successfully take root, the Spanish economy could see private-sector deleveraging, the stabilising of public finances and the restructuring of the banking system lead to an increase in confidence, softer financial conditions and, in sum, an improved economic outlook that would boost investment and employment. The role of economic policy remains pivotal for steering the adjustment process. In the case of fiscal policy, the measures adopted last spring marked the starting point. But substantial challenges lie ahead and determination will be required to define and specify the measures that allow public finances to resume a stable path. In the short run, the deficit target for 2011 is ambitious, as it entails a reduction of more than 3 pp of GDP to 6%. But, at the same time, compliance is crucial in view of the financial markets’ extreme sensitivity to the course of public finances. A great effort is needed but, as we have so much at stake, it is vital to prevent deviations from these targets from arising and, should they do so, the necessary measures must immediately be implemented to correct them, as the government has undertaken to do. To see this task through, all levels of government must be involved. This begins with the regional governments, who must firmly redress their budgetary positions, in which connection the strict arrangements for the authorisation of indebtedness may prove helpful. Another confidence-building factor would be greater transparency of regional government budgetary information. True, significant headway has recently been made in this area. But, to dispel doubts about the state of regional finances, it would be very important to see the regular publication of figures for the regional governments as a whole and for each particular region, with the same periodicity, degree of detail, lag and accessibility as State figures. The heavy deterioration in the general government deficit in this crisis advises, moreover, adopting measures to achieve a more balanced budgetary performance both in upturns and in recessions. Here, the government announcement to include in the Budgetary Stability Law a rule whereby general government spending may not exceed the medium-term growth rate of the Spanish economy is most positive. This rule would be immediately applicable to central and to local government, but its adoption by the regional governments would also be pursued.  Fiscal sustainability also needs the economy to swiftly restore its dynamism and to achieve a high potential rate, since this is a fundamental means of financing the public spending increases to which population ageing is inevitably going to lead. The proposed pension BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 
system reform submitted by the government in January this year is also a key step towards curbing these costs. The financial markets have understood that this reform strengthens fiscal sustainability, so it would be advisable to set this proposal down in the form of legislation as soon as possible. Further, the sustainability to which the reform refers should be specified, so that a procedure is in place to ensure at all times that pensions growth is on a sustainable path.  On the financial front, further headway in restructuring the banking sector has been made in 2010 and in 2011 to date. The most significant regulatory step here was the creation, in 2009, of the Fund for the Orderly Restructuring of the Banking Sector (FROB). The FROB has proven most useful in paving the way for merger and integration processes in the savings bank sector, which was highly fragmented. As a result, the number of institutions in the sector has fallen relatively quickly from 45 to 18. In those operations that received funds from the FROB, the institutions concerned submitted restructuring plans that envisage reductions in the number of offices and in other operating expenses.  Other major steps in banking system restructuring have been the reform of the legal regime governing savings banks, approved last summer. And more recently, in February this year, Royal Decree-Law 2/2011 was enacted. This raised the minimum required level of top-quality capital for all credit institutions. It encourages tapping the markets for funds, either through market launches or through the entry of new investors, although the FROB is authorised to inject the capital needed in those cases in which banks cannot meet the new requirements through resort to the markets. This recapitalisation strategy encouraging the entry of private investors into savings banks requires time and effort by all concerned. But it offers clear advantages in the medium and long term as regards the cost to taxpayers and, above all, the soundness and durability of new projects, compared with the nationalisations used in other countries, where problems differed and it was not necessary to pursue beforehand a strategy based on the rationalisation of the weakest institutions to attain gains in efficiency, size and governance. Recapitalisation is moving ahead under the terms and timeframe envisaged in Royal Decree-Law 2/2011. On 11 March, the Banco de España published the capital needed by all institutions to comply with this legislation. Most commercial banks and half of the Spanish savings banks met the requirements laid down. Following the collapse of one of the integration projects, 13 institutions – commercial banks and savings banks – needed to increase their capital. On 14 April, the Banco de España approved the strategies and timeframes submitted by these 13 institutions. Two of them were the subsidiaries of foreign banks that are being recapitalised by their parents. A further two Spanish banks opted to reinforce their capital by tapping the market. Of the remaining institutions, namely nine savings banks or groups of savings banks. four opted as a primary alternative to increase their capital resorting to the markets, and, as a second option, resorting to the FROB. Another savings bank decided to participate in an integration process with a better capitalised institution. Finally, the remaining four savings banks that had to increase their capital to meet the new requirements chose the FROB as their primary option.  The institutions opting to tap the markets, whether through IPOs or through private investors taking a stake in their capital, are currently immersed in the process associated with this strategy. In the case of savings banks that have resorted to the FROB to recapitalise, the business and recapitalisation plans are being analysed, and the valuation of these institutions by independent experts is under way. Accordingly, the entire process is moving ahead as scheduled in the legislation, which stipulates that the new requirements shall be met by 30 September this year, although institutions opting for private investment may apply for a three-month extension, extendible to six months in the case of market listings. Significantly, the recapitalisation process has been accompanied by the transformation of most savings banks into banks, a move that has gone outside and beyond the group of institutions that had to increase their capital to meet the new requirements.  4 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The Banco de España considers that the capital requirements laid down by Royal Decree-Law 2/2011 are sufficient to ensure the soundness of the Spanish banking system, not only under the most likely macroeconomic scenario, but also under harsher scenarios that are most unlikely to occur. As is known, some analysts estimated that the capital needs of our banking system may be greater in the future, under assumptions of a strong deterioration in the Spanish economy. In this respect, the stress tests being conducted at the European level will show to what extent banks need more capital to withstand the extreme scenarios envisaged in these tests. If, as a result of these tests, certain Spanish banks were to evidence additional capital needs that could not be covered by the banks themselves through resort to the markets or to other means, the FROB would provide the funds required, as envisaged in the Royal Decree. In any event, even under highly pessimistic scenarios about the Spanish economy, the use of public funds to recapitalise institutions would entail only a relatively moderate increase in the outstanding balance of Spanish public debt. The restructuring and recapitalisation of the banking system has been accompanied by a significant drive to write down the balance sheets of Spanish deposit institutions which, since January 2008, have recognised and assumed asset impairment losses totalling €96 billion, equivalent to 9% of GDP. Lastly, I should like to stress the progress made in transparency and the significant role this tool has played. In particular, I should remind you that the Europe-wide coordinated stress tests conducted last year were subject in Spain to substantially higher coverage than in other countries. Indeed, the results of all savings banks and all listed commercial banks were published. Consequently, analysts and the public at large have all the information they need to evaluate and assess the situation of even the smallest Spanish institutions, something which cannot be done in other countries. Moreover, the Banco de España required all institutions to publish in detail their exposures to the most troubled assets, along with their volumes of wholesale funding and their liquidity situation. Lastly, another area in which the degree of transparency in Spain is comparatively greater is that relating to provisioning since, unlike standard practice in other countries, the methodologies for provision-measurement and provisioning requirements are public.  Transparency is a most useful tool in financial system restructuring because it helps dispel doubts about the soundness of the Spanish banking sector, it enables public opinion to better understand the need to overhaul the savings banks sector, and it encourages managers and the attendant authorities to promptly undertake the necessary restructuring process.  The Spanish economy faces considerable challenges, which I have reviewed today. But the most pressing task undoubtedly lies in our labour market, the workings of which evidence singular traits compared with those of other countries. In times of crisis such as the present, these traits lead to the adjustment coming about essentially through job destruction and, even in boom times, the unemployment rate holds at an unjustifiably high level. To reduce such high unemployment and to rapidly generate jobs again, we must draw our institutional and legal framework closer to the models of the other developed countries, which allow for greater flexibility in the use of the labour factor with a greater degree of worker protection. In fact, within the euro, the key variable for the recovery of the Spanish economy is competitiveness. And without a far-reaching reform of these institutions, it will be very difficult for the Spanish economy to promptly attain a reasonable rate of sustained growth.  On 10 June the government approved a Decree-Law providing for some improvement to the regulation of collective bargaining. Foreseeably, in its passage through Parliament, greater powers will be extended to workers and employers so that, in mutual agreement, they may decide what they believe is most suitable to enhance the productivity and competitiveness of their companies. The positive effects of this greater flexibility in the labour market would be reinforced if, moreover, measures were taken to increase competition in the markets for goods and services. BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches In sum, we are at a juncture where achieving the right monetary and fiscal stance and successfully managing economic policy will be pivotal for the future of the Spanish economy. The course the European sovereign debt crisis takes will be a determinant of paramount importance. But whatever the scenario the role of our economic policy will remain fundamental for overcoming the inefficiencies highlighted, for redressing the lack of confidence hampering and raising the cost of external funding, and for keeping the Spanish economy safe from any incident that might occur in the European arena. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Andreas Dombret: Reform of the global financial system Opening lecture by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Generation Forum, Eltville, 16 June 2011. *      *      * 1. Introduction Ladies and gentlemen, The reform of the global financial system will be in the limelight during the next two days of lectures and debates. I was asked to kick off the discussion by presenting you, in brief, the Bundesbank’s point of view about the ongoing regulatory reform process. What has already been achieved, and what key issues still need to be tackled? 2. Regulatory reform – what has been achieved? The global financial crisis has been keeping us extremely busy for some 4 years now. Looking back, there is little doubt that an inadequate regulatory framework was one of the most important causes of this crisis. Thus, it is imperative to learn the right lessons and minimise the likelihood of future crises by closing the regulatory loopholes and mending the weaknesses that have come to the surface. Significant progress has already been made in this regard. Therefore, I will restrict myself to mentioning only two key measures. Firstly, the new capital and liquidity standards for the banking sector, commonly known as Basel III, were finally endorsed by the G20 at their meeting last November in Seoul. Capital requirements will rise considerably in terms of both quantity and quality. Moreover, the first-time introduction of global liquidity standards will bolster banks’ liquidity cushions, thereby addressing the possibility of contagion via the money markets and excessive maturity transformation. All in all, the new rules will significantly strengthen the resilience of financial institutions. Secondly, and related to Basel III, substantial progress has also been made in tackling the problem of how to deal with systemically important financial institutions, called SIFIs for short. As you all know, the striking feature of SIFIs is that their insolvency is regarded as virtually intolerable – because they are particularly large, complex or interconnected. Or because they perform specific functions that cannot be readily assumed by other market participants.  Back at the Seoul Summit last year, the G20 accepted a comprehensive framework on how to address the SIFI problem put forward to them by the Financial Stability Board. Work on specifying the framework’s individual recommendations is currently being pursued as a matter of urgency. The final framework will be spelled out in detail by the next G20 Summit, which will take place in Cannes in November of this year.  3. What remains to be done? Notwithstanding the progress already made, there is still a long way to go in making the international financial system watertight. In my following remarks, I would like to point out three aspects of regulatory reform that will accompany us in the coming months.  Firstly, it is indispensable to finalise, and then implement without delay, the FSB framework for dealing with SIFIs. Secondly, we have to introduce internationally compatible restructuring and resolution regimes for financial institutions to allow them to exit the market in an orderly 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches fashion without causing a breakdown of the system. And finally, we must identify the so-called shadow banking system and expose it to supervision. Let me now briefly discuss these three areas in more detail.  3.1 Dealing with SIFIs As already mentioned, the FSB is currently finalising its recommendations for dealing with SIFIs. One difficulty here lies in accurately identifying SIFIs based on criteria such as size, interconnectedness, substitutability and complexity. I would like to promote a rather pragmatic approach towards solving this problem: We should start with only those institutions that are indisputably of global systemic relevance. I expect this to be a group of some 25 to 30 banks – not more and not less. The composition of this group will surely change over time. As experience is gained, we might later extend the framework in an appropriate manner to other SIFIs, including financial institutions of domestic relevance, financial market infrastructures, insurance companies and other non-bank financial institutions. Central to the FSB concept are systemic capital surcharges for SIFIs that go well beyond the requirements mandatory under Basel III. Such capital add-ons do more than merely improve the resilience of a SIFI, in other words reduce its probability of failure. They surely are also a suitable instrument with which to put a price tag on the implicit guarantee that SIFIs are deemed to enjoy. Formal decisions have yet to be taken as to the exact application modalities of the SIFI surcharge, especially its size. Nevertheless, I expect that at the end of the day the amount of additional capital required from a SIFI will be related to its systemic importance and will in all likelihood lie somewhere between two and three percent. What is also still being discussed is the choice of capital instruments acceptable for the surcharge. Common equity surely appears to be the natural choice for the additional charge. But I think other instruments with full loss absorbing capacity deserve careful consideration. For instance, contingent capital – in other words debt that converts into equity once certain stress triggers are hit – affords loss absorbency when needed.  We have to bear in mind that contingent capital is still largely uncharted territory. It might be necessary to conduct further research and gather practical experience with these untried and untested instruments, especially the market implications of contingent capital and the associated net financial stability implications. Nevertheless, contingent capital, when properly designed, is likely to represent a major step forward in providing additional loss absorbency. Let’s all realise that contingent capital was part of the Basel III communiqué.1 Therefore, the Bundesbank continues to be in favour of including contingent capital in the SIFI package. 3.2 Introducing restructuring and resolution regimes Closely related to SIFIs is my second issue, namely the need for appropriate restructuring and resolution regimes for the financial sector. Let’s all realise that we will never fully prevent individual institutions from going bankrupt. Failure is part and parcel of a market economy. But if financial institutions fail they must not be allowed to drag down the entire system with them. Unfortunately, in many countries general insolvency laws have proven inadequate during the crisis. Hence there is clearly a need for special mechanisms that allow for an orderly restructuring and resolution of financial institutions. A strong resolution regime makes failure a credible option and thus reduces moral hazard.                                                   1 See also Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision announces higher global minimum capital standards, 12 September 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 In this regard, significant progress has already been made on a national level. For instance, in Germany the so-called Restructuring Act came into effect at the beginning of this year. Its elements include a significant extension of supervisory powers, especially the possibility of transferring financial assets of a distressed bank to a private bank or to a public bridge bank. Remaining parts can then be wound up during insolvency proceedings, if necessary. To reduce the financial burden of the public sector in future crises, the Act provides for a restructuring fund that is to be financed through a levy from the banking sector. Despite all its positive features the German Restructuring Act represents largely uncharted legal territory and has certain limits once banks with significant cross border business are involved. This is another reason why we need internationally harmonised resolution mechanisms.  While progress on a national level has been remarkable in many countries, obstacles to effective cross-border resolution remain. Thus, one of our main tasks in the coming months will be to establish and ensure mutual compatibility between different national restructuring and resolution mechanisms. Yet we should bear in mind that an orderly resolution of financial institutions which are truly active on a global level may be possible only to a certain degree. At the European level at least, the proposed European Commission legislation, which is due before this summer, looks to represent a major step forward.  3.3 Let’s not overlook the shadow banking system The third regulatory challenge I want to address is the necessity to extend our reform efforts beyond the banking system.  The stricter rules imposed on banks via Basel III and the rules for SIFIs entail the realistic danger that activities will be shifted to less regulated areas. Therefore, it is imperative for us to better illuminate the fringes of the financial system. In other words, we must closely monitor and regulate what is commonly referred to as the shadow banking system.  Whether a market participant is classified as belonging to the shadow banking system should depend not so much on its institutional type but on its activities. At the behest of the G20, the FSB is currently exploring ways and means of monitoring and regulating the shadow banking system. It has recently defined the term shadow banking as “credit intermediation involving entities and activities outside the regular banking system”.2 This rather broad definition involves non-banks such as special purpose vehicles and money market funds, but also hedge funds.  The FSB will present a set of recommendations to the G20 in autumn of this year. What is already obvious today is the need to significantly enhance transparency by imposing appropriate registration requirements as well as reporting obligations on all parts of the financial system.  Yet better monitoring will not be enough. To reduce systemic risk, better regulation of the shadow banking system will be necessary too. This could be done either directly, by regulating the activities and actors of the shadow banking system themselves. Or indirectly, by regulating banks’ interactions with the shadow banking system. 4 Need for international cooperation Let me close by emphasising once more the urgent need for international cooperation. More than 4 years after the outbreak of the crisis, we are now at a crossroads. Our cooperation in                                                  2 See FSB, Shadow Banking: Scoping the Issues, A Background Note of the Financial Stability Board, 12 April 2011. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches the coming months will decide whether the new rules for the financial system will be internationally compatible or bring about an uneven level playing field, leading to regulatory arbitrage. At the end of the day, it is the globally consistent implementation and transposition of the adopted key reforms into national law that counts. While heterogeneous national structures make it imperative to maintain a certain degree of flexibility when reforming financial regulation, we must ensure that individual countries do not game the system to the benefit of their own financial institutions.  Financial centres, when vying for a good position among themselves, must under no circumstances be permitted to engage in activities at the expense of financial stability, not least given the ever closer interconnectedness in the global financial system. Individual countries should not seek advantages by watering down, or by reluctantly implementing internationally agreed reforms. To avoid such beggar-thy-neighbour policies, transparency, peer pressure and a close monitoring of progress in implementing agreed standards and measures will be essential. 5. Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen, To sum up:  A number of crucial reform measures designed to secure financial stability have already been approved or are under way. Yet important tasks still lie ahead. Above all, we need  • to find a solution for the SIFI problem;  • to ensure that all financial institutions can be resolved without dragging down the whole system; and  • to identify the shadow banking system and expose it to supervision.  In doing all this, we must strike the right balance between paying sufficient attention to peculiarities of national financial systems and ensuring an international level playing field. Thank you for your attention!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Subir Gokarn: Financial stability Welcome remarks by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the SAARCFINANCE Governors’ Symposium, Kumarakom, Kerala, 10 June 2011. *      *      * Governor Dr. Subbarao, distinguished Governors, Dr. Reddy, Mr. Caruana, Mr. Ninan, Mrs. Thorat, Deputy Governors, our guests from SAARC central banks and friends. On behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, I extend a warm welcome to you all to the SAARCFINANCE Governor’s Symposium 2011 on the theme of Financial Stability. Just to refresh your memories, the last Governors Symposium organized by us under Dr. Reddy was in 2005 at Mumbai which dealt with the theme of “Communications Policy of Central Banks”. Financial Stability is indeed a most appropriate theme for this meeting. The recent financial crisis also termed as “the great recession” clearly brought financial stability to the centrestage of public policymaking. The global financial crisis that swept the economic and financial systems across the world during the last three years has shaken our beliefs in some near truths. One, it has questioned the premise that price stability and financial stability are complementary. Rather financial stability can be jeopardized even in an environment of price stability and macroeconomic stability. Two, it is now impossible to imagine of sustained growth without financial stability. Any disruption in the financial system anywhere in the world has the potential of affecting the real economy not only in that country but also elsewhere. We have seen that domestic and global financial stability are not mutually exclusive domains. With increasing financial globalization, there was a growing realisation about this, but the extent of transmission of disruptions during the recent financial turmoil through different channels, namely finance, trade and confidence channel was unthinkable before the crisis. It also came as an unpleasant revelation that even those countries which had not contributed to the immediate causes of the crisis had to bear the brunt of an unwholesome international financial climate. Hence, domestic financial stability cannot become a realistic goal in the absence of a conducive global environment. Three, the two-speed recovery, accompanied by a widening of global economic imbalances is at the centre of a new configuration of risks. These are visible on a variety of  fronts – sovereign debt risks, financial fragility, the search for yield, and related stresses in emerging-market economies and foreign exchange markets. Hence, in the current environment, financial stability has to be viewed not only in terms of lessons from the crisis, but also in terms of the future risks and challenges. There is, thus, a clear recognition of the importance of financial stability policy. However, several questions have arisen, to which we still do not have answers. We may attempt to address at least a few of them. I would like to highlight the prominent ones. First, as increasing number of central banks start including financial stability in their policy mandates along with price stability, we need to consider whether financial stability has to shift from being an implicit variable to an explicit variable of the economic policy. As a recent IMF survey (December 2010) pointed out, although financial stability is a formal mandate in most of the countries, the definition of financial stability is informal in almost 80 per cent of the respondents. If financial stability is to be made an explicit objective for central banks, the search for an operational definition and measurment of financial stability come to the forefront.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches In this context, it is important to recognise that financial stability, difficult enough to define, is even more difficult to measure. Though theoretically one would prefer composite indicators of financial stability (threshold or benchmark values) over individual variables as indicators of financial system stability, in practical terms, assessments of financial stability revolve around monitoring several indicators conveying about the health of the institutions, markets and infrastructure. Considering that the construction of a single aggregate measure of financial stability is a difficult task given the complex nature of financial systems, it would be useful to have an appropriate template and methodology for the key indicators. As an initial step, the IMF in December 2010 conducted a stock-taking survey of international experiences with financial stability and the evolving macroprudential policy framework covering 63 countries and European Central Bank which also include all the G20 countries and those subject to mandatory Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP). Second, the appropriate role of the central banks in maintaining financial stability and their relationship with other relevant bodies has intensified as new arrangements are being put in place in several countries and being planned in others. Under the reformed financial stability framework, the allocation of responsibilities with respect to financial stability and instruments to manage stability are still being rigorously debated worldwide. Third, the financial stability mandate for central banks may have implications for monetary policy as well. Although a predominant focus on price stability may have yielded low and stable inflation in terms of prices of goods and services, the lowering of returns in the commodity/service producing sectors could have diverted the search for yields to the financial sector. This has called into question the pre-crisis consensus on the best practice in monetary policy framework as the one characterised by “a single target” (i.e., price stability) and “a single instrument” (i.e., short-term policy interest rate). The financial stability mandate and governance arrangements for central banks must be compatible with their monetary policy responsibilities. Fourth, as it is being widely recognised that analysis through a micro-prudential lens makes policymakers prone to ignoring the implications for systemic stability of financial market imperfections, including those stemming from information frictions, moral hazard implicit in too-big-to-fail firms outside regulatory purview and the negative externalities when firms too-interconnected-to-fail failed. While supplementing micro-prudential approach by a macro-prudential approach, the role of the central bank regard need to be designed taking into account the synergies and conflicts in the assignment of functions to various policy agencies. Fifth, the financial regulatory reforms spearheaded at the international level by the G20 aims at increasing the resilience of the global financial system. In the process, the international best practice trajectory itself has shifted upwards with the introduction of Basel III and other reforms. Nevertheless, when it comes to country specific implementation in an internationally consistent manner, there are several practical challenges. Any substantial adjustments in the financial sector in tandem with the international prescriptions in some SAARC economies might have implications for steady state growth in individual economies as well trade and financial cooperation within the region. Further, many countries are still recovering from the crisis and any new impositions may disrupt this. Moreover, unlike developed economies, the SAARC economies also need to factor in the inter-linkages between growth and socio-economic outcomes. Even a small decline in growth may have magnitudinally wider repercussions as growth is critically linked with inter-regional equity and poverty. Hence the region needs to calibrate the time and magnitude of adjusting to the global new normal.  Sixth, for SAARC countries, because they are at different stages of development there may be some other features of the financial sector which pose challenges to the stability of the system which are not there in advanced economies. For example, it is important to ensure that the crucial goals of financial literacy and financial inclusion are not ignored in the overdrive for financial stability. In India, the newly created FSDC has included financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 literacy and inclusion in its mandate apart from those of macroprudential and financial stability responsibilities. Against this backdrop, let me now introduce to you the format of the Conference. We will cover the conference theme in two special talks and two technical sessions. We begin with the key note address by our Governor Dr.Subbarao followed by presentation by two guest speakers, Mr. Jaime Caruana, General Manager, Bank for International Settlements and Dr. Y.V.Reddy, Former Governor, Reserve Bank of India. Then we move on to the presentation of papers and discussions where participants from fellow SAARC member countries shall share their country experience on financial stability. It will be interesting to notice the differences/similarities in mandates, powers and accountability arrangements that are needed in different circumstances. For convenience, we have spread the discussions over two technical sessions, with a lunch break in between. This will be followed up with a panel discussion of Governors, dealing with future challenges. The panel discussion will be moderated by Mr. T.N. Ninan, President of Editors’ Guild of India. Friends and Colleagues, I trust we will have fruitful discussions during the day that will set the outline of our reaction function to the global developments in financial stability. With these words, I once again welcome you all to the Conference. I wish you all a pleasant stay in Kumarakom. This is one of the premier tourist locations in the country, combining aesthetic appeal with the pursuit of ecological sustainability, which is an apt metaphor for the issues and concerns that we will talk about during the rest of the day. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Ardian Fullani: Economic and monetary developments in Albania in 2010 Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Parliament presenting the Annual Report of the Bank of Albania, Tirana, 9 June 2011. *      *      * Dear Madam Speaker, Dear Members of Parliament,  It is a pleasure for me to be here today to present the Bank of Albania’s opinion on economic and monetary developments of the past year.  Pursuant to legal requirements and our institutional commitments to enhancing the central bank’s transparency and responsibility, in this presentation I will share with you the main highlights on Bank of Albania’s activity over 2010. This activity, in its entire spectrum, aimed to fulfil our mission and legal obligations, and reflect the Parliament’s recommendations for 2010.  Let me begin my presentation with a brief overview of our conclusions.  During 2010, the Albanian economy experienced an overall positive performance. The economic activity posted growth, while the macroeconomic stability and financial health indicators improved.  Economic growth reflected mainly the foreign demand for Albanian products and services, affirming, above all, the dynamism of our private sector. It was also supported by a sustained macroeconomic environment, with downward risk premia and improved liquidity indicators.  In particular, reflecting developments in the financial and real sector of the economy, as well as our monetary policy, consumer price inflation remained in line with our 2010 target.  Also, during this year:   The economy’s external position improved;   The ratio of budget deficit and public debt to GDP dropped;   Financial stability consolidated;   Financial intermediation expanded further; and   Interest rates and risk premiums in financial markets decreased.  On the other hand, 2010’s developments underlined the need to continue and intensify structural reforms, which are pre-requisites for a sustainable and long-term economic growth.  First, the new agenda of structural reforms should aim at establishing the requisites for a more balanced and sustainable growth in the long run.  Greater orientation of Albania’s economy to export and overall higher competitiveness of our products in international and domestic markets dictate the need for continued structural reforms at macro- and microeconomic levels.  Second, macroeconomic stability consolidation requires more work in the future. The greatest lesson that the recent global financial crisis taught us is that prevention is better than cure.  Maintaining the country’s internal and external balances requires further development of decision-making architecture and macroeconomic coordination, as well as economy and market supervisory and regulatory mechanisms. Analytical forecasting and decision-making skills of public and private economic agents should also be further improved.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Third, ensuring the country’s financial stability requires coordinated action by all supervisory and regulatory institutions, and a greater attention by private agents of the market.  A sustainable financial system, oriented to new long-term horizons and prudential to risks, serves to channel savings into the most competitive sectors of the economy.  *      *      * In the following, I would like to address the above-listed topics in more details, focusing on key points of the Bank of Albania’s work.  1. Economic and financial developments in 2010  According to INSTAT data, the Albanian economy is estimated to have grown by 3.9 % this year. Compared to 2009, economic growth is more balanced in terms of sectorial distribution and demand components.  During 2010, the Albanian economy was characterised by gradual improvement of the aggregate demand and further consolidation of the macroeconomic stability. Economic development was followed by price stability, while the public debt and current account deficit narrowed.  Economic growth relied mainly on foreign demand and increased Albanian exports, while domestic demand was sluggish. The latter decelerated due to public finances consolidation and budget deficit reduction in 2010, while consumer spending and private investments were affected by insecurity about the future and presence of spare capacities.  Fiscal policy was oriented towards fiscal consolidation in 2010, following the stimulating nature in 2009. Fiscal consolidation accelerated especially in 2010 H2, following the approval of the revised budget. This consolidation was present on both, income and expenditure sides. Budget revenues increased by 8.4% y-o-y, reflecting the economic growth, expansion of taxpayers’ base, and privatisation receipts. On the other hand, budget expenditures decreased by 4.5%, attributable to reduction of government capital expenditures.  Budget deficit for 2010 settled to around 3.0% of GDP, reduced by 52% compared to a year earlier. This deficit was funded mainly through the issue of domestic debt instruments. However, deficit financing was a novelty in 2010, with the issue of the first Albanian Eurobond. Its issue, at EUR 300 million, met a part of the public sector’s need for foreign currency and was accompanied by reduction in domestic borrowing.  Current account deficit narrowed by 21.5% in 2010, to 11.9% of GDP. This was reflected in augmented private and public sectors savings. Increased exports as a result of invigorated foreign demand, depreciated exchange rate and improvement of trade terms over this period also contributed to it. Notwithstanding the improvement recorded in 2010, current account deficit remains high. As we have continuously stated, the Bank of Albania deems that compilation of structural policies to dampen the external economy misbalance should be a priority.  Net flows in the capital and financial account recorded a decline by 11.2% in 2010, leading to current account deficit financing to 87.5%. Excluding privatisations, foreign direct investments were estimated at 9.3% of GDP and constituted the main source of foreign financing of the Albanian economy. Foreign reserve increased by about EUR 178.8 million and its stock of EUR 1.9 billion may cover 4.8 months of goods and services import.  Positive developments in the external sector of the economy, primarily owing to expansion of exports and foreign currency inflows from the Eurobond, contributed to the generation of contained pressures in the foreign exchange market. From the macroeconomic viewpoint, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 relative exchange rate stability during the year reflected a new equilibrium in foreign currency demand and supply.  In sectorial terms, the Albanian economy development relied chiefly on growth of industry and services sectors, while construction sector continued to contract in 2010. Industry and services sectors benefited, to a great extent, respectively, from foreign demand and structural shift of the domestic demand to short-term consumption goods.  In the short- and mid-term horizon, both sectors are expected to remain the main supporting pillars of the Albanian economy. Agriculture, the other important sector of the Albanian economy, marked a positive performance in 2010. Even so, based on the broader concentration of the country’s population and the great potential for development, the increase in this sector’s productivity remains a long-term priority.  Money and financial markets  Monetary developments in the past year were in line with the performance of the real sector of the economy, reflecting simultaneously the fully restored confidence in the financial system, improved supply and demand ratios in the financial markets and prudent liquidity management policy of the Bank of Albania.  Expansion of monetary stock by 10.6% on average complied with the economy’s demand for money and did not trigger any inflationary tendencies in the economy. Deposit to GDP ratio was 64.2% at end-year, higher than its level prior to deposits withdrawal. In addition, the profile of deposit time structure reflected a higher preference for saving, characterised by a shift to longer maturity-term deposits.  Easing lending terms during 2010 H2, stimulating measures taken by the Bank of Albania, and decreasing uncertainty and risk premiums were followed by a gradual credit growth. Private sector loan portfolio expanded by 10% in 2010, principally influenced by foreign-currency credit growth. This performance reflects prudential bank policies on loan portfolio quality and economic agents’ moderate demand for loan.  In general, lending continues to suffer from lack of demand and realistic, qualitative and valuable business plans for crediting.  Restoration of confidence in the financial system, macroeconomic stabilisation, and regulatory and supervisory measures taken by the Bank of Albania led to stabilisation and improvement of banking system capitalisation, liquidity and profitability indicators.  2. Inflation and monetary policy  Annual consumer price inflation was on average 3.6% in 2010, remaining within the Bank of Albania’s targeted band. Inflationary pressures were more concentrated in  2010 H1, mostly triggered by a rise in some administered prices. Average annual inflation in 2010 H1 was 3.9%. In the following two quarters, relative stabilisation of the exchange rate and low inflationary pressures from the domestic demand contributed to the average inflation rate convergence around the Bank of Albania’s target.  Negative output gap generated contained inflationary pressures throughout 2010, thus balancing the national currency depreciation effect and the international market price rise. The prospects for the future show that the Albanian economy is expected to operate below its potential even in the medium-term, putting downward pressures on inflation.  As I highlighted earlier, in 2010, the Bank of Albania’s monetary policy was implemented in a macroeconomic environment with positive growth rates, contained inflationary pressures and anchored inflation expectations. This environment led to retaining the stimulating monetary policy stance that has been conducted since 2009. It triggered downward interest rates and completed even further the stimulating effects from the exchange rate depreciation. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Low interest rates favoured rise in domestic consumption and investments, whereas the depreciated exchange rate supported growth in Albanian exports.  Reduction of the fiscal stimulus in 2010 H2 expanded the space for monetary policy conduct. In July 2010, the Bank of Albania lowered the key interest rate by 0.25 percentage points, to its historic low of 5.0%. Improvement of banking system liquidity condition and weak public sector demand for money supported the transmission of an easing policy to all segments of the financial markets in the last months of 2010.  In parallel, the Bank of Albania supplied the financial market with the required liquidity to support financial intermediation. Aiming at adopting the most advanced models of central banking, and particularly, convergence with Euro-system practices, the Bank of Albania changed the form of its operational objective.  Since June 2010, our liquidity management operations are oriented to targeting short-term interbank interest rates and minimizing their volatility.  *      *      * The banking system supervision function is another important aspect of central bank duties.  3. Banking supervision and financial stability  Year 2010 was characterised by increases banking system activity, improved banking soundness and profitability indicators, as well as a good capitalisation of the system. On the other hand, the banking system was characterised by increase in non-performing loan portfolio, reflecting also the active policy of the Bank of Albania in terms of enhancing the transparency of bank balance sheets.  Banking system development  The banking sector continues to remain the main actor of financial intermediation in Albania. At end-2010, banking system assets doubled compared to a year earlier, accounting for about 81% of GDP. The banking system continued to be financed mainly by public deposits and focused on lending to the private sector.  On the other hand, the economy’s below-potential growth and the depreciated exchange rate contributed to increasing non-performing loans, to 14% of total loans. However, this indicator’s growth rates decelerated in 2010.  Capital adequacy ratio remained at satisfactory levels, to 15.4%, obviously higher than the 12% benchmark set forth under the regulatory framework. The system’s shareholder equity increased by 10% in 2010.  Credit risk remains the main risk to the banking sector. In response to this risk, the banking sector has created adequate provisions to weather big shocks to borrowers’ solvency and market equilibria.  Banking system supervision  In early 2010, the Bank of Albania changed its banking supervision organisational framework, orienting and relating it directly to risks associated with the financial activity. In parallel, the Bank of Albania re-conceptualised its supervision focus and strategy in accordance with risks posed to Albania’s banking and financial system.  Transparency and publication of information on banking and financial products and services were in focus of supervision in 2010. Encouraging enhancement of private financial agents’ transparency is also reflected in amendments made to regulatory framework during the year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 High commission fees on banking products and services were a sensitive issue that was addressed over the past year and will constitute a priority in the upcoming period. The Bank of Albania, through its analyses, played a key role in discussions about this matter, aiming to tackle it timely and duly.  Also, issues related to anti-money laundering, transparency and compliance with prudential regulations were an important part of the supervisory process in 2010.  In view of strengthening the supervisory process on banking institutions, the Bank of Albania has signed a number of cooperation agreements with central banks in the region and with European ones, where parent banks have their headquarters.  Strengthening the supervisory regulatory framework  In 2010, the Bank of Albania finalised drafting of several new regulations and amended some other regulations on banking supervision. This process aimed at compliance with Basel Committee standards and EU Directives, taking into account international best practices and Albanian banking system developments.  New regulatory acts and key amendments to actual acts on banking supervision approved during 2010 are:   Regulation “On management of risk from open foreign exchange positions”;   Regulation “On risk management in the activity of non-bank institutions”;   Guideline “On conservatorship and liquidation of banks”.  *      *      * Besides the main aspects of the Bank of Albania’s work, such as monetary policy and banking supervision and regulation, the Bank of Albania’s activity was also focused on fulfilment of its other legal obligations and institutional commitments.  Sparing the details, I would like to emphasize that the Bank of Albania has done a great job in 2010 for:   Developing and sophisticating the payment system;   Supporting the integration processes of the country, in accordance with our scope of activity;   Enhancing our communication with the public, as an essential instrument to foster transparency and central bank independence;   Further developing the monetary statistics and those of the external sector of the economy;   Strengthening research capacity, in support of analysis and decision-making.  All these activities serve the financial system development and support the free market economy in Albania. A detailed analysis on them can be found in our Annual Report  *      *      * Dear Madam Speaker, Dear Members of Parliament,  Turning back to our analysis on economic and financial developments in the country, during and after the crisis, I would like to highlight a structural weakness of the Albanian economy 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches that has accompanied it throughout the transition: high current account deficit and still low degree of our economy’s competitiveness in global markets.  Today we live in a global world, with integrated capital, product and labour markets. As a developing country, Albania is facing (and will continue to face) a rising competition, not only in the region but also beyond it.  In our opinion, the long-term sustained development of the country and reduction of our structural weaknesses, imply necessarily increase of competitiveness of the Albanian economy. Ongoing structural reforms should be driven by ambitious goals and a realistic time horizon.  Structural reforms should aim at creating a more attractive climate for foreign and domestic investments, encouraging employment and further growth of welfare, providing:   A sustainable macroeconomic environment;   An efficient and reliable financial system;   A legal, complete and transparent functional framework;   A modern infrastructure;   A qualified and competitive workforce in terms of cost; and   A clear perspective for a faster integration into the European Union, which will open the way to convergence funds.  Fulfilment of all these criteria requires a joint commitment, and the Bank of Albania will play its role. Personally, I remain convinced that increasing effectiveness of these reforms in light of this, would enable Albania to make a qualitative step towards its integration. In conclusion, allow me to remind you that, besides the Bank of Albania’s Annual Report, the Bank of Albania’s financial statements and balance sheet, as certified by auditors, are submitted.  Thank you for your attention  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Intervention at Sveriges Riksbank conference “Monetary policy in an era of fiscal stress” Intervention by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in the panel “Challenges for monetary and fiscal policy”, at the Sveriges Riksbank conference “Monetary policy in an era of fiscal stress”, Stockholm, 17 June 2011. *      *      * It is a pleasure for me to contribute to this Sveriges Riksbank conference entitled “Monetary Policy in an Era of Fiscal Stress”. The subject is indeed a very topical – and global – one. Not just in Europe but around the world, the crisis has progressively acquired a fiscal dimension that may be with us for a number of years to come.  Against this background, it may be useful for me to briefly look back over the relationship between monetary policy and fiscal policies, stressing in particular the challenges that monetary policy may face in an environment of sharply rising fiscal deficits and debt. Coming from the ECB, I will of course primarily focus on the euro area experience and lessons. If, in a simple one-country setting, sovereign debt becomes unsustainable, the central bank always retains the option – in theory and partly in practice – to monetise the debt. The short-term implication of such monetisation is that sovereign credit risk will be replaced by both an inflation and exchange rate risk. In other words, the currency of that country will no longer be considered as a good store of value, either domestically or externally. None of the above constitutes a feasible scenario for the euro area, which is characterised by a unique combination of centralised monetary policy-making and largely decentralised, albeit closely coordinated, fiscal policy-making. This one-monetary-policy-and-many- fiscal-policies approach is at the heart of the institutional arrangement which governs the interactions between monetary and fiscal policies in the euro area. Importantly, the Treaty specifically excludes any “fiscal dominance of last resort”, due to the prohibition of monetary financing.  So what are the implications of all this?  Ruling out the possibility of monetising sovereign debt in turn rules out inflation and exchange rate risks. However, if we exclude the possibility of monetising the debt and of bailouts between countries, the risk of sovereign default could arise. Furthermore, this type of risk may emerge in financial markets in a rather disruptive way, at least compared with other risks, such as inflation and exchange rate risks. The reason is twofold. First, inflation risk may take time to materialise and to be factored in, even when the central bank monetises the debt. Second, financial markets may find it easier to manage and hedge against inflation and currency risk than against sovereign risk.  The separation between monetary and fiscal policies may create non-linearities and even multiple equilibria in the pricing of credit risk, which in turn may fuel self-fulfilling expectations and precipitate crises. Given the role that government bonds play in advanced economies’ financial markets, such instability may impair the transmission of monetary policy. This may justify targeted action by a central bank to push markets towards a more stable equilibrium. In general, the lack of fiscal dominance and the exposure to sovereign risk should promote overall better fiscal policies. This is certainly the case for most of the euro area countries. Fiscal consolidation started already in 2010, when the euro area general government deficit-to-GDP ratio and the debt-to-GDP ratio reached around 6% and 85% respectively. This compares with a deficit of 11.2% and a debt of 92% in the US, a deficit of 9.5% and a debt of 220.3% in Japan, a deficit of 10.4% in the UK and a debt of 80%. Further improvements in the fiscal situation of all the euro area members is expected for the current year, with the 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches euro area average coming down to slightly above 4%. The euro area debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to stabilise in 2013 and come down thereafter. In the euro area three countries are facing severe problems regarding market access. Overall these three countries account for about 6% of the euro area GDP. I will not elaborate on these three cases, and the fact that they have emerged in the midst of the worst economic and financial crisis since World War II.  The solution to these three cases entails a specific role to be played by the fiscal authority of the respective countries, the fiscal authorities of the other countries supporting the adjustment programme in those countries and the ECB. Some commentators have said that in a crisis stronger coordination between monetary and fiscal policy is desirable, even if it comes at the expense of reducing the independence of monetary policy. The opposite is actually true. Especially in a crisis the responsibilities for monetary policy and for fiscal policy have to remain quite separate.  The reason is that it is precisely during a crisis that the fiscal authorities try to push the central bank towards solving the fiscal problem through the inflation tax. However, the central bank is protected from this pressure by its statutes and the rules it adopts for the conduct of monetary policy. In the case of the ECB, the rules specify that it can lend only to sound institutions and against appropriate collateral. The appropriateness of the collateral depends in particular on whether the country under stress follows rigorously the IMF/EU adjustment programme and is on track to regain market access. The soundness of institutions, which is assessed primarily by supervisors, is also a key principle. It has ensured that all adjustment programmes envisaged sufficient funds for the recapitalization of the banking system.  These rules and principles apply to the central bank but are ultimately there to protect taxpayers and to prevent monetary policy from being misused to bail out insolvent governments. They constrain the actions of the central bank, but also give it sufficient flexibility to react in the event of a crisis.  There is no doubt that these rules cause some frustration to those who would instead like to shift the responsibility for solving the crisis entirely to the central bank, even if the crisis is of fiscal origin. It is quite paradoxical that the very same people who criticise the ECB for having taken too many risks during the financial crisis are also those who criticise it for opposing any form of debt restructuring. This same group even suggests that the ECB should stand ready to accept, after a debt restructuring, the signature of a default-rated government as collateral. How are such contradictions possible? In my view they are only possible when the analysis is partial or the rationale is unclear. Let me give a couple of examples. One reason for debt restructuring – which is often made by some theoretical economists – is that it helps financial markets to function better and it eliminates moral hazard. The problem with this view is that it totally omits the broader impact on the markets. Trying to eliminate moral hazard in the middle of a systemic crisis is like shooting yourself in the foot. Think about it: did the failure of Lehman Brothers make markets work better, or worse? Did it reduce moral hazard?  Another reason for private sector involvement (PSI) is to minimise the taxpayer’s contribution and to penalise bad investments. This reason is even less economically sound. Lehman Brothers’ failure proved that if PSI is applied in the wrong way, the taxpayer will in the end pay more. Short-term speculative investors benefit from perverse forms of PSI, while long term investors are punished. That doesn’t sound very clever to me. Having a clear objective, which in the case of the ECB is price stability, helps us to be consistent and to implement a policy which is in the best interests of taxpayers, given that inflation is ultimately a tax.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 The architecture of the euro area – which clearly divides responsibilities between the single monetary policy and the many national fiscal policies – offers strong protection for taxpayers: the Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact are intended to ensure sound fiscal policies and to guarantee the independence of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy.  Some strengthening of the institutional framework underlying the Stability and Growth Pact is needed in order to avoid any repetition of the problems we are currently experiencing. Progress has been achieved, although not as much as we would have hoped. However, looking back, it is encouraging to note that, when facing difficult choices, the political authorities of the euro area have always decided to move forward, towards greater integration and a more solid foundation for Economic and Monetary Union. The trialogue between the Commission, Council and European Parliament has tried to finalize an agreement on the strengthening of fiscal discipline in the euro area, in time for next week’s ECOFIN Council and European Parliament plenary meetings. The Parliament is asking for a reverse Qualified Majority in the Council to vote down a Commission recommendation to a Member State with clearly unsound budgetary policy already under the preventive arm of the Pact. This should not be seen by the Member States as a reduction of their sovereignty but rather as a way to better protect themselves against the negative impact of undisciplined policies in diverging countries. It will also better protect the euro. I hope that the Council will show courage and leadership in this important endeavour. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with The Times Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, in The Times, conducted by Mr Sam Fleming on 13 June 2011 and published on 16 June 2011. *      *      * The Times: There are two camps: one that emphases the benefits of the euro and another group that says look at what happened in Greece, Portugal and Ireland – this shows that the project is fundamentally flawed. Why are you in the first camp?  Jean-Claude Trichet: All advanced economies are still going through the aftermath of the worst crisis in 60 years. It could even have been the worst crisis since World War I, if central bank and governments had not taken tough and bold decisions. Had public authorities not acted, we would not have avoided a major depression. I am absolutely convinced of that.  What we are reflecting upon in Europe is not that different from the important discussions and reflections that are taking place in the US or Japan. Were we on a sustainable long term path on the previous business model? It seems to me that no big advanced economy – including the UK – can avoid to embark on a strategic reflection after this global crisis. It is not at all surprising that we in the euro area, as one of the big advanced economies, are reflecting on our business model, on our governance and measures to reinforce our resilience.  What is very important is that a bird’s eye view of the euro area gives elements that are rather encouraging and which are often not perceived: the euro area as a whole is less indebted and far less in deficit on a yearly basis than the US and Japan. Our current account is balanced, and our growth has been rather encouraging since the recovery started in the third quarter of 2009. As regards growth and job creation, compared with the US we have more or less the same growth per capita and we created more jobs since 1999. But this is no time for complacency in any respect. The big issue to be addressed is to strengthen our surveillance of economic policies by member states. These economic policies are very important in a single currency area – fiscal policy on one hand and macroeconomic policies, including indicators of imbalances and competitiveness, on the other hand. “Economic Union” has to be improved considerably. That being said, as regards “Monetary Union”, twelve years after the launch of the single currency, I can say that the euro is there, it is credible and it maintained price stability even better than was expected by almost all observers. Annual average inflation over the past 12 years has been less than 2%, close to 2%. This is better than in the euro area countries over the last 50 years. As a stable currency the euro is undoubtedly a success.  But if you are in Greece, Portugal, Ireland or even to an extent in Spain you will look and say it is a success if you are in Germany or in Northern Europe but if you are dealing with the changed public services, or the unemployment levels, the euro doesn’t feel like a success.  You have to judge the euro area as a whole. I fully agree we have to improve the interaction between national economic policies in a number of domains and the surveillance by the centre; that is clear. It’s absolutely clear that a country like Greece, for example, had a long period of growth that was largely artificial, boosted by unsustainable fiscal expansion. In such a case, the correction after such a period is necessary to bring the economy back on a sustainable path. It is clear that in any large economy, and also in a single currency area, it is extremely important to prevent divergences of this dimension driven by distortions. We have to be aware such issues are inherent for virtually all vast continental economies.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches A lot of central banks are emphasising the fragility of the recovery, yet at the same time the ECB is tightening policy. Why is there this different position between, for example, the Fed and Bank of England on one side and the ECB on the other?  It is not for me to comment on other monetary policies. What I would say is that in our case it is very important that we continue to anchor very solidly inflation expectations. We consider that such anchoring has been a very important element in the way we went through the crisis; we avoided not only the materialisation of inflation risks in normal times but, in these exceptionally difficult times since the intensification of the crisis in 2008, also the materialisation of deflationary risks.  We had some words from Barack Obama last week about the importance that this crisis is well-handled, saying if it is not well handled it could have serious consequences for the US economy. Would you share that view?  I have no particular comment on what the President of the United States said. What I would say is that it was very important to take the appropriate and bold decisions to cope with the private sector crisis, to draw all the lessons from this financial crisis as far as financial regulation is concerned, and to be fully aware of the challenges that the addressing of the financial crisis had for public signatures. We were not at ease with the idea that in the heat of the crisis, all countries were called to spend as much as possible, embark on deficits as much as possible. I believe that the tensions we are observing in Europe today are part of a much more global phenomenon, namely the pressure on the sovereign signatures in the advanced economies. The current tensions on some euro area sovereigns are therefore not only a euro area issue, but also have a European aspect and a global aspect. In comparison with most emerging economies, most advanced economies have to cope with a real challenge as regards their fiscal policies.  The projections now suggest that Greek obligations to the official sector could in a couple outweigh Greek obligations to the private sector. That underlies why those in Germany say we should have private sector involvement. Do you not accept their logic?  The position of the Governing Council, which is public, is that we are not taking any decision in this domain. It is first of all for the executive branches to see what they want to do. We are telling them that to embark in a compulsory way of dealing with this issue is not advisable. We are telling them that doing anything that would create a credit event or selective default or default is not advisable. In any case it is their decision, and then we will take all the appropriate decisions ourselves as far as the Eurosystem is concerned, in line with our statutory obligations. But again, we are saying very clearly that they should avoid compulsion, credit event, or selective default or default. Our position is clear.  Do you think a compromise is possible on this?  No other comment.  There was a story a few weeks ago that some in Greece were considering a withdrawal from the euro. Has anyone in an official position ever raised with you that possibility?  No.  And likewise Ireland and Portugal?  Correct.  What would you say would be the consequences of such a thing?  It is not a working assumption that anybody considers.  You have bailout fatigue in Germany and austerity fatigue in Greece. Do you worry about the strain this situation is putting on the compact between democratic leaders and their populations?  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 We are living in democracies and we have to fully respect their functioning. It calls more than ever to communicate as clearly as possible to our people all the elements on the situation and the economic and financial diagnosis. It is true for all countries, including those in an adjustment programme and those contributing to the financing of these programmes.  The Aachen speech talked of a common European finance ministry: it seemed this would be an EU27 idea. Do you worry that the likes of Britain would see this as a threat to their sovereignty?  I mentioned explicitly it would be in a long-term perspective, which calls for changes of the Treaty and which is based on the assumption that, at a certain moment in history, Europeans would decide to create a new kind of confederation of sovereign nations. I said very clearly this is not for today. We know today what we have to do. It would be for the day after tomorrow. For that, we will depend entirely on the people of Europe and on its will.  Perhaps this is a day after tomorrow question also; do you see it as Britain’s destiny to join the euro one day even if it seems unlikely today? I always said the UK was much welcome in the euro area and that it depended entirely on the will of the UK government and people. It is as simple as that. That being said, even without the UK we are 331m people, the same order of magnitude as the US. Again, the UK is welcome and it depends entirely on the UK to decide. In any case, I am sure that the UK is a European country at the heart of Europe, by all means.  Does the Latin American debt crisis offer any lessons for this one?  What is striking to see is that virtually all countries and economies that had large problems in the past decades drew the lessons from their problems and became much more resilient than the advanced economies in the occasion of the last crisis of 2007–08.  For advanced economies now, financial sector reform is so important not only to make this sector much more resilient, but we also have to take into account that it is extremely unlikely that our democracies would put for a second time 27% of GDP of taxpayers risk on the table. It is very likely that the decision-making processes in our democracies would not allow us to avoid another great depression if we had exactly the same kind of challenge.  You were the author of the 3pc limit in the Maastricht Criteria and, when you were confirmed by the European Parliament, even then you were emphasising over and over again the importance of getting the fiscal side right. No one listened. Why will they listen this time?  They are paying a high price after a practice of benign neglect. We were preaching in the desert for a long period of time. If I have a message today, it would be to all governments, not only in the euro area, but particularly in the euro area, that they have to take fiscal policy very, very seriously. Not only fiscal policy but also the monitoring of competitive indicators, the monitoring of unit labour costs.  The other big lesson that emerges from reading about your earlier experiences before joining the ECB was your role in the franc fort. How important was the benefit that France evidently received from that policy in influencing the way you have approached your job in the ECB?  I was in France the fervent advocate of what I called with a number of colleagues “competitive disinflation”: it was to say that with inflation and successive depreciation of the currency or devaluation countries don’t have a winning strategy but a losing strategy. That was the main message of “competitive disinflation”.  I have heard it said that what Europe faces as a whole now is a crisis of competitiveness, vis-à-vis China for instance. What Germany succeeded in doing much of the West hasn’t, and China provides a huge wake-up call for the West.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches You have a formidable challenge which is coming from all emerging markets. The crisis reveals a lot of weaknesses in the advanced economies and we all have to accept that and reflect on that. All advanced economies, the US, the euro area, the UK, or the single market of the EU-27, clearly we have a major new challenge, which is to adjust to an important role of China, India, Latin America and all the emerging countries in our global economy.  The fact we have to review our business model is obvious. A lot of further attention is warranted to the appropriate flexibility of our economies. Structural reforms are absolutely necessary. Education, science and research & development are key success factors. The progressive diminishing of PhDs in science and technology in the many advanced economies is not a good sign.  The growth and catching-up of the emerging world is exactly what we wanted after World War Two. It calls for us to adapt permanently, perhaps more rapidly than we would like.  One of the impacts of the rise of emerging economies is the strain it puts on resources. This is also going to put a lot of strain on central bankers: how should central bankers respond via monetary policy to what could be a secular long-term increase in the price of raw materials?  Globalisation is a Janus with a double face. You have on the one hand this formidable challenge of volatile oil and commodities prices. On the other hand you have the formidable disinflationary trend of manufacturing goods, which are produced at lower prices. We have to deal with these simultaneous trends that are very complex and are accelerating changes of relative prices. It is a formidable challenge for all central banks of the world, not only in the advanced economies of course. That is something that I trust central banks can do in the medium term if they are vigilant, if they are attentive. In the very long run, I tend to be optimistic. I was trained as a scientist at the beginning. I trust that we will find technological ways to get rid of this incredible dependency on fossil energy or on the large number of minerals and commodities. It is an absolute must for our world, our environment and our civilisation. I therefore trust that we will deliver.  What are your plans after you retire after the ECB?  I have no plan. I will see after the end of my mandate. At the present moment I still have close to five months ahead of me and quite a lot of challenges obviously. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Deepak Mohanty: Indian economy – progress and prospects Speech by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Harvard Business School, Boston, 27 September 2011. *      *      * The assistance provided by Dhritidyuti Bose and Abhiman Das is acknowledged. It is an honour and privilege for me to be speaking at Harvard to such a distinguished audience. I thank Professor Benjamin Friedman and Professor Tarun Khanna for this opportunity. I will be speaking on the Indian Economy. India is home to 1.21 billion people, which is about 17.4 per cent of the global population. However, it accounts for only 2.4 per cent of world GDP in US dollar terms and 5.5 per cent in purchasing power parity (ppp) terms. Hence, there exists a huge potential for catch up. The global welfare too is linked to progress in India as reflected in the keen global interest in India. But, India seems to inspire and disappoint at the same time. This is reflected in various comments on the Indian economy. Yasheng Huang and Tarun Khanna in their much debated article in July 2003 issue of Foreign Policy had observed: “Can India surpass China? This is no longer a silly question”. The July 23rd 2011 issue of The Economist observed; “Twenty years ago they said the yardstick against which India should be measured was its potential. On that measure, there is much to do.” As a fledgling democracy, India’s economic experiment of planned development was held out as an example to many aspiring low-income countries in the 1950s. While some countries raced ahead in the development process, India lagged behind. This is evident from the fact that it took 40 long years from 1950–51 for India’s real per capita GDP to double by 1990–91. But, 1991–92 was a defining moment in India’s modern economic history as a severe balance of payments (BoP) crisis prompted far reaching economic reforms, unlocking its growth potential. As a result, in only 15 years, India’s per capita income doubled again by 2006–07. If the current pace of growth is maintained, India’s per capita income could further double by 2017–18, in 10 years time. While acceleration in India’s recent economic growth is noteworthy, maintaining the pace, no doubt, will be challenging. Against this background, I propose to highlight the key policy reforms since 1991–92, review the economic progress made so far and then conclude with some reflections on policy challenges in the way forward. Policy reforms post-1991 Macroeconomic crisis of 1991 marked a turning point in India’s economic history for two reasons. First, fiscal deficit driven external payment crisis with a dip in foreign exchange reserves to below US$ 1 billion in July 1991 drew a crisis resolution strategy to restore macroeconomic stability. Sharp correction in fiscal deficit-GDP ratio and reduced monetisation of deficits contributed towards restoring macroeconomic balance by the mid-1990s. The reduced dependence of fisc on monetisation enabled the Reserve Bank of India to reduce its statutory pre-emption of funds from banks, thereby freeing resources for the private sector. Second, simultaneously efforts were made towards wide ranging structural reforms encompassing areas of trade, exchange rate management, industry, public finance and the financial sector. An abiding objective in respect of industrial policy measures since then has been to create a competitive environment to improve productivity and efficiency. New industrial policy fostered competition by abolishing monopoly restrictions, terminating the phased manufacturing programmes, freeing foreign direct investment and import of foreign technology and de-reservation of sectors hitherto reserved for the public sector. These 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches measures created a favourable environment for industry to upgrade its technology and build-up its capacity through imports in order to cater to growing domestic and external demand. At present, only five industries are under licensing, mainly on account of environmental, health, safety and strategic considerations. Only two industries are reserved for the public sector, viz, atomic energy and railway transport. Reservation of industrial products for the small scale sector is still a lingering issue. However, the definition of small scale industry (SSI) has been changed to facilitate modernisation and now only 20 items are reserved for manufacturing in the small scale sector. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) up to 100 per cent is allowed under the automatic route in most sectors, with a few exceptions. The infrastructure sector has been thrown open to the private sector. Considering the large requirements of funds for infrastructure, 100 per cent FDI has been allowed in all infrastructure sectors. There are extended tax holidays to enterprises engaged in the business of development, operation, and maintenance of infrastructure facilities. The emphasis has been on public-private partnership (PPP) as one of the preferred modes for infrastructure project implementation. Comprehensive fiscal reforms covered tax reforms, restructuring of public sector undertakings and improving fiscal-monetary coordination before eventually carrying these reforms forward under rule based fiscal consolidation path from 2004–05, which was interrupted by the global financial crisis in 2008–09. Reduction in customs duties over the years reflected India’s commitment towards converging towards the ASEAN levels over the medium-term. The monetary policy framework and the associated operating procedures of monetary policy in India have evolved over time with the changes in the underlying macroeconomic structure and development of financial markets. A landmark development was the abolition of the system of automatic monetisation of fiscal deficit from April 1997, which provided instrument independence to the Reserve Bank of India in the conduct of monetary policy. This, combined with the introduction of auctioning system in the government securities, enabled the Reserve Bank to switch from direct to indirect instruments of monetary control. With the opening up of the economy and deregulation of the financial sector, the stability of money demand function became suspect. The Reserve Bank, therefore, switched from a monetary targeting framework, adopted in the mid-1980s, to a multiple indicator approach. Under this approach, various indicators such as rates of return in different markets, movements in currency, credit, fiscal position, trade, capital flows, inflation rate, exchange rate, refinancing and transactions in foreign exchange – available on a high frequency basis – are juxtaposed with output data for drawing policy perspectives. This approach continued to evolve and is presently in its augmented version, wherein forward looking indicators drawn from the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook survey, capacity utilisation survey, professional forecasters’ survey and inflation expectations survey are used for macroeconomic assessment. The operating procedure of monetary policy also underwent a change with the overnight interest rate emerging as the operating target of monetary policy. In the financial sector, the objective was to provide operational flexibility and functional autonomy to banks and other financial institutions so that they could allocate resources more efficiently. Some of the important initiatives in the financial sector were: reduction in statutory preemptions so as to release greater funds for commercial lending, interest rate deregulation to enable price discovery, allowing new private sector banks to create a more competitive environment, dilution of government holding in public sector banks and institution of prudential norms such as capital adequacy, income recognition, asset classification, provisioning and exposure norms to strengthen the health of the banking system besides improving transparency and disclosure standards. The development of financial markets has been regarded as a critical prerequisite for improving the operational effectiveness of the transmission of monetary policy. During the first phase of financial sector reforms, various structural rigidities were eased, so as to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 increase participation in financial markets as well as develop and strengthen inter-linkages amongst market segments, and foster competition. The focus of various reform measures in financial market was on ensuring adequate liquidity in various segments of the market spectrum, and developing the regulatory, legal, institutional and technological infrastructure for orderly functioning of market activity. In the second phase of reforms, more sophisticated financial instruments were introduced. Further, issues relating to the stability of financial markets received priority in the policy agenda. The key objective of the external reforms was to move to a more open trade regime by correcting for the implicit anti-export bias. Moreover, there was a greater recognition of the need to view trade policies, exchange rate policies and industrial policies in an integrated manner. In pursuance of this, the administered exchange rate regime gave way to a flexible market-determined system. The exchange rate has since been guided by underlying demand and supply conditions and the broad principles of careful monitoring and management of exchange rates with flexibility, without a fixed or preannounced target or band. The trade policy reforms comprised withdrawal of the quantitative restrictions on exports and imports, phasing out of the system of import licensing and lowering the level and dispersion of nominal tariffs so as to bring them on par with the East Asian economies. The peak customs tariff rate was progressively brought down from 150 per cent in 1991–92 to 10 per cent by 2008–09. The liberalization of restrictions on various external transactions led to current account convertibility under Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of the IMF in 1994. With respect to capital account liberalization, India embarked on a gradual and well sequenced opening up of the capital account. The active capital account management framework was based on a preference for non-debt creating capital inflows like foreign direct investment and foreign portfolio investment. The capital account is virtually free for non-residents and resident corporates with some restrictions on financial institutions and higher restrictions on resident individuals. Economic progress post-1991 The initiation of economic reforms in the 1990s saw India gradually breaking free of the low growth trap which was euphemistically called the “Hindu growth rate” of 3.5 per cent per annum. Real GDP growth averaged 5.7 per cent per annum in the 1990s, which accelerated further to 7.3 per cent per annum in 2000s. A feature of the growth acceleration during the period was that while the growth rate of industry and services increased that of agriculture fell. This was because there was no notable technological breakthrough after the “green revolution” of the mid-1960s which saw sharp increase in yields of cereal production particularly in northern part of India. By the 1990s, the momentum of “green revolution” had died down. Consequently, the yield increases in the 2000s were much lower than those experienced even in the 1990s. Notably, the decade of the 2000s encompassed the inflexion point in the growth trajectory with an annual average GDP growth of about 9 per cent for the 5-year period 2004–08. Growth in all the sub-sectors of the economy, including agriculture, accelerated during this period. However, this growth process was interrupted by the global financial crisis. Subsequently, the average growth slowed down to 7.8 per cent during 2009–11 with a noticeable slow down in both agriculture and industry. The growth dynamics altered the structure of the Indian economy with a decline in the share of agriculture from 28.4 per cent in the 1990s to about 15 per cent in 2009–11. There was corresponding gain in the share of services, including construction, from 52 per cent to 65 per cent during the same period. What is, however, of concern is that the share of industry has remained unchanged at around 20 per cent of GDP. This suggests that India’s growth acceleration during the last two decades has been dominated by the services sector. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches The pace of average annual industrial growth had nevertheless picked up from 5.7 per cent during the 1990s to 9 per cent during 2004–08 before being interrupted by the global financial crisis (Table 1).  While the share of industry in GDP remained stagnant, there was noteworthy structural transformation in manufacturing over the period. As a process of restructuring, while the gross value added in organized manufacturing increased by 8 per cent per annum at current prices, employment fell by 1.5 per cent per annum during 1995–2003. Subsequently, during 2004–09 gross value added growth accelerated to 20 per cent per annum at current prices; but significantly, employment also increased by 7.5 per cent per annum. With work participation rate of 39.2 per cent, India had a workforce of 400 million in 2009–10. Of this, 53 per cent was in agriculture and the rest 47 per cent in non-agricultural activity. While the bulk of the employment is in agriculture despite its shrinking share, the noteworthy feature of the employment structure has been that for the first time the absolute workforce in agriculture declined in the latter half of the 2000s (Table 2). The overall unemployment rate in the economy also declined from 8.3 per cent in 2004–05 to 6.6 per cent in 2009–10.  Not surprisingly, the growth acceleration was accompanied by a sharp pick-up in the rate of growth of gross fixed capital formation which had more than doubled from an annual average of 7.2 per cent in the 1990s to 15.7 per cent in the high growth phase of 2004–08. It, however, has dropped significantly in the post-crisis period to 5.8 per cent (Table 1). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 The structure of Indian economy also underwent a change during this period in terms of openness. The stereotypical view that India is a closed economy has not been borne out by the openness of Indian economy which was increasing rapidly. Exports and imports of goods and services have more than doubled from 23 per cent of GDP in the 1990s to 50 per cent in the recent period of 2009–11. If the trade flows are considered alongside capital flows, the rise in openness (measured as current receipts and payments plus capital receipts and payments) was more dramatic from 42 per cent of GDP in the 1990s to 107 per cent in the recent period (Table 3) Empirical evidence suggests that with increasing openness of the Indian economy, the trade and industrial cycles were getting more synchronised with the global business cycle.  The high growth phase of 2004–08 was accompanied by sharp increase in exports and imports as well as capital inflows. Net capital inflows as percentage of GDP more than doubled from 2.2 per cent in the 1990s to 4.6 per cent of GDP during 2004–08. Subsequently, growth rates in both trade and capital inflows moderated following the global financial crisis. The openness of the Indian economy has been accompanied by improvement in India’s external position as the debt to GDP ratio fell from about 29 per cent in the 1990s to 19 per cent in the recent period. The debt service ratio has also declined from 25 per cent to under 5 per cent during the period (Table 4).  The openness in the capital account has resulted in two-way movement in capital with a sharp pick-up in India’s outward FDI since the mid-2000s (Table 5). Uptrend in outward FDI mainly reflected the large overseas acquisition deals of Indian corporates to gain market share and reap economies of scale amidst progressive liberalisation of the external payments regime. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Gradual improvements were also observed in the fiscal position with fiscal deficit moderating sharply during the high growth phase of 2004–08, which also coincided with a period of switch over to a rule based fiscal consolidation process. In fact, the high growth phase of 2004–08 saw a primary surplus for the Centre enhancing debt sustainability. The deficit indicators, however, have deteriorated in the recent period following crisis induced fiscal expansion (Table 6).  The average saving rate also showed a substantial increase from 23 per cent of GDP in the 1990s to about 31 per cent in the 2000s with a peak saving rate of over 33 per cent achieved during the high growth phase of 2004–08. Fiscal consolidation helped in lifting the overall saving rate as public sector saving rose significantly. The efficiency of capital utilisation also improved as the incremental capital output ratio (ICOR) declined to 3.7 during the high growth phase of 2004–08 from 5 in the 1990s. Subsequently, however, capital efficiency has declined in the post-crisis period (Table 7).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 The high growth was achieved in an environment of price stability as headline wholesale price index (WPI) inflation dropped to an annual average of 5.5 per cent in the 2000s from 8.1 per cent in the 1990s. There was also similar drop in consumer price inflation. Subsequently, however, in the post-crisis period the inflation trend has reversed with the headline WPI inflation averaging over 7 per cent and the consumer price inflation crossing double digits during 2009–11. The uptick in food price inflation was particularly sharp during 2009–11 (Table 8).  During this period, financial deepening of the Indian economy has also increased: broad money (M3) to GDP ratio rose from an average of 50 per cent in the 1990s to 85 per cent in the recent period of 2009–11. Credit penetration, measured as credit to GDP ratio, also increased from 21 per cent of GDP to about 50 per cent during this period. The high growth phase of 2004–08 was accompanied by acceleration in growth of bank credit to the private sector to about 27 per cent per annum from about 15 per cent in the 1990s. However, during the high growth phase of 2004–08, the average increase in M3 remained contained which aided price stability. This was made possible due to deceleration in banks’ investment in government securities to about 13 per cent per annum during 2004–08 from 21 per cent in the 1990s. Fiscal consolidation opened up the space for private credit expansion without exerting much additional pressure on monetary expansion (Table 9).  Policy challenges The draft approach paper for the Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012–17) released in August 2011 targets an annual GDP growth rate of 9 per cent. This is challenging but not unattainable. Why? Because India has already achieved an average growth rate of about 9 per cent during 2004–08 which was interrupted by the global financial crisis. Subsequently, average growth has dropped by about one percentage point to 7.8 per cent during 2009–11. In 2011–12, the terminal year of the Eleventh Plan, growth is expected to be about 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches 8 per cent. Hence, growth will have to be raised by an additional percentage point per annum which is challenging because it will require a conducive global environment and policy reforms at home. While there are several tasks to be addressed, I will focus on six key issues. First, India will have to raise agricultural productivity and diversify agriculture to feed its own population. The food entitlement has increased with the public employment guarantee programme (MGNREGA) which guarantees for 100 days of employment to one member of each family in the rural areas. This has also given better bargaining power to labour and consequently the overall wage rates have gone up raising the demand for food. While the country currently has sufficient foodgrains stocks, it is not yet self-sufficient in pulses and oilseeds. Further, demand for protein based products like meat, egg, milk and fish as well as fruits and vegetables has increased substantially with rise in income. The demand-supply mismatches in the case of these items have resulted in rise in their prices. There is, therefore, a need for another technological breakthrough to give fresh impetus to agriculture. At the same time, greater emphasis will have to be placed in the management of supply chain with investment in rural infrastructure. The annual growth in agriculture has to be raised to at least 4 per cent from the current trend growth rate of around 3 per cent. Second, the fact that 53 per cent of overall work force is still engaged in the agricultural sector – whose share of GDP has shrunk considerably – is worrisome. A substantial part of this labour force will have to be ejected from agriculture not only to improve the productivity in agriculture but also in the overall economy. It is unconceivable that they can all be absorbed gainfully in the services sector. Hence, industrial employment will have to expand so also the relative contribution of industry. This needs a focused attention as we have seen that the share of industry in the overall GDP has stagnated over the last two decades. In this direction, the Government has taken up a major policy initiative to create National Manufacturing and Investment Zones (NMIZ) to increase the sectoral share of manufacturing in GDP to 25 per cent by 2022 and double the current employment level in the sector. Good physical infrastructure, a progressive exit policy, structures to support clean and green technologies, appropriate investment incentives, and business friendly approval mechanisms will be the cornerstones of this new initiative. Third, to support industrialization and increased economic activity, there is a need to step up investment in infrastructure. The assessment of the Planning Commission suggests an investment of `45 trillion (US $ 1 trillion) over the Twelfth Plan (2012–17). Given the large requirement of long-term funds, financing infrastructure would be a big challenge. Besides budgetary support, the bulk of the funds has emanated from banks. However, channelling domestic and foreign financial savings of this scale into infrastructure will require developing the domestic private corporate debt market. Apart from the need for substantial financial outlays for infrastructure, there are several non-financing constraints: particularly land acquisition delays need to be addressed to avoid time and cost overruns. Fourth, there is a need for the Government to revert to its rule-based pre-crisis fiscal consolidation path without compromising on the quality of fiscal correction. This is necessary to obviate the risk of twin deficits and to raise the overall saving rate. This will require further reform in the tax structure to ensure revenue buoyancy and greater focus on quality of expenditure with an emphasis on reduction of subsidy. In this regard, major reforms in the pipeline are the introduction of an integrated Goods and Services Tax (GST) by the Centre and the States to reduce cascading effect and improve tax compliance and operationalisation of a Direct Taxes Code (DTC), to improve allocative efficiency and equity of the direct taxes. Fifth, credit markets have, historically, played a crucial role in sustaining growth through efficient intermediation of funds between savers and investors. Although India has a well-diversified financial system, and several measures for financial inclusion have been taken in the recent past, credit penetration continues to be relatively low in comparison with several other developed and emerging market economies. The extent of financial exclusion 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 is staggering with around 61 per cent of population having a deposit account and only 10 per cent of population having a credit account. The Reserve Bank has embarked on a plan of making available basic banking services to all habitations of population of over 2000 by 2012 through a combination of brick and mortar branches and a system of business correspondents (BCs). Accelerated economic growth will depend on access to formal finance by the bulk of the population and greater credit penetration. Sixth, empirical evidence suggests that the threshold level of inflation is in the range of 4–6 per cent. Hence, without bringing inflation down from the current level it will be difficult to sustain a high level of growth. This will require greater monetary-fiscal coordination and alleviation of supply constraints, particularly in agriculture. Conclusion Envisioning India’s emergence as a major economic power in the world, Dr. Manmohan Singh in his Union Budget 1991–92 speech that launched wide ranging economic reforms had quoted Victor Hugo’s saying, “no power on earth can stop an idea whose time has come”. Ever since, there has been no looking back as India launched wide ranging structural reforms and has made significant economic progress over the past two decades. India’s industrial environment has become more competitive and open, infrastructural gaps have been sought to be bridged through public-private initiatives with both domestic and foreign sources of funding, current account has become fully convertible while capital account is virtually free for non-residents. The policy environment has become more enabling with rule-based commitment on fiscal policy and considerable instrument independence for operation of monetary policy. As statutory preemptions were reduced and interest rates were deregulated, banks gained operational autonomy for commercial lending. As a result, India’s per capita income, which had taken four decades to double by 1991, doubled thereafter in 15 years and is likely to double again in 10 years by 2017–18. If India could maintain the current pace of growth it will lift millions out of poverty and enrich the global economy. While India has come a long way, maintaining the current pace would itself be challenging and require continued reform efforts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Overview of the global economy Statement by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC) Twenty-Fourth Meeting, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC, 24 September 2011. *      *      * On behalf of the Constituency representing Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Indonesia, Lao P.D.R., Malaysia, Myanmar, Nepal, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Tonga and Vietnam. Global and domestic policy actions The IMFC is convening at a time when global growth outlook has dimmed considerably since our Spring meeting. Recovery in major advanced economies has weakened in the last several months. Meanwhile, growth in emerging market economies has moderated. Stresses in the Eurozone periphery have not abated and have impacted larger economies, undermining market confidence. Consequently, the clearest risks currently to the global economy are unstable debt dynamics, sluggish economic performance, banking sector funding stresses and policy responses perceived by markets as inadequate. Further, risk aversion in the current environment has already had an impact on emerging market economies, including those with strong fundamentals. Risks to the global economy and financial system demand decisive policy responses. For advanced economies with some fiscal space, this means a credible medium-term fiscal consolidation plan and policy flexibility to support growth in the near term. Eurozone economies under market pressure should deliver credible commitment to fiscal consolidation and implementation. While we welcome the measures announced at the Eurozone summit in July, further resolute measures to strengthen the banking sector, credibly restore debt sustainability in the Eurozone periphery, and lift long-term growth potential through structural reform are necessary to restore market confidence in the short term and contribute to global growth and stability in the long term. The Fund should be pro-active in proposing solutions and mediating their adoption. We believe that progress in structural reforms will be key to restoring growth in the medium- and long-term. Although each crisis is different, our efforts during the Asian crisis that brought about a relatively fast recovery may provide a useful lesson for countries facing current difficulties. From our experience, the determination to undertake and stick with structural reforms, particularly in the financial sector, was a crucial factor that led to an improvement in confidence, competitiveness and growth. The fund’s response i) Global Financial Safety Nets (GFSN) With substantial downside risks to growth in the global economy and heightened volatility in financial markets, the Fund should assess the adequacy of its resources against expected financing needs. At a minimum, there should be no reduction in Fund resources during this time. In this regard, countries in our constituency which are participants of the New Arrangements to Borrow fully support the extension of the activation period to March 2012. We also regard as particularly relevant the Fund’s work to develop a more coherent response to systemic events, including short-term liquidity provision to crisis bystanders. Rapid liquidity support at an early stage is critical to help pre-empting temporary liquidity difficulties in sound economies from escalating into a wider crisis. We call on the Fund to review its lending toolkit and emphasise that potential solutions should minimise stigma, and 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches send effective signals that differentiate crisis bystanders as fundamentally sound economies. A study of gaps and new solutions can be undertaken together with an early review of the Flexible Credit Line and Precautionary Credit Line. The latter should be aimed at improving the accessibility and flexibility of these instruments whilst limiting moral hazard. ii) Surveillance The Fund’s credentials on surveillance suffered a setback after it had not given sufficient warning in the run-up to the 2008/9 crisis. The 2011 Triennial Surveillance Review (TSR) is therefore a good opportunity for the Fund to address the shortcomings. On the whole, we welcome the key TSR objective of making the Fund’s surveillance as interconnected as the global economy itself. Given its universal membership, cross-country experience and deep technical expertise, the Fund is uniquely placed to identify global challenges and facilitate dialogue with country authorities to undertake appropriate policy responses. To leverage on this strength, the Fund needs to invest time to build stronger trust and consensus amongst members on its surveillance and analytical frameworks. The Fund is also well placed to integrate its macroeconomic and financial surveillance, and thus to identify latent vulnerabilities, interconnections and transmission channels. Such an integrated, risk-focused approach should aim to inform timely policy interventions and limit contagion. In this context, we welcome both the spillover reports and the Consolidated Multilateral Surveillance Report presented at this meeting as steps in the right direction to understand and act on the implications of increasing interconnectedness among members. In addition, the Fund needs to have a broader, more balanced surveillance mandate that better reflects the major areas of risks confronting the global economy, including risks in sovereign balance sheets and the financial system. We call on the Fund to adopt a new Integrated Surveillance Decision that replaces the 2007 Decision, which focused too narrowly on exchange rates. International monetary system We encourage the Fund to continue its work to strengthen the international monetary system. The experience of countries in our constituency attests to the complex policy challenges posed to emerging market economies by volatile capital flows. We expect the Fund’s work in this area to continue to be even-handed, non-prescriptive and to take into account country specificities. Further, we look forward to the extension of staff analysis of capital flows and associated policies to cover both source and recipient countries. We also support the Fund’s work on examining the case for broadening the SDR basket. This could contribute towards the diversification of reserve holdings, thereby strengthening the stability of the international monetary system over the longer term. Governance reform Governance underpins the legitimacy and traction of the Fund’s activities and advice. For this reason, we support the Managing Director’s call for greater progress in implementing the 2010 quota reform and re-composition of the Executive Board. We also emphasise the importance of completing a review of the quota formula by January 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Jens Weidmann: Germany’s role in the global economy Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the American Council on Germany, Washington DC, 26 September 2011. *      *      * 1. Introduction Ladies and gentlemen I would like to thank the American Council on Germany for giving me the opportunity to speak here today. The American Council on Germany was founded in 1952 in order to encourage reconciliation and understanding between Germany and North America following the two world wars in the first half of the twentieth century. To this day, it has the objective of enhancing transatlantic understanding. This is still very important as we are experiencing fast and significant changes. The headwinds generated by the global financial crisis are still being felt and on both sides of the Atlantic a rethinking of old certainties is underway. In such a situation, it is crucial to exchange ideas, re-examine the perceptions we have of ourselves and of one another and foster mutual understanding. With this in mind, I would like to talk about Germany’s role in the global economy, which, of course, is closely connected to its role as a member of European Monetary Union. One thing that people often associate with Germany is its export strength. And the export sector certainly has traditionally played an important role in the German economy. However, the German economy has not always performed as solidly as it is doing now. The past two decades have seen changing patterns in Germany’s economic performance, with a major structural weakness following the boom of reunification and an arduous but ultimately successful process of reform in the years that followed.  As popular as individual German export products are globally, Germany sometimes faces the reproach that its export strength comes at the expense of global stability. Critics either imply that Germany promotes imbalances at a global level or within the euro area or that it should have done more to bolster global demand. As I will outline in more detail during this speech, the difficult but ultimately successful adjustment that Germany has undergone in the past has enabled it to serve as an important buffer for global demand during the crisis and an indispensable anchor of stability within EMU, both throughout the crisis and during the subsequent recovery. In order to clarify these points, I will concentrate on the following three aspects:  First, I will shed some light on the underlying factors behind persistent divergences in price competitiveness within the euro area, which, together with past fiscal profligacy, are to a large part responsible for the problems we are facing today. In particular, I will illustrate how those member states whose competitiveness has deteriorated substantially since monetary union have not managed to take advantage of it.   Second, I will describe Germany’s economic performance during the crisis and the recovery. In particular, I will show how Germany served as an import buffer during the economic downturn that followed the financial crisis. Now that many countries are struggling with recovery, the more dynamic upswing in Germany is providing an important impetus to the rest of Europe.   Finally, I will turn to the challenges that the European sovereign debt crisis is posing to Germany. Considering that Germany is providing a large part of the fiscal contributions to euro area countries with refinancing problems, confidence in Germany’s solvency is vitally important in the current situation. Germany therefore 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches has to set an example for implementing sound fiscal policies within the euro area. However, this alone will not be sufficient to resolve the sovereign debt crisis. To secure long-run stability within EMU, significantly stronger incentives for sound public finances are indispensible.  2. Intra-EMU divergences What critics actually have in mind when they talk about Germany’s export strength is the existence of current account surpluses which contrast with current account deficits in other EMU member states or other countries around the world. I would like to emphasise that neither current account surpluses nor current account deficits are a bad thing per se. Current account surpluses reflect net foreign lending and current account deficits net foreign borrowing, and depending on the circumstances, both can be appropriate for a given country. For a country with a declining working-age population, for example, it is quite reasonable for residents to save money for the future and to invest a share of it abroad. By compensating for a shrinking income in the future, the money saved today allows consumption to be smoothed over time. Conversely, countries which are undergoing a catch-up process and need financing for the investments might be willing and promising borrowers of foreign funds.  Consequently, for a proper assessment we have to take a closer look at the underlying drivers of current account surpluses in some euro-area countries and of current account deficits in others. One worrying development is that divergences in current account balances have mostly gone hand in hand with divergences in price competitiveness. Whereas Germany, as a surplus country, has been able to improve its price competitiveness significantly since the launch of the euro, the current account deficits in Greece, Spain and Portugal and to a lesser extent in Ireland were accompanied by significant losses in price competitiveness: The lower interest rates brought about by monetary union and inflowing capital had partly fuelled unsustainable developments, such as excessive credit dynamics and real estate bubbles in Spain or excessive fiscal spending in Greece. The resulting domestic boom and existing labour market rigidities led to large wage increases well in excess of productivity growth, triggering a loss in price competitiveness and thereby impairing export performance. Current account deficits were therefore ultimately a symptom of countries living beyond their means. The deficits will only decline if ambitious and often painful adjustments are undertaken that bring these economies back on a sustainable track. What about Germany? At first sight, Germany’s gain in price competitiveness since monetary union seems quite large. However, it is important to bear in mind that this increase followed a period of rather weak economic performance in the 1990s after Germany’s reunification boom. The most recent competitiveness gains and the resulting impulse for exports were the consequence of a painful but necessary and ultimately successful adjustment process. An important part of this process was a restructuring in the corporate sector, which significantly enhanced the profitability of firms. In addition, there were major and long overdue policy reforms, namely labour market reforms, fiscal consolidation and adjustments in the social security systems. Consequently, and in contrast to some other surplus countries, Germany’s current account surpluses were certainly not caused by policy interventions aimed at boosting exports. Instead, they resulted from market-driven adjustments to external pressure as well as overdue structural reforms. It is true that the restructuring process has fostered the emergence of current account surpluses by putting a strain on domestic consumption. As the restructuring process was temporary, however, German current account surpluses are not expected to reach pre-crisis levels soon again. In addition, Germany’s experience should provide some reassurance to those countries faced with the need to restore their competitiveness: Structural reforms can initiate necessary adjustments and will pay off in the end – thanks to its reforms, the German economy was much stronger in the years preceding the crisis than before. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 3. Economic spillovers during the crisis and the recovery Not least for this reason, Germany was able to serve as an anchor for stability within EMU throughout the crisis as well as in the current recovery. Because of its export strength, the German economy was affected particularly strongly by the global economic downturn that was triggered by the financial crisis. However, as this shock hit the German economy in a phase of structural strength and was only temporary, the negative effects were contained. From today’s perspective we know that Germany has weathered the economic crisis comparatively well. The labour market was only weakly affected as firms in the export sector chose to reduce working time over staff layoffs, whereas the domestic economy was less affected and even continued to increase employment. Now unemployment rates are even lower than before the crisis. In addition, Germany profited from its previous consolidation efforts. The almost balanced fiscal budget at the beginning of the crisis allowed scope for implementing sizeable fiscal stimulus programmes. As a consequence, private consumption remained robust throughout the crisis, which explains why Germany was able to serve as an important buffer for world demand at the height of the financial crisis. In fact, the huge downturn in the German economy was largely driven by a decline in exports: about two thirds of the downswing can be attributed to a negative contribution from foreign trade. Having experienced a disproportionately strong decline during the crisis, exports in Germany have also benefited disproportionately from the revival of global economic activity. So far, Germany has undergone a sound process of recovery. Economic activity has almost returned to its pre-crisis level and the output gap has been closed, indicating that the recovery process is at an advanced stage. The recovery is also broader-based than in past cycles. The positive labour market situation and the improved real wages and income expectations of private households are supporting growth in consumption, which had already been resilient throughout the crisis. And even though spillover effects from growth in Germany to other countries are comparatively low, Germany still serves as an important transmitter of the impulses from global demand to other EU member states. Most recently, the German economic outlook has been dampened by high overall uncertainty, especially regarding further developments in the European sovereign debt crisis. But we expect economic activity to remain robust in the third quarter, and even though expectations for the winter months are subject to considerable risks, this should prove to be more of a soft patch. Nevertheless, there is a heightened danger that financial market turmoil affects the real economy. Thus, it is crucial to find a prompt and consistent political answer to the sovereign debt crisis in order to reduce downside risks. 4. Fiscal discipline and the European sovereign debt crisis In addition to its robust economic conditions, Germany is an anchor of stability within EMU through the high level of confidence in the sustainability of its public finances as well as through its financial support to those countries within EMU which currently lack this confidence. While Germany profited from its public finances being in comparatively good shape at the beginning of the crisis, the economic downturn and necessary rescue measures for banks during the crisis have put a serious strain on the national budget. The debt ratio increased by 19 pp to 84% of GDP between 2007 and 2010, mostly due to the support for the financial sector. Given the experience from the sovereign debt crisis, it is imperative to sustain confidence in public finances. This requires credible consolidation efforts now and not just some kind of commitment to future steps. The debt brake, which Germany has enshrined in its constitution, is principally a good means of achieving this objective, as it legally binds politicians to obtaining sound public finances. Germany has therefore set an important example within EMU and I welcome the aspirations in France, Spain, Portugal and Italy to follow this example. This is an acknowledgement to 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches the importance of sound fiscal policy. However, the effectiveness of national debt brakes will depend on their specific design and in the case of Germany on the condition that the debt brake is applied according to its rules. As important as effective national debt brakes are, they are not sufficient to solve the current sovereign debt crisis within the euro area. To achieve this, we need an effective policy framework that meets the requirements stemming from the unique nature of EMU. EMU is a monetary union between sovereign states, not a federal state with a common budget. This is a fundamental difference compared for example to the United States. It means that euro area countries decide independently about their fiscal policy, but that the high indebtedness of one country affects all of the member states because of its effects on the common monetary policy. This harbours the danger of weakening incentives for sound public finances as the individual countries no longer carry the full burden of high sovereign debt by themselves. Ultimately, this could even translate into pressure on monetary policy to ease the burden of high public debt, for example by a more expansionary monetary policy or by using central banks’ balance sheets to shift burdens among member states. In order to correct for these adverse effects, European Monetary Union was founded on a stability-oriented policy framework. This framework includes legal provisions that preclude monetary financing of governments, strict fiscal rules laid down in the Stability and Growth Pact and the “no bail-out” clause, which, by ensuring that each country ultimately has to bear the consequences of its own fiscal policy, is an indispensable prerequisite for sound public finances within the euro area. The severity of the sovereign debt crisis in some member states and the imminent risks of contagion for other member states, however, have threatened financial stability within the European Monetary Union as a whole. The European Council therefore agreed that financial assistance should be granted to countries with severe refinancing problems, a substantial part of which is provided by Germany. This financial support is intended to buy time for the affected countries to conduct necessary structural reforms and implement consolidation measures in order to regain market participants’ confidence in the soundness of their public finances and their competitiveness. The assistance is therefore bound to adjustment programmes, which each recipient country has to fulfil. However, the reduction of interest payments on the financial aid has weakened the incentives for countries in an adjustment programme to re-establish sound public finances via fiscal and economic reforms and return to the capital market. Furthermore, the conditionality of the support measures has been loosened by the recent decisions of July 21st. This weakens the underlying principle of European Monetary Union that each country has to bear the full consequences of its own fiscal policy. Contrary to what is actually needed in order to overcome the sovereign debt crisis, we risk seeing the propensity for excessive deficits rise even further in the future. Germany’s debate about the way forward in the crisis is therefore motivated by a serious concern for the stability of monetary union.  We will not be able to regain stability within EMU without re-establishing the credibility of its framework. A fundamental political decision is therefore needed: either the existing policy framework of EMU has to be changed fundamentally or the incentives for sound fiscal policy have to be strengthened within the existing framework. The first option would imply EMU member states abandoning a substantial part of their national sovereignty over fiscal policy and would therefore require fundamental legal changes on the European and possibly also the national level. The second option requires a return to the fundamental principles of monetary union, with each member state bearing the consequences of its own fiscal policy decisions. Either option would be sustainable from an economic point of view. However, combining elements of both options, ie sharing the risks of unsound fiscal policy and retaining national sovereignty over fiscal policy, is condemned to failure. It would undermine the incentives for sound fiscal and economic policy even further, thus achieving the opposite of stabilising monetary union. Ultimately, this approach would also not be credible to financial markets as its inconsistencies raise doubts about the public and political support. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 5. Conclusion Let me conclude my speech on Germany’s role in the global economy with some caveats. In spite of the rather favourable performance during the crisis, Germany faces major challenges, overcoming the euro area’s sovereign debt crisis being the most pressing. In addition, the level of public debt has risen substantially throughout the crisis. Consequently, and considering the increasing fiscal burdens caused by an ageing society and a shrinking working-age population, consolidation is a major task for Germany, too. It is indispensable to ensure the long-term sustainability of its public finances.  But unlike some other EMU member states, Germany is still in a relatively favourable position. This combined with the fact that Germany continues to be an important economic player despite global shifts in economic weights is due, not least, to painful but ultimately rather successful structural reforms undertaken in the past. It would be short-sighted to rely solely on these achievements. But they could well serve as an encouragement to reform-minded policymakers in other countries. And the fact that these reforms, including the emphasis on fiscal soundness, contributed to revitalising the German economy and to increasing its resilience should not be a cause for concern or complaint. Instead, it should be seen as good news – for Germany, but also for EMU and the global economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Ravi Menon: Singapore’s approach to the regulation of capital markets Keynote address by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the Thomson Reuters 2nd Pan-Asian Regulatory Summit, Singapore, 28 September 2011. *      *      * What do capital markets do? Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. And to all our guests from abroad, welcome to Singapore. Two thousand years ago, in ancient Rome, enterprises contracted with the government to build temples and collect taxes. The enterprises funded these ventures by selling ownership or equity stakes in the form of shares which were readily transferable among the Romans. Later, the Italian city states sourced for funds from their citizens in the form of bonds to finance wars, while merchants sought financing from individuals to procure better vessels for sailing over ever increasing distances. Over time, a market developed to enable holders of bonds and equities to sell their holdings to other interested buyers. Thus was born – what we now call – capital markets. Since those early days in Imperial Rome, capital markets have spread far and wide across the globe. But the fundamental function of capital markets has remained unchanged – to allocate capital to those who need it and transfer risk to those who are able to bear it. It is the ability of capital markets to efficiently mobilise financial resources that has made possible the large investments needed for the Industrial Revolution of the 18th century, and the risk capital that funded the global Internet Revolution more recently. Like other markets, capital markets are prone to volatility as demand and supply fluctuate. But unlike other markets, turbulence in capital markets can have far wider consequences on the rest of the economy. From the Wall Street Crash of 1929 to the Global Financial Crisis of 2008, we have seen how dislocations in capital markets can have devastating effects on financial stability, economic growth, and the welfare of citizens. Capital markets must therefore be regulated, but in a way that does not unduly undermine their efficiency and effectiveness. This morning, I want to share with you Singapore’s approach to the regulation of capital markets.  Why we regulate capital markets We can think of the capital market as an ecosystem comprising four key components:  one, issuers – those who issue securities to raise capital;  two, investors – those who invest in these securities;  three, intermediaries – those who advise issuers or investors and facilitate the trading of securities;  four, infrastructure – the platforms or systems through which securities are traded. Each component of this ecosystem is prone to market failure – hence the need to regulate.   First, there is information asymmetry between issuers/intermediaries and investors, and investors may be unable to make informed judgments about financial products. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Second, there is a principal-agent problem, and intermediaries may not act in the best interests of their clients, be they investors or issuers.   Third, investors are sometimes prone to herding behavior, exaggerating price movements and thereby precipitating market instability.   Fourth, if issuers and intermediaries take on too much risk or liability that they cannot manage, there will be loss of confidence and market instability.   Fifth, critical infrastructure may fail, again leading to market instability. The purpose of regulating capital markets is to safeguard the interests of investors, ensure that risks are kept to an acceptable level, promote efficient price discovery, and maintain confidence in the market.  In Singapore, the regulatory framework for capital markets is underpinned by the Securities and Futures Act (SFA) and the Financial Advisers Act (FAA). Consumers who invest in products or deal with entities that are regulated under this framework will enjoy the safeguards provided under these laws. Together, the SFA and FAA cover each of the four components in the capital markets ecosystem. Issuers – dissemination of material information Let me begin with issuers. A key tenet of capital market regulation is that relevant information is transmitted efficiently for price formation and discovery. Like most reputable regulators, MAS imposes stringent rules requiring issuers of securities to disclose and disseminate all material information. We conduct ongoing surveillance of market practices and undertake rigorous enforcement actions to ensure compliance.  Disclosure The SFA requires exchanges to develop rules for reliable and unhindered price formation and discovery. First, disclosure must be ongoing. Post-listing, material information likely to affect market prices must be disseminated in a timely and organised manner. For example, a company that makes an acquisition which is likely to have a material impact on its share price must immediately announce it on the website of the Singapore Exchange. Second, disclosure must be accessible to all. Listed companies are prohibited from disclosing material information on an individual or selective basis. These disclosure requirements complement Singapore’s statutory provisions on market manipulation and insider trading. Enforcement …. and its limitations Issuers and investors alike must have confidence that the ground rules are adhered to when they transact in our markets. Constant surveillance and strict enforcement are therefore critical. MAS takes a serious view of any false statement or omission of material information that misleads the market. We will not hesitate to impose stiff penalties on issuers who have made misleading statements in initial public offerings, or IPOs. But no regulator can totally prevent fraud or misconduct. Take for instance our experience with S-chips, or Chinese companies listed on the SGX. Many of them are reputable companies and add breadth to our equity capital market. But some of them are not. Since 2006, accounting irregularities or outright frauds have been discovered in 14 such companies listed on the SGX. Most of these cases came to light when the auditors were unable to confirm the companies’ cash and account receivables. The counters were suspended pending investigations by special auditors, and investors had to bear the losses. I still get 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 letters from investors who had lost money in these shares. I can understand their frustrations. Many have asked MAS to do more to bring the full force of our law to bear on the wrongdoers. Let me state the position categorically: MAS will leave no stone unturned to take rigorous action against those who break our laws. But there are real challenges when the fraud is perpetrated by parties outside our jurisdiction. Cross-border investigations and enforcement are intrinsically difficult.  Singapore is not alone in facing challenges with international listings. Co-operation among securities regulators and enforcement agencies in different jurisdictions is therefore critical. We cannot eliminate fraud. But we can and must ensure that companies that are brought to the market are of good quality. SGX must be rigorous in evaluating the suitability of listing applicants before admitting them. Other stakeholders must play their part too.  First, directors of the company seeking a listing must exercise adequate oversight of internal controls and ensure the veracity of information disclosed.  Second, IPO advisers have a legal and professional responsibility to conduct proper due diligence when bringing companies public. They must have a healthy dose of skepticism, and never place their commercial interests above the need to ensure that a company is suitable for a public listing. MAS will not hesitate to take advisers to task for poor due diligence work.  If the regulators, issuers, and advisers each do their jobs well, we can reduce the likelihood of poor quality companies gaining access to our markets. Investors – safeguarding their interests This brings me to the second component of the capital market ecosystem – investors. Well-informed and empowered investors are at the core of a well functioning capital market. Investors will lose confidence in a market where disclosure is misleading and where selling practices are irresponsible.  Safeguarding the interests of investors, particularly retail investors, is therefore a key focus of MAS regulation. But this objective has to be balanced against the need for investors to take ownership of their investment decisions.  A regulatory approach that requires issuers or intermediaries to bear all the risks and losses will not work. If investors expect their losses to be always made good, there will be moral hazard and it will encourage reckless investing. MAS safeguards the interests of investors in five ways:  First, we demand stringent disclosure of information by issuers;  Second, we require transparency in the information disclosed;  Third, we set standards for intermediaries who sell investment products to provide quality financial advice;  Fourth, we promote investor education, so that investors are empowered to make informed decisions.  Fifth, we provide affordable and accessible dispute resolution mechanisms for investors who feel aggrieved by the investment process. Let me take each of these aspects in turn. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Disclosure There is nothing like disclosure to instill market discipline. In the words of US Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis, “Sunlight is said to be the best of disinfectants; electric light the most efficient policeman”. Disclosure is about shining that light so that all can see and make informed decisions.  Investors are entitled to accurate and timely disclosure of material information so that they can assess the risks and rewards of their investment. Disclosure works not because all investors understand every word that is disclosed. Disclosure works because it facilitates scrutiny by experts in the market; it is this professional scrutiny that acts as a check on issuers and helps to inform the broader investor base. Take for example an IPO prospectus. It can typically run into hundreds of pages, with detailed descriptions about the company’s business operations, its competitive environment, governance practices, and risk exposures, not to mention a full set of financial statements. Most retail investors cannot easily digest all this information. But the scrutiny of the prospectus by analysts and institutional investors helps to bring to light any significant weakness in the company. Having said that, I must acknowledge that greater disclosure does not always improve our understanding of investment products. While all material and relevant information must be disclosed, there is a tendency for disclosure to be voluminous and legalistic – often made for the purpose of limiting legal liability rather than facilitating understanding by retail investors. MAS therefore seeks to ensure that information disclosed is not only adequate but also transparent. Transparency MAS has sharpened the focus on providing investors information in a clear and concise manner to aid understanding.  Earlier this year, we introduced a new regulatory requirement for a Product Highlights Sheet to accompany offers of investment products that come with prospectuses. Its purpose is to convey key risks and product information in plain language and in a simple question-and-answer format. Let me give an example. In one recent prospectus, the right of the investors to cancel their subscription within seven days was spelled out in two rather technical paragraphs using a total of 170 words. In the Product Highlights Sheet, the same point was made in two simple sentences. Financial advice The third aspect of investor protection is the provision of sound financial advice by intermediaries when they sell investment products. The Fair Dealing Guidelines issued by MAS require intermediaries to conduct their own internal assessment to ensure that a new product being launched for sale is suitable for its targeted investor base. Intermediaries must also ensure that their representatives have the competencies to understand and explain the product features to their customers. MAS has introduced new rules requiring intermediaries to assess their customers’ investment knowledge or experience before investing in complex products. The rules will come into effect in January 2012. Where an investor does not possess the requisite knowledge or experience, intermediaries must provide appropriate advice. Investors who choose not to heed their advice or insist on buying a product which has been assessed to be unsuitable for them must take responsibility for their decision. This approach recognises that investors’ capacity to understand complex products is uneven, while respecting their right to invest as they see fit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Over the last two years, MAS has conducted surveys and inspections to assess intermediaries’ delivery of these fair dealing outcomes. We will use our findings to fine-tune the Guidelines on Fair Dealing. While MAS has taken these steps to ensure that the financial advisory industry is able to help investors make informed decisions, the best way to instill discipline on the industry is for investors to demand good advice. Singapore’s investing public should seek good financial advisers who are prepared to even advise them against buying an unsuitable product. They should be prepared to pay a fee for such advice. Investor education Even with the best of disclosure and transparency, investors can make informed decisions only if they have the knowledge and skills to do so. This brings me to the fourth area of investor protection – education. The centerpiece of Singapore’s investor education efforts is the MoneySENSE national financial programme. It was launched in 2003 to raise consumer understanding of basic money management, financial planning, and investment products. Through various seminars and media initiatives, MoneySENSE has reached a large segment of the population since its launch. In the last year alone, MoneySENSE events attracted close to 100,000 attendees while media initiatives reached more than two million people. These events are conducted by industry practitioners, academics, and investor advocates.  To-date, Money SENSE has published more than 230 educational articles on its website and in the media. More than 30 consumer guides have been issued and are available online. While we have made steady progress, much more needs to be done. Most Singaporeans have sound savings habits and are generally responsible in managing credit, but many still do not have a good understanding of common investment products. Every month, MAS receives, on average, about 10 complaints from the public involving the sale of investment products.  I read many of these letters. Sure enough, there are indeed a few cases of inadequate disclosure or mis-selling, which the financial institution concerned should remedy. But there are others where the customer has failed to exercise basic due diligence. These are the most painful letters to read:  of investors who were attracted by headline returns and purchased products without reading any of the product documentation;  of investors who willingly signed blank sheets of product assessment forms without realising what they were buying; and  of investors who insisted on buying risky products even though they were advised that the products were not suitable for them.  It is very difficult to help in cases like these. MAS will continue to explore ways to equip investors with core financial capabilities. We are currently studying the feasibility of establishing a financial literacy institute to complement existing MoneySENSE initiatives through talks and workshops to reach a larger segment of the population.  We are also reaching out more to students, through the schools. The objective is not so much to instill technical expertise in investment products, but to inculcate good money habits from a young age – being prudent, being alert to risks, being clear about the objectives of investing. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Dispute resolution Even with well-informed consumers, occasional disputes with those who sell investment products will be inevitable. Hence the final area of investor protection is to provide an affordable and accessible dispute resolution mechanism for aggrieved investors.  MAS has set clear expectations that financial institutions must establish a robust process to resolve customer grievances independently, effectively, and promptly. We also expect financial institutions to investigate and rectify issues related to any widespread complaints on a particular product or selling practice.  This dispute resolution mechanism within financial institutions can be effective only if parties to a dispute act fairly. Financial institutions must police their relationship managers and enforce internal guidelines. Recently, we were alerted to a case where a financial institution tried to salvage its reputation by denying that its relationship manager had recommended a highly risky investment product to an elderly retiree with a low risk tolerance. This is not acceptable. MAS will take firm action against financial institutions for such behaviour.  On the other hand, investors should not make unreasonable demands and expect financial institutions to accede to them. For instance, a consumer demanded that her bank accept her mobile text instruction to reverse a transaction when the message was sent a day after the transaction was executed. Where disputes cannot be resolved through the financial institution’s internal processes, investors can approach the independent Financial Industry Dispute Resolution Centre (“FIDReC”). FIDReC provides access to an independent and affordable dispute resolution process through mediation or adjudication. This provides the consumer a low-cost alternative to litigation. FIDReC awards are binding on the financial institution, but the investor can choose to reject the award and pursue other options for recourse.  Intermediaries – safety and market conduct I turn now to the next key component in the capital markets ecosystem – intermediaries. The objective of regulation with respect to capital market intermediaries is twofold: their safety and soundness, and market conduct. Safety and soundness We want intermediaries to be safe and sound, in the interest of preserving systemic stability. Intermediaries connect the various parts of the capital market ecosystem. They stand between buyers and sellers, underwrite risks, act as counterparties in risk transfers, and participate as members of clearing houses. The failure of a major intermediary can transmit risks across the system, causing severe market disruption and undermining confidence. Lest we forget, Lehman Brothers was principally a securities firm, not a bank.  MAS regulation cannot rule out the failure of an intermediary. But we can seek to ensure an orderly winding-down process. The segregation of customers’ funds from the intermediary’s own funds is a key feature of our regulatory regime. Unlike banks which can freely deploy the deposits they collect, capital market intermediaries are required to segregate customers’ assets from their own monies. This acts as a safeguard for customers’ funds should the intermediary fail. Fund managers are required to appoint independent custodians and fund valuation firms, and be subject to regular audits. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 Market conduct The second regulatory outcome we expect from intermediaries is fair conduct. Trades that give a false or misleading appearance of market activity, actions to rig the prices of securities or futures, are all prohibited under our law and severely dealt with. MAS works closely with the Commercial Affairs Department to take enforcement actions ranging from civil penalties to criminal action. Last year saw the fruition of MAS’ first civil penalty court action. We secured civil penalties against a fund manager who was found by the High Court to have window-dressed his portfolio by creating a false appearance relating to the price of one of the component shares. The fund manager and its CEO were ordered to pay a civil penalty of S$250,000 each to MAS, as well as costs of the court action. The decision was upheld by the Court of Appeal. The assistance that we sought, and obtained, from our foreign counterparts was vital to our success in this case. Similarly, MAS stands ready to assist our international counterparts in their enforcement efforts. Earlier this year, the Australian authorities successfully prosecuted a former fund manager of an Australian bank for insider trading. MAS had referred this case to the Australian Securities and Investment Commission (ASIC) and provided ongoing assistance during ASIC’s investigations. Infrastructure – sound and stable The final component of the capital market ecosystem is the infrastructure that supports the trading of securities and futures. Capital market participants trade either on a multilateral basis through organised exchanges, or bilaterally with each other over-the-counter or OTC.  Exchanges The Singapore Exchange and the Singapore Mercantile Exchange operate the systemically-important securities and futures markets in Singapore. They constitute critical infrastructure that must function properly to preserve stability and efficiency. Our laws require the exchanges to maintain sufficient financial, human and system resources, have frameworks and processes to manage their risks, and to regulate and supervise their participants. OTC derivatives The OTC derivatives space has traditionally been the preserve of sophisticated financial institutions which are well placed to assess and negotiate trades among themselves. These financial institutions are regulated by MAS and the risks associated with their OTC derivatives positions are taken into account under the respective regulatory frameworks for these institutions.  OTC derivatives, unlike their more standardised counterparts on futures markets, enable customised hedging of risks. Properly employed, they confer significant benefits to the financial intermediation process and hence the wider economy. For example, interest rate swaps enable companies to convert floating rate loans to fixed-rate loans. Companies with large capital investments over a long horizon, such as airlines, shipping companies and infrastructure builders, rely on interest rate hedging tools to manage their financial risks.  But with the rapid growth of OTC derivatives globally, weaknesses in the market structure can contribute to a build-up of systemic risk. We saw this during the global financial crisis. The interconnectedness of OTC derivatives market participants and the limited transparency on counterparty risks can trigger rapid contagion. Under stressed market conditions, this can potentially threaten the stability of the financial system. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches The G20 has called for changes to improve transparency and mitigate risks in OTC derivatives markets. The Financial Stability Board has made recommendations under four key thrusts. Singapore is fully committed to implementing these recommendations. The first thrust is to standardise derivative contracts. MAS is working with the Singapore Foreign Exchange Markets Committee to encourage standardisation of derivative products. The Committee will formulate a code of conduct for financial institutions operating in the OTC market. The second thrust of the reforms is to mandate central clearing of all standardised contracts. Central clearing mitigates systemic risk through multilateral netting and ensures that the failure of a counterparty does not affect other participants. Since 2006, the SGX has operated a clearing facility for OTC derivatives, covering derivatives contracts for commodities, energy and freight. It started clearing interest rate swaps in November last year, and will clear foreign exchange forwards by the end of this year. But comprehensive implementation of central clearing is not without challenge. We need to determine carefully the products for mandatory central clearing, particularly those employed by commercial end-users. The cost of clearing can potentially increase their hedging cost, causing a cut-back on needed investment or an increase in unhedged positions. We also need to be mindful that while central clearing removes counter-party risks, it adds to concentration risks. It is therefore critical that central clearing platforms be subject to robust supervision to ensure that they manage their risks effectively. To the extent that these platforms operate across geographical borders, appropriate arrangements for cooperation among national supervisors must be in place.  The third thrust is to move derivatives trading to platforms where appropriate. This will help to improve price transparency. Singapore is a major centre for exchange-traded derivatives in Asia. We are well placed to move more derivatives trades to organised platforms, but the extent would have to take into account the local context, such as product characteristics and participant profiles.  The fourth thrust is to report trades. Mandatory trade reporting enhances supervision of derivatives markets by addressing information gaps. For this to be effective, regulators need timely access to relevant data that can be aggregated. This requires cross-border supervisory cooperation on data access and harmonisation of reporting requirements and standards. But national concerns have led to some jurisdictions setting up their own trade repositories, which could make data aggregation more challenging. MAS is assessing the need for a local repository and the appropriate regulatory regime to avoid duplication. In recent months, there has been a notion in some quarters that as tighter regulations are proposed for OTC derivatives in the US and EU, activity will flow to centres in Asia that are purportedly less tightly regulated. This is mistaken. Leading centres in Asia – like Singapore, Hong Kong, and Australia – are very much part of the G20 initiative and there is no room for regulatory arbitrage. MAS is fully engaged in the OTC work of the FSB, the International Organisation of Securities Commissions, and the Committee on Payment Systems and Settlements. We will fully implement the OTC derivatives reform agenda.  There must be consistency in implementation across jurisdictions, but there cannot be precise equivalence. The OTC derivatives landscape in Asia and Singapore differs considerably from that in the US and Europe. We have smaller markets and less complex derivative instruments. We have to consider how to implement the G20 reforms effectively while taking into account enforcement issues and the characteristics of our markets. MAS will consult the industry on its proposals for OTC derivatives market reforms by the end of this year. We aim to meet the G20 target to implement the reforms by end-2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 Conclusion – shared responsibility Let me conclude. In regulating capital markets, we are not dealing with a particular industry or a particular type of institution. We are trying to create the conditions within what is essentially an ecosystem, so that its risks are managed and its economic benefits sustained.  But these benefits cannot be achieved by regulation alone. As Winston Churchill puts it, “If you have ten thousand regulations you destroy all respect for the law”. There is a limit to how far regulation can go without undermining compliance, not to mention efficiency and innovation.  All components of the capital market ecosystem must play their part. A well-functioning capital market is a shared responsibility. If all stakeholders do their part well, not only will we have fair and efficient capital markets that everyone has confidence in, but we will also make Singapore a competitive and vibrant financial hub in Asia. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Ben S Bernanke: Lessons from emerging market economies on the sources of sustained growth Speech by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Cleveland Clinic “Ideas for Tomorrow” Series, Cleveland, Ohio, 28 September 2011. *      *      * Good afternoon. I am pleased to participate in the Cleveland Clinic’s “Ideas for Tomorrow” series. My public remarks often concern short-run economic developments, but it is important once in a while to place those shorter-term developments in the context of the powerful long-term trends shaping the global economy. Of these trends, surely one of the most important is the rapid and sustained economic growth achieved by the emerging market economies. Today, by some measures at least, developing and emerging market economies now account for more than one-half of global economic activity, up substantially from less than one-third in 1980.1 Today I will discuss what the experience of the emerging markets teaches us about the sources of economic growth and conclude with some thoughts about the prospects for future growth in this critical part of the global economy.  Among the emerging market economies, the Asian “growth miracle” is, of course, the most conspicuous success story, with the case of China being particularly dramatic. Over the past three decades, growth in Chinese output per person has averaged roughly 9 percent a year, putting per capita output about 13 times higher now than in 1980. The economy of Korea, another East Asian success story, has expanded, on average, at better than a 6 percent annual rate over the past 30 years. Growth in Latin America has been more moderate, but that continent has made substantial economic progress as well, most notably in terms of lower inflation and greater economic stability. More recently, the pace of recovery in most emerging market economies from the global financial crisis has been impressive. In short, in the past few decades the emerging market economies have made significant strides in raising living standards. Hundreds of millions of people have benefited from this progress, with many millions lifted out of poverty.2 To be sure, the gap with the advanced economies remains substantial, but it has been narrowed significantly.  These developments raise the question: How have the emerging market economies achieved such strong results in recent decades? The answer is complex, of course, and I can only scratch the surface of these issues today; but I hope to lay out some key themes and provide some food for thought.  Fostering growth in developing economies: the Washington Consensus Ironically, the rapid growth of the emerging market economies reflects in part the low levels of development at which they began. In the economic-growth derby, in contrast to most types                                                  1 Based on gross domestic product (GDP) data from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), with the valuation of a country’s GDP based on purchasing power parity exchange rates. The emerging market and developing economies group used here includes the IMF’s classification of newly industrialized Asian economies. There is no consensus definition of emerging economies, as contrasted with developing economies, but generally speaking, emerging market economies are defined as those economies in the low- to middle-income category that are advancing rapidly and are integrating with global capital and product markets. Emerging economies account for most of the rise in the share of the developing and emerging economies in global output, and they are the focus of this speech. 2 According to data from World Bank Development Indicators, 2011, there were more than 500 million fewer people living below the $1.25 a day poverty line in 2005 than 25 years earlier. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches of competitions, starting from far behind has its advantages. For example, all else being equal, domestic and foreign investors are attracted to the higher returns they receive from investments where capital is relatively scarce, as is generally the case in poorer countries. In the 19th century, the United States drew capital from all over the world to finance railroad construction; although not all of these investments paid off, overall they helped generate enormous increases in wealth by reducing transport costs and fostering economic integration within the North American continent. Similarly, emerging market economies in recent decades have attracted substantial foreign investment in new manufacturing capacity, in part to take advantage of low labor costs. Developing countries also have the advantage of being able to import and adapt production technologies already in use in advanced economies. And, indeed, empirical studies have found some tendency for countries that start from further behind to grow faster than those that begin with higher incomes.3  However, much of the national and regional variation in growth rates is not explained by initial economic conditions. Notably, emerging Asian economies have tended to outperform, relative to what would be predicted based solely on their levels of income per person, say, 30 years ago. And some of the poorest countries, including a number in Africa, have continued to grow relatively slowly. So what factors – and what economic policies – differentiate the more successful performers from the less successful?  A classic attempt to generalize about the policies that best promote economic growth and development, and a useful starting point for discussion, is the so-called Washington Consensus, articulated by the economist John Williamson in 1990.4 Writing about Latin America, Williamson outlined a list of 10 broad policies to promote economic development that he judged as commanding, at the time he wrote, substantial support between both economists and policymakers. Because these views were influential at major institutions like the World Bank located in Washington, this set of policies was dubbed the Washington Consensus.  Williamson’s original list of recommendations can usefully be divided into three categories: first, steps to increase macroeconomic stability, such as reducing fiscal deficits (which had caused high inflation in many countries), broadening the tax base, and reallocating government resources to build human and physical capital; second, actions to increase the role of markets in the economy, such as privatization of public assets, appropriate deregulation, and the liberalization of trade, interest rates, and capital flows; and third, efforts to strengthen institutions that promote investment, business formation, and growth, particularly by enhancing property rights and the rule of law.  Aspects of the Washington Consensus have stirred considerable controversy over the past two decades.5 Williamson himself viewed the Consensus as an attempt to synthesize the conventional wisdom of economists and policymakers of the time, not as a roadmap or comprehensive strategy for development. I have introduced this framework here because it is                                                  3 The idea that levels of output per capita tend to converge across countries, which in turn implies that the countries that are initially the poorest tend to grow the fastest, is known in the research literature as “absolute convergence.” A more sophisticated variant of this idea is “conditional convergence,” which holds that convergence across countries holds only after we control appropriately for factors that affect the long-run level of output in each country, such as the domestic saving rate and the rate of population growth. Empirical analyses generally find somewhat mixed evidence for absolute convergence but fairly robust support for conditional convergence. See, for example, Barro and Sala-i-Martin (2004) and Durlauf, Johnson, and Temple (2005). Rodrik (2011) and some others have argued recently that absolute convergence holds at a more disaggregated level in the manufacturing sector. 4 Williamson initially articulated the Washington Consensus in a speech in 1989, but the first written version appears in Williamson (1990). See also Williamson (2004) for his views on the various interpretations given to his recommendations. 5 Examples of critiques of the Washington Consensus include Burki and Perry (1998), Rodrik (2006), and Birdsall and others (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 a nice summary of the prevailing views of 20 years ago, a time when the most dramatic growth in emerging markets still lay several years in the future. By comparing current views with those described by Williamson in 1990, and accepted by many, we may learn something about which ideas have held up and which have been modified or refuted by recent events. I will take in turn the three groups of policies that make up the Washington Consensus.  The first group of recommendations, as I noted, comprised policies aimed at increasing macroeconomic stability. In this case there is little controversy. Abundant evidence has linked fiscal discipline, low inflation, and a stable macroeconomic policy environment to stronger, longer-term growth in both emerging and advanced economies.6 In particular, many emerging market economies in the 1990s emulated the success of the advanced economies in the 1980s in controlling inflation. Over the years, the emerging market economies have also improved their fiscal management to the point that their fiscal positions are now often more favorable than those of some advanced economies. Improvements in macroeconomic management have been particularly striking in Latin America, where large budget deficits and high inflation rates had produced costly swings in economic activity in previous decades. Brazil, for example, suffered hyperinflation from 1986 to 1994, with several years of inflation well in excess of 500 percent, but has maintained an average annual inflation rate of about 5 percent since 2006, while (not coincidentally) reducing the ratio of its budget deficit to its gross domestic product. Disciplined macroeconomic policies have also supported growth in emerging markets by fostering domestic savings, stimulating capital investment (including foreign direct investment), and reducing the risk of financial instability.  The second group of recommendations listed by Williamson emphasized the need for greater reliance on markets: the freeing up of the economy through privatization, deregulation, and liberalization. The basic idea here has held up pretty well; most observers today would agree that carefully managed liberalization – the substitution of markets for bureaucratic control of the economy – is necessary for sustained growth. For example, trade liberalization measures, such as the reduction of tariffs and the removal of other controls on exports and imports, have been a key element of the growth strategies of a number of fast-growing emerging market economies, including China.7 Openness to inflows of foreign direct investment has helped many emerging economies import foreign management techniques and technologies as well as to attract foreign capital. More generally, greater use of markets improves the allocation of resources, creates incentives for more efficient forms of production, and encourages entrepreneurship and innovation. However, as I will discuss in a moment, experience has also shown that the success of reform programs may depend crucially on how the transition to greater market orientation is managed, and in particular on how market reforms are sequenced, issues on which the Washington Consensus is largely silent.  The third part of the Washington Consensus focused on strengthening property rights and the rule of law – for example, through effective enforcement of contracts. The evidence suggests that these factors too can be important for development.8 For example, the inability to establish clear title to land or buildings has inhibited entrepreneurship and investment in                                                  6 Fischer (1993) and Easterly (2001) document that poor growth is associated with high inflation, large budget deficits, and distorted foreign exchange markets. Durlauf, Kourtellos, and Tan (2008), emphasizing techniques that take into account model uncertainty, also find considerable support for the importance of stable macroeconomic policies. Fatas and Mihov (2009) establish that stability of policy is a relevant and robust determinant of cross-country differences in growth. Easterly and Levine (1997) link much of the plight of Africa to macroeconomic instability. 7 See, for example, Chapter 5 of World Bank (2005). Earlier studies documenting the importance of trade openness for growth include Sachs and Warner (1995, 1997) and Frankel and Romer (1999). 8 For example, Kaufmann and others (2002) provide some evidence linking economic development to the presence of institutions that promote the rule of law. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches some poor countries. On the other hand, some critics fault the Washington Consensus for paying insufficient attention to the role in economic growth of a much broader range of institutional factors than property rights alone – standardized accounting conventions, political accountability, control of corruption, bankruptcy laws, and capable and transparent regulatory agencies, for example.9 Moreover, the Washington Consensus provided little specific advice on how to create and sustain a strong institutional framework, nor did it touch on a variety of institutional arrangements – central bank independence being one familiar example – that have been shown to promote economic stability and growth.10  Amending the Washington Consensus Overall, some key elements of the Washington Consensus appear well supported both by basic economic logic and by their successful application by a number of countries. However, the experience of the past two decades also suggests some lessons that augment or modify what we thought we knew about economic development in 1990. I will highlight three specific lessons.  First, the implementation of the Washington Consensus recommendations is important and not so straightforward in practice. In particular, as I alluded to earlier, the sequencing of reforms matters. For example, some developing countries, following the principles of liberalization and deregulation, removed controls on the inflows of foreign capital, and foreign investors responded by pouring in funds. However, the banking systems and the associated regulatory and supervisory agencies in these countries were not always well prepared to manage these capital inflows. Consequently, some of the foreign capital was badly invested, which in turn contributed to emerging-market financial crises, like those in Mexico and emerging Asia in the 1990s. This experience suggests that measures to strengthen banks and bank regulation should be put in place before the domestic market is opened to capital flows from abroad.  Similarly, dismantling controls on the domestic financial industry has proven counterproductive when important complementary factors – such as effective bank supervision, the availability of bank managers trained in market-based lending, or consumer familiarity with financial products such as credit cards – were absent. For example, Korea experienced a mini financial crisis in early 2003, resulting from a massive run-up in household debt. In the wake of policy changes to liberalize and increase competition in domestic financial markets, credit card debt in Korea as a share of its gross domestic product more than tripled between 1999 and 2002, as the average number of credit cards for every adult in the country rose from 1 to 3. Korea’s consumers, lenders, and regulators had little experience with credit cards, and institutional arrangements for sharing data on consumer credit, including credit reports, were inadequate. Not surprisingly, at least in retrospect, delinquency rates soared, putting the solvency of a number of the country’s major financial institutions at risk. The broader lesson is that institutional arrangements, ranging from accounting rules to regulatory frameworks to tax-compliance tools, must be sufficiently developed to ensure that reforms are successful. Fortunately, even in the absence of a clear consensus on how best to sequence and implement reforms, many countries have successfully promoted growth through a slow and pragmatic but continuing process of liberalization.                                                   9 Burki and Perry (1998) and Rodrik (2006) are among those who argue that the Washington Consensus did not sufficiently emphasize the development of institutions. 10 On the lack of specific advice on creating the proper institutional framework, see, for example, Rodrik (2011). On the benefits of central bank independence, see, for example, Alesina and Summers (1993) and Cukierman and others (2002). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 A second important lesson of the past two decades involves the pivotal role of technology in economic development. For emerging market economies, which tend to lag behind in technological sophistication, rapid gains in productivity can be achieved by adapting  state-of-the-art technologies already developed by the advanced economies rather than by having to develop these technologies from scratch. But successful importing of technologies does not happen automatically or without preparation. For example, strong educational systems producing increasingly skilled workforces have proven crucial for climbing the technological ladder. In the United States, substantial increases in educational attainment from the beginning of the 20th century through the period following World War II were instrumental in driving economic growth.11  In the emerging market world, India’s information technology (IT) services industry has thrived in large part because of the country’s large supply of well-educated, English-speaking workers. And it is not just higher education that matters. Encouraging basic levels of literacy is critical as well. Promising programs in some emerging market countries, such as Brazil and Mexico, provide modest amounts of money to poor families (generally to women) on the condition that their children attend school regularly and receive basic health care. The evidence suggests that these programs enhance the quality of the economy’s labor forcewhile addressing social goals such as reducing gender and income inequality.  Many emerging market economies have also harnessed international trade as an engine of technical progress. Openness to trade has allowed these countries to import state-of-the-art capital goods, and vigorous international competition has increased the efficiency of domestic firms and facilitated the transfer of skills and knowledge. International trade has also helped shift these economies away from basic agriculture toward manufacturing, with substantial benefits for average productivity. These benefits of trade openness do not require large trade surpluses, by the way, only a willingness to engage with and integrate with the global economy. Notably, Korea ran current account deficits through much of its “growth miracle” phase.  A third important lesson that has come into sharper focus, and which was not fully appreciated by the Washington Consensus, involves the capacity to draw on economies of scale to accelerate the pace of technical progress and economic growth. Economies of scale refer to the efficiency gains that can be achieved in some industries when production is run at a very large scale. These gains may arise because of the nature of the technologies involved – as, for example, in steel manufacturing.12 But in some cases they can also arise because of the need to develop a critical mass of skilled workers and specialized suppliers. It is no coincidence that so many high-tech firms locate near each other in California’s Silicon Valley or North Carolina’s Research Triangle; these firms benefit from the ability to draw on sufficiently large pools of skilled labor and other resources, while sharing ideas and information in mutually beneficial ways.13 A single, isolated firm would not likely be as productive. Thus, scale economies can arise in the development of knowledge centers, like research universities, or in the building of large-scale infrastructure, like a national highway system.14 For example, India’s IT industry is clustered in certain regions, such as Bangalore,                                                  11 Research by Goldin and Katz (2001) emphasizes the importance of the U.S. high school system in driving the country’s growth during the first decades of the 20th century. The state-supported university system and the educational subsidies of the G.I. Bill boosted educational attainment and growth after World War II. (See, for example, Altschuler and Blumin (2009).) It should be noted that increasing the share of the public budget devoted to education was advocated by the Washington Consensus. 12 In such cases we call them “natural monopolies.” 13 This idea whereby economies of scale can be continuously exploited by the sharing of ideas and “learning-by-doing” is one source of what is called “endogenous growth” in the economics literature. See, for example, Romer (1986) and Lucas (1988). While the idea of “natural monopolies” was well understood at the time the Washington Consensus came out, the “endogenous growth” literature was in its infancy. 14 See, for example, Barro (1990). 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches around some of the more successful and high-quality institutes of technology in the country. Moreover, recent research suggests that the growth of information technology activity in India has increased returns to schooling and has significantly increased primary school enrollment in areas where call centers are located.15  Encouraging international trade can also help countries capture the benefits of scale. For many emerging market economies, domestic markets are not large enough to support the amount of production needed to achieve efficiency gains. Access to global markets has enabled production to expand to levels where economies of scale could be more fully exploited. Additional efficiencies can sometimes be gained when countries specialize in particular stages of a good’s production. They import parts and components from other countries and use them to produce new products, which themselves may be further processed or assembled in still other countries. At each stage, the production is for the world market rather than for domestic producers or consumers alone. Many Asian economies are interlinked through a network of vertical supply chains; China is often referred to as the endpoint in the global supply chain because the assembly of so many goods is completed there before being shipped to consumers around the world.  The existence of economies of scale may, in some circumstances, also create a rationale for targeted government interventions in the economy – in other words, industrial policy. The premise of industrial policy is that large-scale industries may not be able to get off the ground without government support or protection, given the substantial start-up costs and the existence of more-efficient competitors in other countries. Indeed, government support for certain industries does seem to have played a role in several of the best-performing emerging market economies, including China and Korea.16 But such interventions can be double-edged swords. The experience of many decades tells us that industrial policies are far from a sure-fire development strategy, as they require that the government be adept at picking winners. One example, the role of government intervention in promoting ethanol production in Brazil, illustrates the vagaries of industrial policies. After being introduced over the mid- to late 1970s, for several years the program was generally viewed as a failure. More recently, however, the sustained upward trend in world oil prices has turned ethanol production in Brazil into a profitable venture.17 But in many cases, similar interventions have failed or crowded out the development of other, potentially more profitable industries.  Lessons and implications for the future What implications can we draw for longer-term prospects for growth in the emerging market economies? Notwithstanding the recent impressive growth, output per person in the emerging market economies generally remains much lower than in the advanced economies. This fact suggests that the emerging market economies should be able to maintain relatively high growth rates for some years to come, as they continue to catch up to the advanced economies. But over time, as the emerging market countries become wealthier and technologically more sophisticated, they will gradually lose the advantages of starting from behind. Even with continued strong policies, their growth will slow as returns to capital investments diminish and the most profitable opportunities are exploited.18 For example, over time, rising wages in manufacturing should make production and investment in China and                                                  15 See Oster and Millet (2011). 16 Rodrik (2010), for example, discusses China’s case. 17 After 1989, ethanol subsidies in Brazil were removed, but other forms of indirect government support were maintained. 18 Recent research by Eichengreen and others (2011) draws on cross-country evidence to show that the pace of a country’s economic growth tends to slow once its level of real per capita income crosses a certain threshold. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 other East Asian nations less attractive. Also, technological progress will slow as the process of importing foreign technologies reaches its limits, forcing greater reliance on innovation in emerging countries themselves. Resource and environmental constraints, as well as aging populations, should also slow economic growth. But in many ways, such a slowdown in growth will be the inevitable result of progress – the culmination of a successful catching up process – and in that respect should be viewed as a consequence of success, not of failure.  Many emerging markets also will be challenged by their reliance on trade to drive growth. As I have discussed, international trade has many benefits. However, generating trade surpluses by suppressing domestic demand defeats the ultimate purpose of economic growth – improving the lot of the country’s own citizens. Large and persistent imbalances in trade are also inconsistent, in the long run, with global economic and financial stability. Of course, the advanced economies, like the United States, need to do their part as well in reducing global imbalances, as I have noted on numerous occasions before.  In fact, with the emerging market economies accounting for a large and growing share of global activity, many of them can no longer view themselves as small, open economies whose actions have little effect on their neighbors. With increasing size and influence comes greater responsibility. In response to this new reality, many of our international institutions have been restructured in recent years to give an increased voice to the emerging market economies. For example, the Group of Twenty (which has significant emerging market representation) has largely supplanted the Group of Seven as the premier global forum for economic and financial policy matters, and emerging market economies have been given increased power in setting the policies of the International Monetary Fund. These forums should be used by advanced economies and emerging economies alike to meet their respective responsibilities to the global economy in a spirit of cooperation.  So, what lessons can we draw about the Washington Consensus and, more generally, about the experience of the dynamic emerging market economies over the past decades? Ultimately, the principles that John Williamson enumerated two decades ago have much to recommend them. Macroeconomic stability, increased reliance on market forces, and strong political and economic institutions are important for sustainable growth. However, with the experience and perspective of the past 20 years, we can see that Williamson’s recommendations were not complete. Reforms must be sequenced and implemented appropriately to have their desired effects. And a successful development framework must take into account that activities such as the adaptation of advanced technologies and the harnessing economies of scale are often critical to economic growth and depend on a host of institutional conditions, such as an educated workforce, to be fully effective.  Indeed, advanced economies like the United States would do well to re-learn some of the lessons from the experiences of the emerging market economies, such as the importance of disciplined fiscal policies, the benefits of open trade, the need to encourage private capital formation while undertaking necessary public investments, the high returns to education and to promoting technological advances, and the importance of a regulatory framework that encourages entrepreneurship and innovation while maintaining financial stability. As the advanced economies look for ways of enhancing longer-term growth, a re-reading of Williamson’s original Washington Consensus, combined with close attention to the experiences of successful emerging market economies, could pay significant dividends.  References Alesina, Alberto, and Lawrence H. Summers (1993). “Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 25 (2), pp. 151–62.  Altschuler, Glenn C., and Stuart M. Blumin (2009). The GI Bill: A New Deal for Veterans. New York: Oxford University Press.  
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches Barro, Robert J. (1990). “Government Spending in a Simple Model of Endogenous Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 98 (5, part 2), pp. S103–25.  Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (2004). Economic Growth, 2nd edition. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.  Birdsall, Nancy, Augusto de la Torre, and Felipe Valencia Caicedo (2010). “The Washington Consensus: Assessing a Damaged Brand,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5316. Washington: World Bank, May.  Burki, Shahid J., and Guillermo Perry (1998). Beyond the Washington Consensus: Institutions Matter. Washington: World Bank. Cukierman, Alex, Geoffrey P. Miller, and Bilin Neyapti (2002). “Central Bank Reform, Liberalization and Inflation in Transition Economies – An International Perspective,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 49, pp. 237–64.  Durlauf, S. N., P. A. Johnson, and J. R. W. Temple (2005). “Growth Econometrics,” in P. Aghion and S. N. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth. Amsterdam: Elsevier.  Durlauf, S. N., Andros Kourtellos, and Chih Ming Tan (2008). “Are Any Growth Theories Robust?” Economic Journal, vol. 118 (March), pp. 329–46.  Easterly, William, and Ross Levine (1997). “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 112 (November), pp. 1203–50.  Easterly, William (2001). The Elusive Quest for Growth. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.  Eichengreen, Barry, Donghyun Park, and Kwanho Shin (2011). “When Fast Growing Economies Slow Down: International Evidence from China,” NBER Working Paper No. 16919. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March.  Fatás, Antonio, and Ilian Mihov (2009). “Macroeconomic Policy: Does it Matter for Growth? The Role of Volatility (PDF),” Commission on Growth and Development Working Paper No. 48. Washington: World Bank.  Fischer, Stanley (1993). “The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 32, pp. 485–512.  Frankel, Jeffrey A., and David H. Romer (1999). “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic Review, vol. 89 (3), pp. 379–99.  Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz (2001). “The Legacy of U.S. Educational Leadership: Notes on Distribution and Economic Growth in the 20th Century,” American Economic Review, vol. 91 (2), pp. 18–23.  Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, Eduardo Lora, and Lant Pritchett (2002). “Growth Without Governance,” Economia, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp.169–229.  Lucas, Robert E. (1988). “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 22, pp. 4–42.  Oster, Emily, and Bryce Millet (2011). “Do Call Centers Promote School Enrollment? Evidence from India,” working paper, University of Chicago and Harvard University, February.  Rodrik, Dani (2006). “Goodbye Washington Consensus, Hello Washington Confusion? A Review of the World Bank’s Economic Growth in the 1990s: Learning from a Decade of Reform,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 44, pp. 973–87.  ______ (2010). “Making Room for China in the World Economy,” American Economic Review, vol. 100 (2), pp. 89–93.  ______ (2011). “The Future of Economic Convergence,” NBER Working Paper No. 17400. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 Romer, Paul M. (1986). “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 94 (5), pp. 1002–37.  Sachs, Jeffrey, and Andrew Warner (1995). “Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995 (1), pp. 1–118.  ______ (1997). “Fundamental Sources of Long-Run Growth,” American Economic Review, vol.87 (2), pp.184–88.  Williamson, John (1990). “What Washington Means by Policy Reform?” in John Williamson, ed., Latin American Adjustment: How Much Has Happened? (Washington: Institute for International Economics), pp. 5–38.  ______ (2004). “The Washington Consensus as Policy Prescription for Development,” speech in the series “Practitioners of Development” delivered at the World Bank, Washington, January 13 (more information is available here).  World Bank (2005). Economic Growth in the 1990s: Learning From a Decade of Reform. Washington: World Bank.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Øystein Olsen: Use of models and economic theory in Norges Bank Lecture by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Department of Economics, University of Oslo, Oslo, 8 September 2011. *      *      * The lecture is based on previous speeches and newspaper articles. A brief comment on recent developments is included in the final section. Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation.  Allow me to start by thanking you for your invitation to give this year’s Schweigaard lecture. Anton Martin Schweigaard was one of the leading statesmen of 19th century Norway. He was a jurist, a politician and an economist. Although “revival of productive forces” and “expansion of national wealth” were to Schweigaard important objectives for economic policy, most important was the promotion of “moral progress”, “public decency” and “the perfection of political and legal institutions”.1 I doubt that Schweigaard was always impressed by the perfection of political institutions, perhaps in particular the institution of Norges Bank. Schweigaard grew up in modest circumstances in the small market town of Kragerø on the coast of southern Norway – a town severely affected by the British blockade of Norway during Denmark-Norway’s involvement in the Napoleonic Wars in the early 1800s. Norges Bank was established in 1816, the year after the Wars ended. The Storting decided that a compulsory silver tax would be levied to provide capital for Norges Bank. Schweigaard’s brother wrote2: “When the compulsory payment to Norges Bank came in addition – Anton and I witnessed our parents’ silverware and gold ornaments being melted down to pay the tax – it is easy to understand that many of the town’s inhabitants found it difficult to make ends meet, which unfortunately was also the case with my parents and grandmother, and times were hard.” But Schweigaard was a talented man and it was said that he had probably never been as happy as when he passed his examen artium with flying colours and was admitted here to the University of Christiania. I expect that as you embark on your economics studies, you will get down to business with the same energy and enthusiasm as Schweigaard did then. I expect you will learn that economics is not a perfect subject. But I know that the study of economics will provide you with a useful tool to further improve both the subject and the institutions. In my lecture today, I will provide some insight into how Norges Bank makes use of economic models and touch upon the issues you will have the opportunity to explore further in the course of your studies. Inflation is a persistent rise in the general price level or, in other words, a fall in the value of money. When inflation is high, it is as a rule also variable. This generates uncertainty for households and firms. It is costly to bring high inflation under control. However, inflation should not become too low either. Deflation is often synonymous with recession. Central banks have always had a natural responsibility for stabilising the value of money. Schweigaard was concerned with stabilising the krone’s value in silver terms. Since that time, Norway has operated various regimes with the aim of stabilising the value of money. A silver standard for the krone was followed by the gold standard. Later Norges Bank sought to stabilise the krone’s value against other currencies, first the pound sterling and thereafter the US dollar. For a long period after the war, various fixed exchange rate systems were introduced under international agreements, which were subsequently abandoned in favour of                                                  1 Slagstad, Rune (1998), “De nasjonale strateger” (National strategists), Pax 2 Aubert, L. M. B. (1883), “Anton Martin Schweigaards barndom og ungdom” (Anton Martin Schweigaard’s early years), P.T. Mallings Boghandels Forlag 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches a more unilateral stabilisation of the krone against various currencies. Since 2001, the objective of monetary policy has been low and stable inflation. Rather than stabilising the value of money indirectly through an exchange rate target, we now aim to attain a more direct objective which we believe monetary policy can achieve over time.    The operational target of monetary policy is annual consumer price inflation of close to 2½ per cent over time. Monetary policy shall also contribute to stabilising output and employment. In this respect, inflation targeting is flexible. The inflation target is symmetrical – it is just as important to avoid an inflation rate that is too low as an inflation rate that is too high. The inflation target provides economic agents with an anchor for inflation expectations. Decisions concerning saving and investment can be based on the assumption that inflation in Norway will be around 2½ per cent over time. Norges Bank’s instrument to meet the inflation target is the key policy rate, which is the interest rate on banks’ deposits in Norges Bank. This interest rate forms the basis for banks’ lending and deposit rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 The Bank’ monetary policy assessments and decisions must be based on knowledge it can obtain on interactions within the Norwegian economy and how the interest rate interacts. But we need a methodical apparatus to structure this knowledge.  Like other central banks, Norges Bank uses economic models as an aid in monetary policy analysis. Economic models can help us to interpret historical developments, make forecasts for the future and analyse the effect of the interest rate. For an economic model to be relevant, it must be fit for its intended purpose. A model that is to be used as an aid in making interest rate decisions requires different attributes and is based on different principles than models that for example seek to provide optimal near-term inflation and output forecasts.  In this chart, the time axis has been divided into three: short term, medium term and long term. There are no sharp dividing lines between these horizons. Nonetheless, the time horizon imposes various requirements on economic theory and models for our purposes. The starting-point for the analyses is important. Current statistics and anecdotal information can serve as a basis for providing some indication of how the economy has evolved up to the present. But the information set is uncertain. Statistics are published with a lag and are often revised. Data from different sources can provide different pictures of the situation at hand. Statistical models can provide us with good support and help distinguish between news and noise in the data. They can capture time series properties in data and correlations that in many cases will be able to produce good forecasts of developments in the months ahead. There are certain similarities between projecting developments in the Norwegian economy in the coming months and forecasting the weather. Meteorologists have observed that averaging forecasts from a large number of models generally produces more accurate forecasts. To project consumer price inflation in the coming quarters, the Bank has developed a system for averaging forecasts from about 170 different statistical models, all of which are intended to project inflation in the Norwegian economy in the very near term.3 The model weights are determined on the basis of historical accuracy and are continually adjusted so that models with better predictive power are given greater weight in the                                                  3 The models are grouped into three classes: factor models, indicator models and VAR models. The models within each class may contain different variables or be variants of one another. For a detailed discussion, see Aastveit, K.A, K. Gerdrup, A.S. Jore (2011) “Short-term forecasting of GDP and inflation in real time: Norges Bank’s system for averaging models”, Staff Memo 9/2011, Norges Bank 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches subsequent round. The Bank has a similar system including almost 250 models for forecasting mainland GDP. The projections from these systems of models extend four quarters ahead in time and are published at regular intervals on the Bank’s website. We call this apparatus SAM (System for Averaging Models). For projections with slightly longer horizons, the Bank parts company with weather forecasters. While meteorologists are unlikely to influence the weather with their predictions, Norges Bank’s interest rate setting can actually influence economic developments in the medium term. This places particular demands on the system of analysis and involves other demands than if the sole purpose were to make forecasts. Norges Bank has developed the Norwegian Economy Model (NEMO), which we use as an aid when drawing up one-year-ahead to four-year-ahead forecasts. NEMO is a model for analysing fluctuations in the Norwegian economy around a long-term trend. In the medium term, the economy may in periods deviate substantially from trend, referred to as cyclical fluctuations. When the fluctuations subside, we must assume that the economy is moving towards equilibrium. The long-term trend is not determined by monetary policy, but by assumptions regarding technological developments and the supply of labour and capital.  When we set the interest rate, we give weight to both the current situation and the outlook two to three years ahead. The statistical models help us understand the current situation, while the equilibrium properties frame the analysis. NEMO describes how the interest rate can be set to bring the economy from its current starting-point back to the long-term equilibrium path. As a support tool in making monetary policy decisions, such a model apparatus is thus particularly relevant. I will come back to the main features of NEMO later.  As I mentioned earlier, Norges Bank operates under a formal monetary policy mandate. The Bank’s objective is to stabilise inflation and provide the economy with a nominal anchor. As a minimum, an economic model to be used as support for interest rate decisions should be based on the assumption that monetary policy can steer inflation. Economic agents can be expected to look ahead when making consumption and investment decisions. It is not only current economic policy that is likely to matter to them, but also what they expect it will be in the future. Expectations must therefore be incorporated and play a role in a monetary policy model. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Many economists previously held the view that unemployment could be reduced by accepting slightly higher inflation over time. Monetary policy was oriented accordingly and inflation accelerated in many countries, without a sustained decline in unemployment. It turned out that bringing rising inflation under control involved substantial real economic costs. In the past 20 years, inflation has been consistently low and stable. Economic growth has been just as high, if not higher, since inflation came down to a low level, compared with the years when inflation was high and at times at double-digit levels.  For the model to be relevant it should build on long-term relationships that we believe to be valid and it should be consistent with data. For example, the model’s relationships should describe how the interest rate works, in line with relevant empirical observations of the Norwegian economy. It is also of considerable importance to us that the economic mechanisms in the model should be understandable and easy to communicate. The model apparatus is to function as a useful tool, both in the internal process ahead of the monetary policy meetings and in Norges Bank’s external communication. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  A model will never be able to provide an exhaustive description of reality. In 1979, the British statistician George Box stated: “Essentially, all models are wrong, but some are useful”. Models can help to identify key driving forces and ensure a valid line of reasoning and consistency over time. This will enable the model to play an important role in the analytical basis for interest rate setting. At the same time, we must use common sense and experience when evaluating the model-based results and supplement these results with our own professional judgement. In this respect, the Bank has a pragmatic attitude regarding the use of models. Before I discuss Norges Bank’s suite of models in greater detail, I would like to look at a few key macroeconomic variables and their interaction. Studying fundamental statistical relationships provides important insight into the functioning of the economy. Along with the theoretical foundation, such insight is one of the most important building blocks of a good analytical apparatus for implementing monetary policy.  Let me begin by taking a look at the relationship between output and inflation. In recent years, consumer price inflation (CPI) has fluctuated between 0 and 3 per cent. Mainland GDP growth has also fluctuated, giving rise to economic cycles. The chart shows developments in the two variables measured as deviations from long-term trend growth, in other words an “inflation gap” and an “output gap”.4 When the output gap is positive, the                                                  4 The gaps express deviations from estimated trends in seasonally adjusted figures for mainland GDP and CPI adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy products (CPI-ATE), respectively. The trends are estimated using a Hodrick Prescott (HP) filter on quarterly data with λ=40000. The output gap in this analysis is a technical estimate and does not fully correspond with the output gap in Norges Bank’s Monetary Policy Report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 economy is usually in an upturn, while the economy is in a downturn when the gap is negative. The blue line in the chart shows that GDP growth was markedly higher than trend growth in the latter half of the 1990s and in the period from 2003 to 2008, but that it has risen somewhat more slowly in the period following the financial crisis. When developments in output are compared with inflation, a pattern emerges. A pickup in GDP growth has consistently occurred 4–5 quarters before a rise in inflation.5 While the chart says nothing about causality, turning points in GDP growth seem to be a fairly reliable leading indicator of turning points in inflation.  The path from changes in output to inflation passes through the labour market, among others. We have seen that when economic growth has picked up, unemployment6 has declined one to two quarters thereafter. The relationship between the “output gap” and the “unemployment gap” is fairly strong. This is a useful observation because GDP figures are published with a considerable lag and often subject to revision, while the unemployment data published at the end of each month are not revised. If there is uncertainty about the GDP figures – which there often may be – falling unemployment can be an indication of a recovery in economic growth.  Labour market developments, in turn, affect wage growth, as illustrated by the blue line in the chart. High unemployment results in low wage growth, and vice versa. The chart shows that in periods of falling unemployment, wage growth7 moves up fairly rapidly. Changes in unemployment appear to have a fairly immediate impact on wage growth.                                                  5 The correlation between these two data series is highest when the output gap is deferred 4–5 quarters into the future. 6 Unemployment measured according to LFS 7 Mainland hourly wage growth from quarterly national accounts 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Not unexpectedly, there is also a close statistical relationship between wage growth and the rise in prices for domestically produced goods. It appears to take about one year for changes in wage growth to feed through to inflation. Such observations of data provide a picture of some of the interrelationships in the economy, but they say little about causality or how interest rates feed through to the economy. Correlations are nevertheless interesting as a background for the analytical tools that are used in interest rate setting.  Historically, the interest rate has been set in response to various developments and shocks. In this respect, the interest rate is an endogenous variable, that is to say it is dependent on other economic variables. The relationship between the interest rate and other key variables has through history also been influenced by shifting monetary policy objectives. Let us look at two different situations. In the first, there is an unexpected sharp rise in inflation. In response, the interest rate could be raised to bring inflation down again, which will curb growth in household and corporate consumption and investment. In the second, there is a sudden sharp pickup in demand for goods and services. The interest rate might be raised in this case too in order to prevent inflation from rising at a later stage. In historical data, a higher interest rate can go hand in hand with both lower growth and higher growth. It is demanding to identify the effects of interest rate changes when studying historical data series. Trygve Haavelmo, Nobel Prize winner and a former professor here in the Department of Economics, called this a problem of identification. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  In order to analyse the effects of the interest rate, we need an analytical apparatus that can take into account the interdependency between the interest rate and the other variables we want to analyse. A simple approach involves using a vector autoregressive (VAR) model. You may come across this type of model in your statistics and economics courses. The VAR model I am going to present here includes mainland GDP, the interest rate, the krone exchange rate and inflation.8 All the variables are a function of lagged values of themselves and the other variables. The system of equations is estimated on historical data. To estimate the model, the relationship between some of the variables is predetermined in line with economic theory. For example, assumptions can be made concerning the sequence in which the different variables will affect one another. A common approach to analysing the effect of the interest rate in models where it is endogenously determined is to apply an exogenous impulse or a shock to the interest rate. This means that the interest rate is raised in response to factors other than those that can be explained historically by the other variables in the model. The effect of such a rise in the interest rate will depend on the variables included in the model, the model’s structure and estimation period. On the one hand, the result can be more robust if we use a long time-series in the estimation. On the other hand, historical changes in monetary policy regimes can influence the results. It may therefore be of greater interest to confine the estimation period to, for instance, the period of inflation targeting – the past ten years.                                                   8 Consumer price inflation adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy products (CPI-ATE) 
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches The chart shows the effect of an interest rate increase on output and inflation over time in 11 VAR models. These models only differ in that they are estimated on data from slightly different time periods. In each estimation we use data up to the present, but start the estimation at different points in time between 1986 and 1996. In the analysis, the interest rate is raised by 1 percentage point, that is, an interest rate shock is applied. Thereafter the model takes over and the interest rate gradually falls back, in line with the model’s estimated reaction pattern. In the course of a couple of years, the interest rate has returned to its starting point.9 As the chart shows, the degree of spread in the results is considerable. If we were to draw a fan chart, or confidence intervals, around each model, it would become clear that the uncertainty is even greater than the spread alone indicates. The results must therefore be interpreted with caution. If we were nevertheless to draw a conclusion on this basis, it must be that an interest rate increase will dampen GDP growth in the course of the subsequent year – all else being equal. Somewhat further ahead, inflation will also recede. As the interest rate returns to normal, GDP growth and inflation will pick up again.  Our macroeconomic model NEMO has a more precise theoretical construction than the VAR models. NEMO is a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model, and has many features that are similar to corresponding models in other central banks. It describes the behaviour of households and firms. Economic agents are forward-looking when making decisions so that expectations are of significance. There are three economic agents: households, firms and a central bank. Households demand goods and supply labour. They assess how much to spend relative to saving and how much they should work subject to their budget constraints. Firms decide how much to produce and set prices to maximise their profits, given expected prices for the input factors labour and capital. These are key mechanisms in microeconomic theory. The long-term growth potential of the economy is determined by technological developments. There is no long-term trade off between inflation and unemployment. As prices and wages respond with some lag, monetary policy can, however, influence demand, output and employment in the short and medium term. In the light of these mechanisms, NEMO can be called a New Keynesian model, with Keynesian properties in the short and medium term and classical properties in the long term. You will learn more about this type of model in your macroeconomics courses and the method for estimating such models in econometrics, although perhaps not until you reach Master’s level.                                                  9 Thereafter the interest rate falls slightly below the starting point for a period. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 Before I show you how the interest rate works in NEMO and compare the results with the VAR model, I would like to show you how monetary policy is modelled in a model such as NEMO. In the model, the central bank’s objective is to steer inflation. The interest rate is set to stabilise inflation at 2.5 per cent somewhat further ahead and weight is also given to stabilising developments in output. In some cases, a change in the interest rate will enable both objectives to be met at the same time. But situations can also arise where an interest rate change cannot bring inflation back to target without output moving in the wrong direction. Then, a trade-off must be made between the objectives and attaining them will take longer. The central bank’s objective is formalised through a loss function. The loss function can, somewhat simplified, be illustrated as follows:  In the equation, π denotes inflation, π * the inflation target and x is the output gap. The loss function includes deviations of output from potential output and deviations of inflation from the inflation target. The deviations enter the loss function quadratically, that is the central bank’s “loss” – or disadvantage – increases with large deviations from the targets either way. The trade off between stabilising inflation close to target and avoiding fluctuations in output and employment is expressed by the parameter λ. The lower λ is, the greater the weight given by the central bank to stabilising inflation. If λ is equal to zero, all other considerations are set aside, while λ greater than zero is the expression of a system of flexible inflation targeting.  In NEMO, the interest rate is set with a view to minimising the overall “loss” as expressed in such a loss function. Consideration is then given to the effect of the interest rate it on inflation and output and their interaction. The chart is a simplified illustration of the model. The 
12 BIS central bankers’ speeches economic relationships are illustrated here by a simple New Keynesian model, which you will become more familiar with in the course of your studies.10  NEMO is an empirical model, that is to say it is estimated on Norwegian data. In order to see how monetary policy works in NEMO, we have increased the interest rate to the same extent as in the VAR models. As indicated by the red line in the chart, NEMO provides a description of monetary policy that is broadly consistent with that derived from the VAR models,11 in spite of the different principles on which the models are based. Overall, it appears that a one percentage point increase in the interest rate dampens output growth by about ½ percentage point and inflation by around ¼ percentage point. The effect of the interest rate increase on GDP reaches its maximum after about one year, while the maximum effect on inflation occurs with a lag of close to two years.                                                   10 See Alstadheim, Ragna et.al (2010), “Monetary Policy Analysis in Practice”, Norges Bank Staff Memo 11/2010 11 The estimation is based on a one percentage point increase in the interest rate, followed by a gradual reduction in line with the response pattern in the model 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 13 The Monetary Policy Report, which Norges Bank publishes three times a year, includes a discussion of key trends and an analysis of the interest rate path ahead. The models I have described here are key support tools. But a model will never be able to tell us exactly how the interest rate should be set. The ultimate assessment is, as mentioned, a result of Norges Bank’s professional judgement and will also capture considerations that are not sufficiently taken into account by our models. As such, the models are only a tool. But, a model such as NEMO is a useful tool for analysing developments and in interest rate setting. It helps us interpret and understand the dynamics of the Norwegian economy and can help us to achieve consistency in our monetary policy response pattern. The chart shows our forecasts for inflation and the output gap in the June Report (2/11). The output gap was assumed to increase somewhat further ahead, with the downturn in the wake of the financial crisis being followed by a mild upturn. The low level of inflation would then gradually move up to target.  The interest rate path presented in June indicated that the interest rate would gradually be raised towards a normal level in the next years. This was conditional on the economic outlook we presented at that time. Our forecasts provide an expression of what we consider to be the baseline path. But the forecasts are uncertain, as illustrated by the fan chart. Our interest rate forecast is not an unconditional promise, but signals how we will set the interest rate if developments in the Norwegian economy are in line with our projections.  
14 BIS central bankers’ speeches The Bank’s Monetary Policy Report also presents alternative scenarios for the Norwegian economy. If developments are broadly in line with expectations, economic agents can expect that the interest rate will be set in line with that projected by Norges Bank. If conditions change, as was the case in August, Norges Bank will naturally adapt the monetary policy stance in the light of new economic prospects. Through summer, dramatic falls on stock exchanges and political unrest made the headlines. There are now prospects of lower economic growth in many countries. In both the US and many countries in Europe, public debt is high and fiscal deficits are substantial. At the same time, measures to reduce the deficit in the short term will also dampen activity. Some economists fear a renewed economic setback in the US and the financial markets are characterised by turbulence and uncertainty.  The US and EU authorities are facing demanding decision-making processes. In the US, the political parties and the people are divided in their views on taxation and the exercise of central government authority, reflected for example in the absence of measures to strengthen central government revenues. The debt problems in the EU are being aggravated by the lack of a similar coordination of fiscal policy to support the European monetary union. Government finances in many of the countries now experiencing problems have been weaker than required under the EU’s own rules for several years. Measures have been put in place. The EU countries have established a joint fund to provide loans for countries with debt problems. The ECB has intervened with support purchases of government bonds. These measures are limited in scope and duration and are intended to be replaced by more permanent resolution mechanisms once they have been implemented. The political authorities may still, in time, find suitable and more permanent solutions, both in Europe and the US. But the road ahead may be both bumpy and long. The Norwegian economy is robust. Government finances are sound, banks are solid, unemployment is low and the economy is growing at a fairly solid pace. At the same time, we must acknowledge that we are influenced by turbulence and weaker prospects internationally. Norway is an open economy. Norwegian firms will be affected if demand slows or funding becomes more difficult. Monetary policy can respond rapidly to changes in the outlook, for example as reflected in Norges Bank’s decision to keep the key policy rate unchanged at the August monetary policy meeting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 15 Earlier this week, the Swiss National Bank decided to announce a minimum exchange rate for the Swiss franc against the euro owing to the substantial appreciation of the Swiss franc. Interest rates and inflation in Switzerland are close to zero and growth is low. According to the Swiss National Bank, a further appreciation could have resulted in a recession with deflationary developments. Measures were therefore introduced to prevent such developments. The Norwegian krone appreciated sharply after the announcement. A krone that is too strong can over time result in inflation that is too low and growth that is too weak. In that case, monetary policy measures will be taken. In Norway, the key policy rate is the relevant instrument. The Norwegian krone market is small by international standards. This means that the krone exchange rate can fluctuate considerably in times of international turbulence. This will also be the case the day foreign exchange market participants decide to shift out of their krone positions. The exit may prove narrow if too many investors decide to withdraw at the same time. I began my lecture with Schweigaard’s childhood experience of his family having to surrender gold and silver for the establishment of Norges Bank. This experience cannot have given him much confidence in public institutions. As an adult, both as a professor of economics and a national politician, Schweigaard became a trendsetter in the area of monetary policy conduct. Schweigaard’s fundamental view was based on “empirical methods” rather than the “empty speculation” of idealism.12 This still applies to monetary policy. Theoretically anchored models and improved methods for quantifying them empirically provide a better basis for conducting an effective economic policy, which we take on board when we apply and further develop models and the analytical apparatus in Norges Bank. Knowledge about relationships in the Norwegian economy, in conjunction with professional judgement, provides a good platform. Thank you for your attention and good luck with your studies!                                                  12 Slagstad, Rune (1998), “De nasjonale strateger” (National strategists), Pax 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Dejan Šoškić: Financial literacy and financial stability Keynote speech by Mr Dejan Šoškić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the Bank of Albania 9th International Conference “Building our future through financial literacy”, Tirana, 15 September 2011. *      *      * Honorable Governor Fullani, Excellencies, distinguished participants and guests, It is my great pleasure to greet you all at the 9th International Conference on Financial Literacy, here in Albania, on behalf of the National Bank of Serbia. I would like to thank our host for giving me the opportunity to be the keynote speaker on such an important issue, not only for the region of Southeast Europe but worldwide. Although financial literacy has been a concern and policy priority for some years now in many countries, it was the financial crisis that additionally propelled the issue into the limelight. With the rapid credit expansion experienced throughout the global financial system and to a certain extent in Southeast Europe (SEE) over the past decade, it is hardly surprising that the importance of financial literacy has become exposed and painfully vivid. The increased availability and complexity of financial products have highlighted the worryingly low levels of financial literacy of the general public. In order to provide efficient, stable and sound financial markets that offer quality financial services, we have to offer and ensure financial education for all financial market participants on various levels and in various points in their personal and professional development. It is not by chance that teaching experts know that by learning early we know better, and that by knowing deeper we know forever. Financial literacy is the ability to understand finance. More specifically, it refers to the acquired financial skills and knowledge that allow us to make informed and effective decisions through our understanding of finance. Such an approach extends this concept beyond households and corporates to existing and potential investors. Although the expanding financial crisis does not stem from a single cause, the role of financial literacy, or rather lack of it, has been evident. Yes, the crisis was to a large extent caused by the combination of the risky and less than proper actions and decisions by various stakeholders; including financial institutions, experts and sometimes regulators who unquestionably carry most of the responsibility. But the lack of understanding of households on financial issues and, in particular, on credit and investment, has also played a major role. As a result, individuals have accepted (sometimes unknowingly) to support more financial risks than they could afford. That is precisely why it is never too early to start learning basic concepts in finance and why it is never too late to revisit the fundamentals and increase and deepen the body of knowledge in finance.  We should never neglect the importance of basic individual level of understanding financial issues, knowledge on how to appropriately manage one’s budget and personal/households’ wealth. This is important in the short and medium but especially in the long term, and has become an essential asset for financial stability. Greed needs to be contained by understanding.  Financial industry professionals need to be aware of the risks the products carry and be able to explain their services to the customers. Financial literacy is being increasingly acknowledged as an important pillar of a sound financial regulatory and supervisory framework on the global scene and a critical component of economic and financial stability and development. Additionally, in order for the financial products on offer to be fully utilized and sustainably increase the wealth of a society it is essential that both professionals in the 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches industry and consumers (corporate and households) have full knowledge and understanding about financial products they consume and potential risks they can be submitted to. Basic financial literacy is a key component of rational decision making in finance. The fundamental concepts need to be widely understood, like: time value of money, flexibility of annuities payments design, importance of maturity in calculating the overall cost of credit… to name just a few. In addition, it is important to have clear understanding of a bit more complex matters, like: flexible and fixed interest rates and the importance of interest rate risk, what an FX clause means for an unhedged borrower and what the importance of FX risk is, what EURIBOR/LIBOR and other reference rates are and how they can move through time… again to name just a few. If we provide wide understanding of these concepts and combine them with legislation on consumer protection of financial products, we have done a lot in preventing future excessive credit growth, potential asset price bubbles and undesirable movement in nonperforming loans. And this is in the interest not just to the regulators and consumers of financial products, but to the banking industry and sustainable economic growth of our economies. It is also important to underline that financial literacy can support the overall efforts to decrease tax evasion and legalize most of the economic activities in the country. This is an important issue not just for the SEE countries but elsewhere as well, especially in the context of increasing budget deficits and diminishing growth rates in many countries.   What is sometimes forgotten in SEE is that a solid basis for loan qualification is and should be exclusively past and expected fully declared net-income both for companies and for individuals. This can be vital information for loan approval and interest rate pricing. By increasing financial literacy of potential financial products consumers in this area, we can significantly influence the decrease of so called “gray economy” with a positive impact on tax collection, budget deficit and accuracy of economic data in the system, and therefore, future efficiency of economic policies. That is why it is very important in this respect as well, to increase financial literacy so as to make people fully understand and realize that fully declared and legal cash-flow is a primary prerequisite for individuals and companies to successfully qualify for banking loans. Another, similar aspect is making people fully understand the role and significance of credit bureaus. By obtaining information from credit bureaus on total borrowing and bill paying habits for corporate and individuals, lenders can obviously better assess credit worthiness of a potential borrower. This can in turn influence the decision to lend or not to lend, and can affect the interest rate and other terms of a loan. Consumers must be aware that interest rates are not the same for everyone, and are, as a rule, determined by risk-based pricing. Obviously, highly leveraged consumers with poor credit repayment histories will pay a higher annual interest rate than consumers with lower overall debt and good payment habits. Full awareness of these simple rules in finance and maintenance of good credit profile in a credit bureau can potentially decrease the overall leverage in the economy, keep the NPLs under control, help avoid the creation of asset bubbles and avoid unnecessary overdue payments court procedures. Again, financial literacy in this domain can protect both the lenders and the consumers, avoiding unnecessary shocks to the financial systems as a whole. Closely related is understanding the importance of full legalization and registration of real estate properties as a common collateral for mortgage lending. Again, this is an area that should be very important for financial literacy and education providers. The task is particularly vital in SEE and other transition and post-transition countries where public awareness of the importance of registering real estate is not so developed in comparison to the rest of Europe and developed world economies. Lack of understanding and the significance of real-estate registration, can have serious economic repercussions; most importantly, the inability to guarantee any obligations with one’s property. This would pose a particular problem for enterprises as loans are, in most cases, one of the most crucial sources of financing. The existence of a means of guarantee 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 would put the enterprises into a better negotiating position, when considering credit contract conditions, as they can offer concrete collateral. In circumstances where there are no means or possibilities of land registration, or a way for creditors to register their mortgage rights, credit becomes a very risky transaction in which the lender claims much higher interest rates if he decides to lend at all. Developed land registry systems should provide for “cheaper” credit for enterprises and consumers. Real estate registration also has consequences with regards to financial reporting. If one enterprise has registered real estate property, its balance sheet will improve and so will their chances to provide adequate financing. From a historical perspective, it was not by chance that successful empires throughout history often had well-developed land registry systems. A sophisticated land registry system improves legal security of property rights and thus improves the basis for finance and market economy. If we consider the relevant publications that take into account assessments of the South-East European region, we can see that one of the most exploited subjects lately has been the region’s exposure to foreign currency lending. As interest rate differentials across currencies during the last decade have been considerable, and the region is mostly export-oriented towards the Euro zone, it may appear that efforts of market participants’ education on such issues as risks linked to currency mismatch and existence of hedging instruments are long overdue. This is especially important for the corporate and small business sectors that have the ability to access a wide range of instruments (such as futures, forwards, options and swap contracts) that may serve as protective tools, especially during these turbulent times with rapid changes in international markets. Furthermore, our corporate sector needs to know that FX hedging instruments serve to insure oneself against exchange rate volatility in either direction. Just as importers may use forwards to buy foreign exchange, exporters may use them to buy their own currency. Indirect consequences have given us a signal that these efforts need to be focused towards banking sector as well. Although with the introduction of Basel II we should be aware that sometimes it can be pro-cyclical and short-sighted. The harm to financial stability of the systems that may arise from such behaviour of market participants especially during “downturn” phases of the business cycle, if not properly communicated and managed, may instigate systemic risk that could to a certain extent potentially backfire on financial institutions. Even if we look at the United States, we can say that the sub-prime mortgage crisis was primarily the result of poor risk management and misled selling practices by lenders and financial institutions, in a context of real estate overvaluation and lax monetary policy and regulatory oversight in the financial sector. However, the development of a speculative bubble and its subsequent shattering happened also due to the reckless financial behaviour of households, including the most vulnerable ones who contracted mortgages they should not have subscribed to, considering their financial circumstances. In fact, individuals were often not aware of the risks they were exposed to and did not understand the terms and conditions of the mortgages they purchased, which often resulted in significant increases in their monthly payments over time. They either relied on the limited and incomplete financial advice from relatives or sometimes less than honest lenders in the form of mortgage brokers, or even sheepishly followed the less than responsible behaviour of others. In this respect, higher levels of understanding of financial products may have helped these individuals consider more accurately the risks and conditions of the credit products they were buying. Additionally, this process was further emphasized by the loosened and remote link between households and banks, or poorly regulated financial institutions. Concerned financial providers did not price appropriately and assess the risks of default, partly owing to the possibility of transferring this risk to other institutions through various types of securitization: mortgage backed securities, collateralized debt obligations and other kinds of securitized products.  Credit rating agencies played an important role at various stages in the sub-prime crisis. They have been highly criticized for understating the risk involved with new, complex securities that fuelled the United States housing bubble such as mortgage-backed securities 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches (MBS) and collateralized debt obligations (CDO).The Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission reported in January 2011 that: "The three credit rating agencies were key enablers of the financial meltdown.” The mortgage-related securities at the heart of the crisis could not have been marketed and sold without their seal of approval. Investors relied on them, often blindly. In some cases, they were obligated to use them, and regulatory capital standards were hinged on them. This crisis could not have happened without the rating agencies. Their ratings helped the market soar and their downgrades through 2007 and 2008 wreaked havoc across markets and firms. Only if there was a wide-spread understanding that credit rating is just a professional opinion which can be, and sometimes is, wrong! Learning from the bad experiences of the large-scale crisis, our main job as central banks and educators will be to explain to the investors that the primary role of the credit rating agencies is to give an opinion and direction on the creditworthiness of a debt issued or issuer. The rating does not provide complete guidance on other aspects essential for investment decisions, such as market liquidity or price volatility. Accordingly, as we are all aware, bonds with the same rating may have very different market prices. Despite this fact, and even though each rating agency has its own rating methodologies and scales, market participants have often treated similarly rated securities as generally the same. Our job is also to underline the responsibility of the investors in estimating the risk exposure of the debt issue. Furthermore, we should direct and highlight to the professional investors the importance of developing their own risk management function, not solely taking into account the opinion of the rating agency, but going deeper and fully understanding underlying assets and risks. Long periods of rapid economic growth worldwide resulted in the narrowing of focus towards high financial gains – circumstances which gave the potential to constantly create new types of hybrid financial instruments that majority of the market did not fully understand – in some cases, not even the sophisticated financial analysts and not even the regulators themselves. More importantly, the instruments were sometimes not completely and clearly understood by the institutions that we have all looked to for proper interpretation – the rating agencies. The primary lesson of this crisis is that we can no longer rely on other market participants, and we must both individually and on national level invest significantly in financial education. In an increasingly globalized world, the possibility for localized problem solving becomes more and more difficult and we must put additional effort on taking pre-emptive action in the future. The experience has taught us that efficiency and effectiveness of measures that are justified by future possible outcomes is only productive when communicated with well-informed and properly educated market participants. Financial institutions should have a responsibility to provide clients with information that clearly and accurately represents the terms and conditions associated with the products they offer. For example, effective interest rate (EIR) should allow consumers of financial services to find out the actual cost of a financial product. On macroeconomic level effective interest rate is important to provide efficient allocation of money and capital. The task of a loan officer has to be to explain to the consumer that EIR includes all the credit payments and costs payable by the financial services consumer (e.g. interest, fees, taxes) and/or benefits to be received by the consumer (interest and other unconditional benefits) and costs relating to ancillary services which are prerequisite for the use of financial service or for its use in a specific manner (e.g. costs of life assurance, property and personal insurance). Thus, financial education can serve to augment and strengthen consumer protection but also to enable more effective allocation of money and capital on macroeconomic level. Financially educated consumers are in a better position to protect themselves on their own and to report possible misconducts by financial institutions to the authorities. Consumer protection and financial education share many of the same goals but each takes a somewhat different approach. Both financial education and consumer protection have as aims to ensure the well-being of consumers and to shield them from misconduct. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 The National Bank of Serbia has been addressing the need to expand activities in the field of financial education and financial consumer protection since 2005. At the beginning of 2011 the NBS introduced the Law on Financial Consumers Protection. This Law is prescribed not only in line with EU Directive 48/2008 relating to Consumer Credit, but includes a wider range of financial products, because our intention was to cover all kind of banking services: loans including mortgages, deposits, accounts, debit and credit cards etc. The purpose was to ensure maximum protection of financial consumers in Serbia. The NBS has been actively promoting consumer education and financial literacy training and programmes over the years. We are now in the process of introducing a Financial Education Strategy of the NBS (2011–2015) not only in order to improve our activities in this field, but also to provide a more adequate way for our citizens, entrepreneurs, farmers, schoolchildren, and students to obtain information that are of significance for them both currently and in the future. Bearing in mind that consumer protection has a reactive function – the actual problem has already taken place when the consumer is asking for help – we are aiming to place the main emphasis on financial education, especially of schoolchildren, with the aim of having a financially literate population in 5, 10 or 15 years. Our overall aim however remains the need for all the participants in the financial market to be financially literate. We intend to initiate the creation of a National Strategy for Financial Education as a necessary complement to a sound financial regulatory and supervisory framework. In doing so, we should favour and promote the establishment of coordinated public-private partnerships. All stakeholders should be encouraged to consider and implement international principles, guidelines and good practices developed by the OECD and the International Network for Financial Education (INFE) in the financial education field. It is not possible to overestimate the importance of financial literacy and financial education. Literacy and education are the essence of building confidence. Without confidence there is no financial stability. Persistence, systematical and inclusive approach, innovative, user-friendly and technologically advanced methods used – all of these should be the properties of a far-reaching, effective and long run effort in financial literacy and education. As some wise people rightfully noted: it might be costly but undoubtedly priceless.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Duvvuri Subbarao: Monetary policy dilemmas – some Reserve Bank of India perspectives Comments by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Stern School of Business, New York University, 26 September 2011. *      *      * 1.  I value this opportunity of speaking at the Stern School to an academic community interested in central bank issues. Over the last decade, the profile of central banks has gone up. First, we had the Great Moderation – a period of extraordinary benign macroeconomic environment globally, characterized by steady growth in advanced economies and accelerated growth in emerging economies, and low and stable inflation all around. Central banks took credit for this, believed they had discovered the Holy Grail and declared victory. 2.  That sense of triumph was dented by the crisis as central banks came to be blamed for policies and actions that got the world into the crisis. Even so, central banks battled the crisis from the frontlines and regained some of the lost reputation by acting quickly, decisively, and where required in concert, to stabilize the global economy which was hurtling towards collapse. Over the last few months, fears of a double-dip recession have resurfaced, and governments in advanced countries are locked in a policy logjam over the balance between short-term fiscal stimulus and long term fiscal consolidation. This has willy-nilly pushed central banks to the fore once again as monetary stimulus is having to bear the burden of being the first, and in some cases, possibly the only line of defence against recession. 3.  The crisis has been an intellectual challenge in many ways. It has tested the armoury of instruments available to central banks and the limits of their policy force. It has also reopened questions that we thought had been answered and renewed debates that we thought had been settled. My own experience has been that real world problems are too complex to fit template solution of text books. I want to use this opportunity that you have provided me to communicate to you some of the complexities and dilemmas in real world policy making, and I will do so from the perspective of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). What is the appropriate monetary policy response to complex growth-inflation dynamics? 4.  India recovered from the crisis sooner than even other emerging economies, but inflation too caught up with us sooner than elsewhere. Inflation, as measured by the wholesale price index (WPI), which actually went into negative territory for a brief period in mid-2009, started rising in late 2009, and it has remained around 9–10 per cent since January 2010 reflecting both supply and demand pressures. Supply pressures stemmed from elevated domestic food prices and rising global prices of oil and other commodities. The source of demand pressures was an economy with low per capita income which recovered sharply from the crisis. The supply pressures and demand pressures collided triggering a wider inflationary process. 5. In response to the inflationary pressures, the Reserve Bank began to reverse its accommodative monetary policy as early as October 2009. We have been criticized for our anti-inflationary stance, ironically from two different directions. From one side, we have been criticized for being hawkish on inflation. The argument has been that our inflation is driven largely by supply shocks, particularly, since mid-2010, by high oil and other commodity prices, and that monetary policy should not respond to such inflation. We will only end up hurting growth. The criticism from the other side has been that the Reserve Bank has been soft on inflation, the baby step approach we followed – of 
2   increasing policy interest rates by 25 bp each time – was not deterrent enough, and that the persistence of inflation is a result of our delayed response. Both these critiques cannot obviously be right at the same time. Let me offer a response to them and in the process explain the rationale for our anti-inflationary stance. Monetary policy too hawkish 6.  My response to the doves is as follows. Admittedly, monetary policy is best suited to contain inflationary pressures stemming from the aggregate demand side. In that case, the policy prescription is clear. If inflation is high, tighten monetary policy; and if inflation is low, loosen monetary policy. Monetary policy options in the face of supply shocks are less straight forward. Whether monetary policy is effective in dealing with supply shocks is therefore a matter of both academic debate and policy contention. 7.  The conventional wisdom is that if inflation expectations are well anchored, monetary policy need not react to supply shocks. This premise is based on two assumptions; first that the supply shocks are purely temporary, and second that supply shocks are the only ones driving inflation. These assumptions do not always hold. In the real world, oftentimes supply shocks lead to a permanent trend upward shift in prices. Also, sometimes, demand pressures combine with supply shocks to stoke inflationary pressures. 8.  A good illustration of the first assumption – mean reverting supply shocks – not holding comes from the world prices of oil which have trended up on a long period basis. International crude oil prices recorded an annual average increase of around 17 per cent during the 2000s as against only a modest increase of 2 per cent during the 1990s and a decline of 3 per cent during the 1980s. This obviously is the outcome of structural changes in supply and demand for oil. Monetary policy has to recognize these underlying trends and respond to them. If it looks upon these trends as pure transient supply shocks and ignores them, it runs the risk of destabilizing inflation expectations. 9. And now about the second assumption – of supply shocks not usually acting alone to stoke inflation. The shifting drivers of inflation in India over the past year and a half offer a good illustration. The increase in global commodity prices coincided with rapidly rising demand at home. GDP grew at 8.5 per cent last year (2010/11), faster than the trend growth rate which is now estimated to be of the order of 8 per cent. In an environment of rapid growth and high capacity utilization, corporates regained pricing power and were able to pass through the increase in input prices to higher output prices thus fuelling generalized inflationary pressures.  10.  Similar dynamics were at play on the food front. Rising incomes, especially in rural areas, have resulted in a shift in dietary habits away from cereals and toward protein-based foods. This is a structural change and monetary policy will be misled if it treats this as a one-off supply shock. Given the high share of food in the various consumer price indices (46%–70%), persistent supply pressures on the food front can fuel inflation expectations; and in the face of growing demand pressures, rising inflation expectations can trigger a wage-price spiral. Recent reports that real wages of rural labour have gone up markedly suggest that such a wage-price spiral may already be under way. 11.  To summarize, the inflation that we have experienced over the last nearly twenty months is a result of a combination of supply shocks that had a trend impact on prices as well as demand pressures. Given the nature of the inflation drivers and their combined impact, clearly there is a significant role for monetary policy in combating inflation. Our monetary policy stance is guided by this understanding, and is aimed at restraining demand and anchoring inflation expectations. The argument of our critics that monetary policy has no role because inflation is a result of imported commodity prices would have been valid if the increase in commodity prices was a pure and transient supply shock or if there were no demand pressures. That clearly was not the case in India. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Monetary tightening hurts growth 12. Another argument made in this line of criticism is that monetary policy tightening is hurting growth. I believe a much more nuanced evaluation of our policy stance is necessary. Evidence from empirical research suggests that the relationship between growth and inflation is non-linear. At low inflation and stable inflation expectations, there is a trade-off between growth and inflation. But above a certain threshold level of inflation, this relationship reverses, the trade-off disappears, and high inflation actually starts taking a toll on growth. Estimates by the Reserve Bank using different methodologies put the threshold level of inflation in the range of 4%–6%. With WPI inflation ruling above 9 per cent, we are way past the threshold. At this high level, inflation is unambiguously inimical to growth; it saps investor confidence and erodes medium term growth prospects. The Reserve Bank’s monetary tightening is accordingly geared towards safeguarding medium term growth even if it means some sacrifice in near term growth. Monetary policy behind the curve 13.  Now let me turn to the criticism from the opposite side – that the Reserve Bank was slow in closing the monetary spigots, that our “baby step” approach was inadequate to tame the inflationary pressures, and that we are having to tighten aggressively lately to make up for lost time. 14.  This criticism fails to appreciate the context – the nature of domestic inflation and global uncertainty – in which we were operating. The calibration of our monetary tightening was guided by the changing drivers of inflation over the course of fiscal year 2010/11. Early on in the year, inflation pressures had their origin in food prices, and accordingly our monetary policy response was aimed at containing the spillover risk to non-food inflation. Note that policy rates had gone down to historically low levels during the crisis, and an abrupt adjustment would have disrupted the market. Our judgement, therefore, was that tightening should be done gradually, in small steps, so as to allow time for the banks and the private sector to adjust to a higher interest rate environment.  15.  The inflation scenario changed starting August 2010 when global commodity prices surged higher than anticipated. Global oil prices came under further pressure starting January 2011 because of political developments in the Middle East and North-Africa. Also, as I had indicated earlier, because of the narrowing of the output gap, producers were able to pass on higher input prices to higher output prices leading to inflationary pressures getting generalized as evidenced by the increase in non-food manufactured product inflation from 5.3 per cent per cent in August 2010 to 8.5 per cent in March 2011. We responded to these changes in underlying drivers of inflation by tightening more aggressively starting May 2011.  16.  The second factor relevant in the “behind the curve” debate is that we also had to contend with an uncertain global recovery. Even as there was some talk of spring shoots in April 2010, the optimism did not last; soon thereafter, the Greek sovereign debt crisis and unemployment concerns in the US revived concerns about the pace and shape of global recovery. These uncertainties increased both in nature and size as time passed with the euro area sovereign debt problem not only spreading but proving to be intractable, the US recovery stalling and the Japanese economy assaulted by an unprecedented natural disaster. Our “baby step” approach during 2010 was accordingly a delicate balancing act between supporting recovery at home amidst growing global uncertainty and containing inflation pressures. 17.  If the above factors are reckoned with, the “behind-the-curve” argument loses potency. Starting in March 2010, we have so far raised policy interest rates (the repo rate) by 350 bp. The effective tightening has been even more, 500 bp, as the operational policy rate shifted from reverse repo rate (absorption mode) to repo rate (infusion mode). 
4   18.  In offering a response to the criticism of our monetary policy stance from both sides, my endeavour has been to communicate to you that every monetary policy action involves complex judgement. The supply shocks we confront in the real world are different from pure text book versions; oftentimes they coincide with rising demand pressures. We have to balance growth-inflation concerns. On top of that, monetary policy actions need to be forward looking even in the face of external uncertainty. This in essence is the dilemma of monetary policy decisions. How do you justify liquidity injection in the midst of a tightening cycle? 19.  The conventional tools of monetary policy are controls over the volume of money (liquidity) and the price of money (policy interest rate). Typically an expansionary stance would involve easing both the rate and volume, and conversely, a contractionary stance would involve tightening both of them. Occasionally, there arise situations when the price and volume instruments are deployed in opposite directions – for example, injecting liquidity amidst a rate tightening cycle – that call for both cautious judgement and extra effort at communication.  20.  In understanding the motive force for liquidity adjustment by a central bank, it must be noted that a growing economy requires the central bank to inject primary liquidity to meet the requirement for currency and credit. This injection can come about only through an expansion of the reserve (base) money. In the first instance, liquidity injection happens through overnight borrowing by banks under the Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF). If the liquidity shortage is of a durable nature, the central bank needs to meet that need through outright open market operations (OMOs) by buying government securities. 21.  As we progressed with monetary tightening through 2010, the LAF window shifted from a surplus (absorption) mode to a deficit (injection) mode. This was consistent with our anti-inflationary stance since a deficit liquidity situation would improve monetary transmission. We had also indicated clearly that it would be the endeavour of the Reserve Bank to maintain the absorption or injection through the LAF window at about ± 1 per cent of the net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) of banks. However, towards the second half of 2010, systemic liquidity tightened further pushing the injection through the LAF window beyond 1 per cent of NDTL. This was owing to a combination of structural and one-off factors. Recognizing that the deficit in systemic liquidity was of a durable nature, the Reserve Bank conducted outright OMOs to inject liquidity of a durable nature. 22.  This liquidity injection through OMOs happened at a time when we were tightening policy rates to combat inflation. These were seemingly contrarian actions, and many observers may have seen them as being conflicting and incoherent. We realized that there was a communication challenge here – to explain to the market that we remained committed to bringing inflation down, that our action in injecting liquidity was not inconsistent with our anti-inflation stance, that we continued to hold that liquidity should be in a deficit mode in a monetary tightening cycle, but that we were injecting liquidity only to ease the “excessive deficit” in order to ensure that flow of credit for productive purposes was not choked. 23.  Informed market participants did of course understand the rationale for our actions. But we recognized the importance of communicating the rationale to the larger public. If people got confused policy signals and believed thereby that the central bank’s commitment to inflation control was not credible, inflation expectations would get unhinged and that would erode the effectiveness of our anti-inflation strategy. We, therefore, went the extra mile to communicate the rationale at a non-technical level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Forward guidance: how transparent can/should a central bank be? 24.  Received wisdom today is that successful monetary policy is not just a matter of effective calibration of overnight interest rates, but also of shaping market expectations of the way in which interest rates, inflation and income are likely to evolve on the way forward. Among the important instruments used by central banks for this purpose is the “forward guidance” they give in their monetary policy statements. 25.  The practice of giving forward guidance varies across central banks. By far the most explicit has been the Bank of Canada which, given the uncertainty during the crisis, gave a definite timeframe until which it would keep overnight rate at the “current” level, subject of course to the outlook for inflation. The ECB has traditionally been less explicit on the ground that policy commitment is not possible in an uncertain macro environment. The US Fed has a more credible record of using forward guidance to shape and manage expectations. For over two years since the crisis, the Fed had guided the markets by saying that “economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period”. In its most recent statement of August 9, 2011, the Fed quantified “extended period” as “at least up to mid-2013”, thereby giving a more definitive time frame for market participants to plan. The Fed evidently expects that by reducing uncertainty, at least in one dimension (time dimension), the forward guidance will help stimulate demand. 26. Giving forward guidance is not always necessarily a positive sum game. Central banks face several dilemmas. The first is how exactly is the conditionality surrounding the guidance to be worded. It cannot be so vague as to lose all content value; on the other hand, it cannot be so precise that the central bank becomes a prisoner of its words and loses any flexibility to deviate from the guidance should the underlying circumstances change. A second, and related, dilemma is how to ensure that the market correctly appreciates the conditionality and does not interpret the guidance as an irrevocable commitment. 27.  Starting early 2010, in keeping with the best practice, the Reserve Bank too has begun giving forward guidance. And as expected, we too have confronted the classic communication dilemma. Let me illustrate. In the First Quarter Review of July 2011, we said: “Going forward, the monetary policy stance will depend on the evolving inflation trajectory, which in turn, will be determined by trends in domestic growth and global commodity prices. A change in stance will be motivated by signs of a sustainable downturn in inflation.” 28. Simultaneously, we also noted that the stance of monetary policy will be to “manage the risk of growth falling significantly below trend”. 29.  Reading the two statements together, some analysts have criticized the guidance for its lack of precision; more specifically, there were questions like, “what is the trend growth rate” and “how much deviation from trend would the RBI tolerate”. This was valid criticism and these questions were relevant. With our trend growth rate, post-crisis, estimated at 8 per cent, the balance of policy stance would shift if growth fell consistently and substantially below that rate. But a shift in stance will also be a function of the behaviour of the external and internal drivers of inflation. What we said in response to the criticism therefore was that defining precisely “what significantly below trend” ex-ante was difficult, and that the ambiguity in the guidance was deliberate because it was unavoidable.  30. Central to this whole issue of forward guidance is that a central bank is handicapped by external uncertainty over which it has no control. The crisis has brought this dilemma into sharp focus. On the one hand, central banks want to use the instrumentality of forward guidance to manage expectations, and even outcomes; on the other hand, they cannot be precise enough because of external uncertainty. How to communicate monetary policy so that the benefit-cost balance is positive is yet another dilemma for central banks.  
6   Should monetary policy respond to asset prices? 31.  Among the many questions thrown up by the crisis is one about the role of central banks in dealing with asset price bubbles. The broadly accepted theology before the crisis – although not the only view – was the Greenspan orthodoxy which can be summarized as follows. First, asset price bubbles are hard to identify in real time, and the fundamental factors that drive asset prices are not directly observable. A central bank should not therefore second guess the market. Second, monetary policy is too blunt an instrument to counteract asset price booms. And third, central banks can “clean up the mess” after the bubble bursts. The surmise therefore was that the cost-benefit calculus of a more activist monetary stance of “leaning against the wind” was clearly negative. In other words, it is not the job of central bankers to remove the punch bowl no matter that the party is getting wild. 32.  The crisis has dented the credibility of the Greenspan orthodoxy. The emerging view post-crisis is that central banks cannot remain indifferent to asset price bubbles. However, it has thrown up a debate over what should be the role of the central bank and how that role might affect its other responsibilities, and indeed its autonomy. The debate is still fluid and there are no conclusive answers. Nevertheless, it has helped in crystallizing some views to guide the way forward. Let me discuss some of them. 33.  As much as the pre-crisis orthodoxy about not deploying monetary policy in aid of asset price management has now lost its potency, reservations persist about its efficacy. The essence of the argument is that the typical monetary policy action of raising policy interest rate in small steps of 25–50 basis points will not help contain the surge in asset prices. On the other hand, monetary policy action aggressive enough to deter asset price build up will take a heavy toll on the real economy. A consensus is building around the view that the most appropriate way of addressing asset prices is through macroprudential instruments, either independently or in conjunction with monetary policy. Indeed, macroprudential instruments are at the heart of the Basel 3 package which was agreed upon last year.  34.  Macroprudential policies are neat in concept but throw up a host of problems in operation. The tools of macroprudential policy such as capital norms, countercyclical buffers and risk weights fall within the domain of regulation. But there also has to be consistency between the monetary stance and macroprudential policy. Does this then mean that the central bank should also have responsibility for bank regulation? If on the other hand, the responsibilities are distributed across different agencies, what should be the platform and protocol for coordination? What should be the role of the government? 35.  Indeed, the post-crisis trend has been to entrust macroprudential supervision to central banks, and where central banks already have this responsibility, to define it more explicitly. While there could be some synergies in that, there are also questions about potential conflicts of interest such as when, for example, the macroeconomic situation may require a tight monetary policy, but the central bank may demur because such tightening may raise concerns about the stability of the banking system. Some people argue though that potential conflicts between monetary policy and macroprudential policy are being exaggerated. In entrusting responsibility for macroprudential supervision, and more broadly for financial stability, to central banks, there are concerns also about how this responsibility, might impact the prized autonomy of central banks. This apprehension arises because macroprudential decisions entail a greater element of subjective judgement than do monetary policy decisions, and if that be the case, it opens up scope for interference from the outside. 36.  My attempt as above has been only to give you a flavour of the many complex questions thrown up by this issue of central bank responsibility for asset price management, indeed more broadly for financial stability. The scope of this lecture does not permit a detailed assessment of the debate. But let me give you the Reserve Bank perspective on this. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  37.  The Reserve Bank has traditionally had a much broader mandate, including responsibility for some development functions, than is typical of advanced economy central banks. Our experience in regard to simultaneously managing both monetary policy and macroprudential policy has been positive, indeed synergistic. Asset price trends are one of the many variables we take into account in monetary policy calibration. We have used conventional monetary policy instruments such as policy interest rates if demand pressures are across board. On the other hand, if demand pressures are confined to specific sectors, we have found it more efficient to use macroprudential instruments such as risk weights and provisioning norms so as to put sand in the wheels of credit flowing to those sectors. We have also used macroprudential instruments symmetrically – tightening in times of excess demand as, for example, in the years before the crisis, and easing in times of slackening demand, for example, as part of the crisis response. 38.  Even as macroprudential policies have become the talk of the town post-crisis, deploying them requires careful judgement. In order to make a judgement, a central bank has to ascertain if the asset price build up is driven by “excessive leverage” and if the price build up is across board or confined to specific sectors. By far the most important thing to remember in deploying macroprudential policies is that, with the benefit of hindsight, all conservative policies look safe. But excessive conservatism in order to be prepared to ride out a potential crisis could thwart financial innovation and progress. It is this balance between preventing instability and promoting innovation that central banks have to learn to manage. And this is especially important in an emerging market economy like India where the responsibility of the central bank for market development, though not explicit, is nonetheless quite important. How should monetary policy manage the interface with fiscal policy? 39.  The seventy odd years since the Great Depression saw a famous rivalry between fiscal and monetary policies for influence. For much of this period, almost across the developed world, Keynesian theology ruled, fiscal policy dominated and monetary policy remained subservient to that. The stagflation of the 1970s, the influential monetarist views of Friedman et al and the apparent success of supply side policies to tame inflation prompted a shift in thinking away from full bodied Keynesianism. Also important were the theoretical analysis of discretion vs. rules in setting monetary policy. Together, the theoretical advances and empirical evidence allowed monetary policy to wean itself away from fiscal dominance and central banks started asserting their autonomy. 40.  Even as the advantages of having an apolitical monetary authority as an effective counterpoise to politically driven fiscal policies were becoming evident, democratic compulsions made fiscal discipline increasingly difficult. To get around this, starting 1990s, several countries voluntarily enacted fiscal responsibility laws. The laws imposed limits on fiscal deficits/public debt on the one hand and prohibited primary financing of the fiscal deficit by the central bank on the other. This institutional framework allowed operational independence to the central bank in its conduct of monetary policy within a rule-based regime and was successful in keeping inflation low. 41.  The rule based fiscal regimes unravelled during the crisis as both governments and central banks implemented expansionary policies in close coordination. While such coordination during the crisis was not questioned except by extreme purists, now in the recovery period, several fundamental concerns are resurfacing. At the heart of these concerns is whether monetary policy is once again becoming hostage to fiscal compulsions? The specifics of the debate vary but the basic issues are similar. In the US, the debate is over the trade-off between short-term fiscal stimulus and long-term fiscal consolidation. In the euro area, the question is about the shared benefits of a monetary union without the shared responsibilities of a fiscal union. The questions all around are: Are central banks being forced beyond their comfort zone to maintain expansionary monetary stances to compensate for 
8   fiscal laxity? Aren’t the so called unconventional monetary actions thinly veiled fiscal measures? Aren’t central banks, in the process, compromising their basic commitment to price stability? Are central banks becoming vulnerable to political pressures? Is their autonomy at risk? The answers to these questions will be shaped by how the current big issues are settled. 42.  As in many economies, in India too, monetary policy was dominated by fiscal considerations during the 1970s and the 1980s. Large and growing fiscal deficits ended up being financed by the Reserve Bank. This led to more than desired growth in base money and money supply which ultimately reflected in high inflation. Like other economies, we too put in place a fiscal responsibility legislation – the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2003 – with ceilings on deficit and debt ratios and provisions prohibiting primary financing of government debt by the central bank. These provisions facilitated fiscal consolidation during 2003–08 and afforded the Reserve Bank the necessary flexibility to implement monetary policy aimed at low and stable inflation. 43.  Like elsewhere in the world, both monetary and fiscal policies were eased in India too in response to the crisis. In particular, this meant interrupting the fiscal consolidation process enjoined by the FRBM Act. As India emerged from the crisis, the Government adopted a revised road map for fiscal consolidation as recommended by the Thirteenth Finance Commission. Nevertheless, meeting the road map targets is going to be a formidable challenge. The quantum of non-discretionary expenditure (salaries, pensions, interest payments) is large and this cannot be adjusted easily, at any rate in the short-term. By far the largest component of discretionary expenditure is on subsidies – on food, fertilizer and petroleum products. In reducing these subsidies, there is inevitably a tension between democratic compulsions and economic virtue. Even as the Government pursues a quantitative target, it also has to be mindful of the quality of fiscal adjustment – that is to prune unproductive expenditure and increase productive expenditure which is necessary for raising the potential output of the economy. 44.  As I said, the Reserve Bank has been battling inflation for the last twenty months. Monetary tightening, as is well known, works by restraining demand. In as much as the fiscal stance is supportive of demand, the monetary stance has had to be more aggressive than otherwise. For monetary policy to be more supportive of growth, it will be necessary for fiscal consolidation to take root more firmly.  45.  The dilemma for monetary policy in India is thus somewhat different from that of the advanced economies. The dilemma for advanced economy central banks is whether monetary policy is having to be kept more accommodative than necessary to offset fiscal contraction. In contrast, the dilemma for the Reserve Bank is whether monetary policy is having to be tightened that much more because of fiscal demand. Conclusion 46.  In my remarks today, I have tried to present to you some of the dilemmas we confront in monetary policy management. All central banks confront these, with differences in the extent and timing. I have tried to give you the Reserve Bank perspective on these. The message I tried to convey is that there are no template answers to real life policy issues. Analysis is important, but judgement is crucial. I believe a two way communication between central practitioners and central bank scholars will help in sharpening both our analysis and judgement. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Tiff Macklem: Managing risks in the new global economic landscape Remarks by Mr Tiff Macklem, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the National Insurance Conference of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, 27 September 2011. *      *      * It is a great pleasure to be speaking here in Vancouver at the annual National Insurance Conference of Canada. Few industries know more about the personal, economic and financial impacts of disasters – or “extreme events” as insurance experts like to call them. And few know more about risk management. Today I want to talk about both topics – an extreme event and private and public risk management in its wake. This morning you discussed earthquake insurance. Earthquakes, like other natural disasters – tsunamis, hurricanes and ice storms come to mind – are entirely exogenous, extreme events – acts of God, if you will. They are not preventable, although their impact can be reduced by building resilience and by timely and effective disaster response. Your industry, of course, plays a vital role in helping households and businesses to mitigate the consequences of natural disasters. Other extreme events are endogenous – or manmade. The recent financial crisis falls into this category. The crisis that began in August 2007 and exploded in the autumn of 2008 was self-inflicted. The financial system was fragile and it failed. We are still paying. We will be paying for many years to come. The global recession that followed the financial crisis was the deepest since the Great Depression. And today, we are two years into what is shaping up to be the weakest recovery since the Great Depression. This is the new economic and financial landscape we find ourselves in. And while it may be less than we desire, it should not be terribly surprising. The lesson from history is that the recessions that follow financial crises are bigger than normal recessions. On average, the loss in output in a recession after a financial crisis is two to three times the loss in a normal recession. Output falls further in a recession after a financial crisis. Normally, the deeper the recession, the sharper the recovery. Not so with the recoveries after financial crises. Recoveries after a financial crisis are slower. Typically, it takes output twice as long to return to its pre-recession level after a financial crisis than in a normal recovery, and output is permanently lower compared with its pre-crisis growth trajectory. The essential reason for this is that the legacy of a financial crisis is a lot of debt, and paying down that debt acts as a dragging anchor on the economy that takes many years to break free from. If we had forgotten this lesson from history, recent economic and financial data have provided a reminder that in a world awash with debt, repairing the balance sheets of banks, households and governments will take years. In Canada, we weathered the crisis better than most advanced economies. Our recession, while sharp, was shallower and shorter than many, and we have few internal impediments to recovery. Our banks are among the strongest in the world, and we have the best fiscal situation among the G-7. Nonetheless, an anemic U.S. recovery, as well as a persistently strong Canadian dollar and elevated global risks, are all weighing on growth here. This new, more modest global economic landscape has implications for a number of issues. I will develop three of these under the headings sovereign risk, shifting economic centre of gravity, and low for long. I will then say a few words about private risk management in this new landscape, as well as the public policy priorities that are necessary to sustain the recovery and support financial stability. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Sovereign risk Let me start with sovereign risk. The immediate issue is Europe: I don’t need to tell this audience that the fiscal and financial strains in Europe are acute. Widening sovereign spreads on an expanding group of euro-area country bonds are challenging fiscal sustainability in these countries. The leading-edge consequence is the buildup of funding pressures on European banks. Most have seen their funding costs rise sharply, their access to financial markets curtailed and their equities trading at historic lows relative to the value of their assets. These challenges are compounded by the impossibility of currency adjustments within a monetary union. Without the option of devaluation, prolonged deflationary adjustments are required in countries that must restore competitiveness. While the situation in Europe is immediate, the need for agreed measures to restore fiscal sustainability in the United States and Japan is no less important. Increasing uncertainty about the ability of the political process to deliver the needed adjustments is reflected in recent sovereign downgrades. These fiscal challenges are manageable with political will and sound execution, but as long as large debts need to be refinanced, sovereigns will remain vulnerable to changes in global growth and investor sentiment. This presents a fundamentally new landscape in which government debt can no longer be considered a risk-free asset in many advanced countries. Given the central role of government liabilities in the financial system, prolonged concerns over sovereign risk could have profound implications for the functioning of the financial system. In particular, the role of government bonds as the benchmark against which a broad array of financial assets are priced is likely to be eroded. Shifting economic centre of gravity A second consequence of a weak recovery in advanced countries is an acceleration in the shift in the economic centre of gravity to emerging markets. This is not a new trend, but it has been turbocharged. The growth differential between advanced and emerging economies has widened sharply. Emerging-market economies now account for close to 80 per cent of global growth – up from just one-third at the start of the millennium. Improved economic management in emerging markets has both increased their potential growth and reduced their riskiness. And with most portfolios underweight in emerging-market exposure, increasing the allocation to emerging markets has the potential to boost returns without taking on excessive risk. Of course, emerging-market economies do not represent a homogeneous asset class. They offer a higher range of both volatility and opportunity that investors must take into account. Large capital inflows and sudden outflows can present challenges for emerging markets and investors alike. In particular, there is a risk that large inflows could fuel asset-price bubbles. A reallocation of only 5 per cent of advanced-economy portfolios to emerging markets translates into a potential flow of $1.6 trillion, or eight times the portfolio equity flows to all emerging markets. This is a considerable shock. The robust growth in emerging economies is a welcome source of strength for the global economy. With strong growth, however, comes the risk of overheating, followed by an abrupt correction. For investors, the exits could be crowded. These are risks that both private investors and public authorities need to manage. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Low for long The last feature of this new economic landscape I wanted to address is low for long. With weak recoveries in the United States and Europe and a tentative hand-off from public stimulus to private demand, policy interest rates can be reasonably expected to remain below normal for some time to come. While providing needed stimulus, prolonged periods of unusually low rates could contribute to excessive risk taking. They can cloud assessments of financial risks, induce a search for yield and delay balance-sheet adjustments. Low for long is a special concern for insurance companies and pension funds with guaranteed returns or benefits. You made promises that you need to keep. And by reducing yields on assets and raising the net present value of liabilities, a sustained period of low interest rates makes guarantees harder to fulfill. To address potential shortfalls, investors may move funds into riskier assets to pick up yield. In the first half of 2011, we saw a significant expansion in a variety of risky exposures offering higher returns – and volatility – including assets such as high-yield bonds, leveraged loans, emerging-market equity and debt, and commodities. The signs of growing risk tolerance in financial markets were evident in data on issuance, pricing and flow across a range of markets, and financial instruments with a riskier and more complex structure were returning. With the dramatic fall-off in risk appetite in recent weeks, investors have shifted from a search for yield to a search for safety. This has sent the prices of risky assets sharply lower and safe-haven assets to record highs. Indeed, in a world of high sovereign debt, weak growth and a low-for-long-induced search for yield, the impact of new information will tend to be magnified. For investors, this means contending with more volatility. In short, the legacy of the crisis is a treacherous economic landscape that puts a premium on private sector risk management and public sector risk mitigation. Let me say a few words about both. Strengthening private sector risk management For the long-term investor, a fundamental shift is required, from thinking about a return target to considering appetite for risk and measuring and managing risk to the desired risk tolerance. The experience of the crisis provides some clear lessons for risk measurement and management, and points to the need for better tools for risk assessment, better information systems and information sharing, improved governance and compensation practices, and better communication. To assess the risk of an extreme event like a major earthquake, insurance experts do not rely on short spans of data because there would be very few, if any, major earthquakes in the sample. Yet, financial risk managers routinely use tools such as value-at-risk models that use relatively short windows of recent data to assess the likelihood of financial loss. To measure financial risk accurately, we need better tools that capture tail events and mitigate procyclicality. In particular, there is a need to draw on longer spans of data and to complement standard tools with other methods, such as stress tests, that allow risk managers to explore the implications of extreme events. Better information systems will help firms to measure risk and identify vulnerabilities. The financial crisis exposed the need to perform due diligence with respect to new products and instruments. A crucial lesson from the crisis is to avoid embedded leverage, which is extremely difficult to measure. We must be able to measure and quantify risks, and these risks need to be understood and considered across business lines. This means developing limits and controls that absorb the amount of risk that a firm can take and putting in place reliable enforcement mechanisms. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Sound governance is fundamental to ensuring appropriate investment in risk management and application of its principles. Boards must be involved in establishing levels of risk tolerance and overseeing risk management. Directors need to question growth rates in businesses and assess whether controls are keeping up with risks and if the business is resilient to shocks. This requires board members with expertise in banking, insurance and risk management. Boards also play an important role in ensuring that compensation systems are part of an integrated risk-management strategy. Tying bonuses to short-term profits without adequate consideration of long-term risk is a recipe for excessive risk taking. The Financial Stability Board has developed principles for compensation practices that align compensation with prudent risk taking. Implementation must be system-wide so that professionals and firms have a level playing field. Finally, financial firms, credit-rating agencies and financial advisers need to do a better job of communicating the suitability of products, and their inherent risks, to their clients. This requires better plain language disclosure. It also requires improved financial literacy and improvements in consumer protection. This is a shared responsibility of the private and public sectors – and we both have much to learn about which methods are the most effective. Public policy priorities Sound risk management makes the best of the situation at hand; mitigating risk improves the situation. And there is much public policy can do. While the lesson from history is that recoveries after financial crises are disappointingly gradual and bumpy, the future is not preordained. Public policy has a critical role to play in securing the recovery and promoting financial stability. There is no doubt that the timely and concerted actions of the G-20 countries in 2008–09 to inject considerable monetary and fiscal stimulus averted a much worse disaster. But, today, uncertainty about the willingness of policy-makers to respond has become part of the problem. This needs to change. European authorities must move decisively to contain their sovereign debt crisis. This starts with delivering on fiscal austerity in key countries and full implementation of announced measures to make the European Financial Stability Facility more flexible. But more is required. The immediate priorities are to provide a funding backstop for vulnerable European sovereigns that is sized to the scale of the problem and a comprehensive capital plan for European banks. In our opinion, this can be done by using existing European resources more efficiently. These steps must be complemented by governance reforms and credible fiscal arrangements within the European monetary union. In other advanced countries, the priority must be to agree on credible, concrete and executable plans to restore fiscal sustainability consistent with the commitments made at last year’s G-20 Leaders Summit in Toronto. In many emerging-market economies, greater exchange rate flexibility is necessary to better manage demand pressures and inflationary risks, while facilitating a global rebalancing of demand. Greater exchange rate flexibility between the United States and China is required to help the recovery in the former and control inflation in the latter. Finally, advanced and emerging countries alike must implement agreed financial sector regulatory reforms to build a more resilient financial system that better serves the needs of households and businesses. In the face of a difficult external environment, the Bank of Canada will continue to support Canada’s economic expansion by keeping inflation low, stable and predictable. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Since the crisis erupted four years ago, the Bank has demonstrated its nimbleness in the conduct of monetary policy. We reacted quickly and forcefully during the downturn. As the Canadian recovery has progressed, we have emphasized that we would be prudent with respect to the possible withdrawal of any degree of monetary stimulus. Conclusion I must conclude. Recoveries after financial crises feel more like a convalescence. For private sector investors, the fundamentals of sound portfolio management have not changed, but the economic landscape has. Sovereign debt is no longer a risk-free asset, the shift in the economic centre of gravity to emerging-market economies has accelerated, and low-for-long interest rates are changing behaviours and straining some business models. The private sector bears much responsibility for the excesses at the heart of the 2008–09 financial crisis. Risk management can and should be strengthened, and adapted to new realities. Public policy has a critical role to play in mitigating systemic macroeconomic risks. More action is needed to contain sovereign risks, promote a rebalancing of global demand and implement financial regulatory reform. The distant horizon of the new landscape is bright. Getting there will take some time, but moving steadfastly in the right direction will get us there safely. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 José De Gregorio: Chile’s latest Monetary Policy Report Presentation by Mr José De Gregorio, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, of the Monetary Policy Report before the Honorable Senate of the Republic, Santiago de Chile, 7 September 2011. *      *      * The Monetary Policy Report of September 2011 can be found at http://www.bcentral.cl. Introduction Mr. President of the Senate, Senator Guido Girardi, Senators:  I am grateful for your invitation to the Board of the Central Bank of Chile to present our Monetary Policy Report. As in September of every year, this presentation coincides with the Central Bank Board’s yearly account to the Senate, where we share with you our vision regarding recent macroeconomic and financial developments in Chile, as well as their prospects and implications on monetary policy conduct. At the time of presenting this Report, we are about to complete three years since the outbreak of one of the worst economic and financial crises in modern history, known as the Great Recession. The string of events that followed the collapse of Lehman Brothers drove the world to an unprecedented confidence crisis, with a drop in global output that has no comparison with any other episode over the last eighty years. Chile was able to mitigate the adverse effects of the crisis, and succeeded in quickly recovering its levels of output and employment, in sharp contrast with what happened in developed economies (figure 1). In fact, the closure of domestic output gaps – i.e., the difference between actual and trend growth – that a year ago we expected to occur over the course of 2011, took place in the first part of the year. The unemployment rate has fallen rapidly and is now below its historic average. Inflation, meanwhile, has concluded a process of convergence to the 3-percent target. Inflation fears resurfaced during the first quarter of this year, but subsided after the Board’s monetary policy decisions and the changes in the external macroeconomic scenario. We have thus arrived at a situation where the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) stands within a range that is considered normal. However, the events of 2008 still cast their shadow over the world economic outlook. Despite the time elapsed and the economic and financial measures adopted by economic policy-makers around the world, we are still seeing the aftereffects of this episode. The underlying problems that caused the disaster have not been totally resolved, and continue to hold back the recovery of private demand. Added to this is the erosion of trust in the public finance management in some Eurozone members and in the U.S., which prompted a new episode of financial stress in early August, and still another one a few days ago. The world economy is going through an extremely complex situation. Certainly, Chile has tools to soften the impact of adverse external conditions. But as we have said time and again in the past, we are not and cannot be immune to what happens outside our borders. We can mitigate its effects, but we cannot avoid them altogether. Therefore, the external situation is likely to have repercussions on our economy and, consequently, on our monetary policy conduct. As I just mentioned, at the August meeting the Board withdrew the tightening bias on the MPR it had communicated in previous minutes, which has reflected in the behavior of market interest rates. The baseline scenario I will be presenting in a moment assumes that the world economy will grow less than we anticipated just three months ago. First-half output figures were pretty 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches weak in the developed world. Recent financial turmoil could aggravate in the second half of the year. Developed economies’ households continue to tighten their belts in order to reduce their massive debts, but, in turn, this deleveraging process is restraining growth in domestic demand and employment, prolonging balance sheet vulnerability. In addition, the fiscal position of these economies has deteriorated after several years of fiscal deficit. Remedying this situation will call for substantial adjustments in their public finances. Some of them could be done in the medium term, for instance in the United States, while others need immediate action, as is the case in some emerging European economies. In moments of weak private demand, these adjustments could postpone the much expected recovery even further.  Add to this that monetary policy interest rates are at their all-time lows, with which the capacity of central banks to increase the stimulus is also limited. In short, the tools traditionally used to boost growth have little room for maneuver in the developed world. Another source of risks that is being increasingly debated is the possibility of developed economies, especially the U.S., enduring a long time of slow growth. Excessive private debts, particularly of households, and public debt, combined with weak labor markets, are determinants of this assessment. This could shape a similar situation to that of Japan after the bursting of its housing bubble in the late 1980s, which gave way to a period of stagnation that has seen no end. Although we believe this to be an unlikely scenario, its consequences on the global economy could be severe. Amidst these conditions, emerging economies continue to grow strongly. The risks of overheating we saw only a few months back have diminished, partly because of the very action of the adopted economic policies and, especially, of monetary measures. There are still risks, however. For one, it is obvious that if developed economies continue to lag, the external demand facing the emerging world will fall, hurting their growth potential. Although in the current scenario some dynamism and a certain degree of decoupling are expected, this cannot go on indefinitely. Given the weakness of domestic demands in developed countries, they rely on their exports to grow and to resolve their global imbalances. This puts pressure on emerging economies’ exchange rates and external accounts. This is one element we have seen in the past year, with parities against the dollar posting the greatest appreciations of the last decade (figure 2). So far, the Chilean economy has been able to withstand this challenge, but the risk of these pressures intensifying is still latent. The real exchange rate has risen after the announced intervention early this year, and now its level is near its average of the past 15 to 20 years (figure 3).  Among the policies that emerging economies have used to mitigate the impact on their currencies has been the adoption of foreign exchange measures. These have taken a variety of forms, including foreign currency purchases and the implementation of administrative measures. In Chile, in early January, we announced a program of reserves accumulation of 12 billion dollars, which will be completed over the course of this year. This is the equivalent of 5 GDP points, the largest since the first half of the 1990s (figure 4). To this date, we have already made purchases amounting somewhat more than 8.5 billion U.S. dollars. This program serves two purposes. The first, as we emphasized in the announcement, is to transitorily attenuate the appreciation of the peso. This should allow the productive sector to make the necessary adjustments within a context in which these pressures could remain for a long time. The program did have an effect on the peso. Without the intervention, it would have appreciated further. However, as proven by the evidence, and as our communication highlighted, taking this kind of measures grants no permanent solution. The solution must necessarily come from improvements in competitiveness and productivity. The second purpose of the program is to strengthen our international liquidity position. This means having the tools to deal with external turbulences. All the available evidence shows that a strong international reserves position helps to protect the economy of financial shocks coming from abroad, which in turn reduces the risk premiums of the economy. In our present 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 conjuncture, the level of reserves we are pursuing with the program sets us on a very good foot in case of a major global disruption. Holding reserves is tantamount to having an insurance policy. During the good times, it bears a cost associated with the differential between the yield of foreign liquid and safe assets, and the cost of the domestic liabilities that finance them. However, during episodes of global recession and financial stress, the available reserves permit to cushion the impact of the shock on the cost of the country’s external financing and provide increased flexibility to economic policies to mitigate the effects on the domestic economy. Fluctuations in the international value of the peso cause significant volatility of our accounting results, as we have seen in recent years. In good times, the peso tends to appreciate, which generates accounting losses as the net worth is measured in pesos due to the effect of reserves revaluation. But during times of global slowdown and increased financial stress, the opposite occurs, with a peso depreciation and greater net worth in the books (figure 5). As is typical of our yearly account to the Senate, in this Report we present the evolution of the Bank’s balance sheet and its prospects for the next year. In the baseline scenario, if the gap between external and internal interest rates remains, we expect that the profitability of our assets will continue to fall short of the cost of our liabilities. Although we foresee no further deterioration in the Bank’s equity, it will continue to be negative. The recent increase in international reserves has a negative effect on these results, but it has to its favor the intangible benefit of a strengthened liquidity position. However, as we said when we announced the intervention program, the level of international reserves we will reach by the end of the year is close to the limits that can be absorbed by our equity position. Still, this net worth – which originates mainly in the costly financial crisis of the 1980s – has not been an obstacle for the Bank to conduct its monetary policy with independence and flexibility. To sum up, we face a complex external scenario. Doubts about how it will unfold and how it will affect the Chilean economy advise acting with prudence, but the Board is convinced that the country is on a good stand to deal with it. In the baseline scenario I will present to you in a moment, we assume that the effects of the external scenario will be limited, and the Chilean economy will grow close to its trend, with inflation near the target. Now I will describe the factors that shape this baseline scenario and the implications of the risks I have mentioned. Macroeconomic scenario In Chile, the dynamism of output and demand moderated further during the second quarter, although somewhat less than had been forecast in June. Inflation, meanwhile, was slightly below expectations of a few months earlier. Headline y-o-y inflation has hovered around 3 percent, while the annual growth rates of core measures remain contained (figure 6). The inflation outlook has been characterized by limited transmission of food prices to the local market. Similarly, the propagation of the price increases of these goods and fuels to other prices has been in line with projections. As I said a while ago, the external scenario has brought important news, with the materialization of some of the risks considered in the last quarters. This, coupled with prospects of slower growth in developed economies and concerns about the debt spreading to Central Europe, has had a significant impact on global financial markets. The sovereign spreads of several Eurozone members, like the premiums of some banks, are in all-time highs (figure 7). Asset prices have seen substantial changes, where worth noting is the decline in interest rates on long-term T-bonds of several developed economies that act as safe havens. Stock exchanges have dropped significantly at the global level (figure 8). To this is added, to a lesser extent, the strengthening of the dollar against some currencies, and the strong appreciation of gold and the Swiss franc, also used as safe havens. Finally, it is 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches worth mentioning the decline in commodity prices, with the exceptions of agricultural goods and, again, gold (figure 9).  Domestically, some variables of local financial markets have felt the external turmoil. The Stock exchange has experienced significant setbacks and interest rates on Treasury and Central Bank documents have fallen sharply (figure 10). The money and interbank markets have continued to operate normally, and liquidity conditions in both dollars and pesos have been unaffected by the increase in interbank premiums in developed markets. The peso, with swings, stands now close to its levels at the statistical cutoff of June’s Report. In light of these developments, output figures for the second quarter and advanced indicators for the third – which are still weak in developed economies – , the baseline scenario revises downward by 0.2 percentage points the world growth estimate for 2011, and by half a percentage point the one for next year (table 1). The biggest change is for the U.S., where, aside from the low growth seen thus far, there is the incidence of foreseeable fiscal adjustments after the approval of the higher limit for public borrowing. Growth in the Eurozone is still expected to be slow. Also, it is foreseen that the weakening of the developed world will have an impact on emerging economies which, in any case, will continue to outperform their developed counterparts. This projected world growth forecast is lower than consensus, which at the closing of this Report probably does not reflect the full effect of current financial turmoil. Nonetheless, incoming reports by investment banks do carry significant downward corrections for these developed economies, in line with the assumptions that make up our baseline scenario. As I said, concerns about an overheating of the emerging world and its consequences on inflation have subsided. Adjustments already made to the monetary policies of several economies, the weakening of the global economy, and the recent drop in commodity prices are behind this assessment. So, several countries have already suspended their cycles of policy rate increases and, in general, market expectations have adjusted to expect a flattened rate. In the developed economies, it is most likely that monetary policy will hold on to – or possibly even intensify – its current degree of expansiveness for some time. The Federal Reserve has just announced its intention to keep the fed funds rate at a minimum at least through mid-2013 (figure 11). All these facts combined will result in that the external impulse that the Chilean economy will be receiving over the coming quarters will be milder than previously estimated. On one hand, the worsened global performance will have a negative impact on our trading partners’ economies. However, they will continue to grow above their 2000–2007 average. The change in composition and weight of this group of countries, where emerging economies  – especially China – have sharply increased their share, explains this result. While in 2000 emerging economies weighed less than one third in the group of Chile’s trading partners, they are expected to be closer to one half in 2011 (figure 12). On the other hand, a drop in the terms of trade is expected. This last projection is based on a copper price of US$3.7 per pound in 2012 and US$3.5 in 2013, and a WTI oil price averaging around US$90 per barrel in 2012–2013 (table 2).  In this scenario of reduced external impulse, the Chilean economy is forecast to grow in the range of 6.25% to 6.75% this year, in line with June’s projections. Up to the second quarter, output was growing above the trend and above expectations in the June Report; consumption was slowing down from its strong expansion but not as much as foreseen; the labor market continued to give signs of being tight and financial conditions were still favorable, with credit showing an increasing growth rate (figure 13). Our present scenario foresees that domestic demand will grow 9.1% this year, more than forecast in the last Report. This will reflect the impact of increased gross fixed capital formation of the first half, especially in machinery & equipment, as well as greater inventory accumulation. Compared with June, this projection assumes a faster convergence of output and demand during the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 second half of the year. July’s output figure, although influenced by specific developments in the mining sector, reflects this trend. The biggest impact of the change in external conditions will be visible in GDP growth of 2012. For then, the baseline scenario assumes that GDP will grow in the 4.25% to 5.25% range (table 3). The slowdown from this year responds to a number of factors. First there is the convergence to expansion figures consistent with trend growth, which the Board continues to estimate around 5 percent. Such convergence reflects the normalization of both the durable components of aggregate demand and the MPR. Moreover, the effects of the low basis of comparison associated to the earthquake and tsunami of 2010 – that influenced first-half growth figures – will disappear. There is also the reduced impulse from abroad we will see in the coming quarters, which I have already mentioned. We also assume that the fiscal balance will converge to a structural deficit of 1 percent of GDP towards the end of the current Administration, as announced by the authorities and in conformity with the Fiscal Accountability Law. This change in external conditions has also triggered significant changes in the inflation outlook, especially in the short run. In the baseline scenario, the increase in y-o-y CPI inflation towards the end of the year will be less than forecast in June, mainly responding to the lower price of fuels. Accordingly, by year’s end, CPI inflation will be 3.3 percent instead of the 4 percent estimated in June. Going forward, inflation will remain close to the target through the third quarter of 2013, which this time marks the end of the projection horizon (figure 14). Private inflation expectations have been revised in the same direction and point at CPI inflation being somewhat above 3 percent at the end of the year, and in line with the target thereafter (figure 15). Such a trend for inflation is based on several assumptions. As I said, that the economy will grow around its trend in the coming quarters; that the real exchange rate will remain fairly stable, in the range believed to be consistent with its long-term fundamentals; and that labor costs will grow in line with the inflation target. Regarding monetary policy, the MPR has reached a range considered normal. Unlike predictions of some months ago, when most thought that the MPR would be raised further, the changes in the macroeconomic scenario have led to a greater dispersion of private expectations. Even so, the baseline scenario uses as a working assumption that, in the short run, the MPR will stay where it is today (figure 16). As usual, this scenario reflects the events that are believed to be the most likely to occur with the information at hand at the Report’s statistical cutoff date. There are risks that, if materialized, will shape a different macroeconomic scenario than the one described here. On this occasion, after thorough evaluation of the alternative scenarios, the Board estimates that the risk balance is downward biased for output, and unbiased for inflation. As I mentioned first, the main risks have to do with the complex global economic situation. It cannot be ruled out that the recent episodes could happen again or intensify, affecting the financial system and confidence of economic agents. The little room for maneuvering of monetary and fiscal policies in the developed world complicates the response to such a scenario. Another part of external risks is associated to developed countries’ growth beyond the projection horizon. The forecast in the baseline scenario is less than market consensus, but an even stronger than foreseen impact cannot be ruled out. Doubts persist about the strength of the recovery of developed economies, and there is still the possibility of these economies’ potential growth having dropped as an aftereffect of the crisis. Such an occurrence could have consequences on the level of interest rates, the speed at which leverage problems will be resolved, and growth in emerging economies. In this scenario, the world economy will grow less than in the past. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Nor can we rule out a scenario where the postponement of monetary policy rate increases in developed economies and their lack of dynamism could lead investors to hunt for better returns in emerging economies. This would trigger a resurgence of capital flows towards the latter, complicating their macroeconomic policy-making. Internally, risks are centered on the persistently strong output and demand. Although the economy has evolved as predicted, the moderation has been softer than expected, the labor market is still tight – various sources of casuistic information report difficulties and pressures in the labor market – and the rate of credit expansion has increased. It is possible that, beyond tensions in the external scenario, the Chilean economy continues to grow above trend, leading to inflationary pressures incompatible with the inflation target. There is no doubt that risks are important, but our monetary policy has the necessary tools to mitigate the potential impact of worse-than-expected external scenarios, as it has shown in the recent past. Now allow me a few remarks to wrap up this presentation. Final remarks The external scenario is complex, but our economy has been very resilient to the effects of the Great Recession. In 2009, the combination of significant fiscal and monetary impulses averted the worse effects of the global crisis. Thus, after a couple of quarters in which uncertainty swept the entire world and hit our economy with special force, we recovered with great vigor. Even in the aftermath of the earthquake and tsunami of February 2010, Chile rapidly returned to a path of sustained growth, with an unprecedented recovery of employment, and unwavering strength. All within a context of low inflation, despite the international price shocks. Monetary policy has given practical proof that it can act with flexibility and determination, and be resolute in attenuating the effects of the external cycle on our economy. As I said, at three years after the outbreak of the crisis we are still enduring its consequences. Chances are, its reverberations will continue for a while longer. The task of monetary policy is to preserve its necessary capacity to react in difficult times, the same capacity it has displayed to withdraw the stimulus packages in due time and prevent costly adjustments later. The Board will continue to fulfill its legal mandate of safeguarding price stability and the normal functioning of the payments system. Accordingly, it reaffirms its commitment of conducting monetary policy with flexibility, in order for projected inflation to stand at 3 percent over the policy horizon. An environment of low inflation improves households’ welfare, particularly those less capable of protecting themselves from rising prices. Furthermore, keeping inflation low and stable permits to soften the fluctuations of output and employment, which contributes to the people’s well-being. Chile must continue on a path of growth that will ensure continual progress of the living standards of its inhabitants.  The world, including our country, is living a decisive moment. Developed countries must make costly, complex, yet unavoidable adjustments. The experience of the developed world confirms the need to safeguard macroeconomic balances, both public and private, as well as a strong, well regulated financial system. The fragility of financial systems and fiscal accounts of some developed economies have caused a recoiling of living standards and could compromise their growth ability for a long while.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 Figure 1Gross domestic product(index, IV.2007=100, quarterly series)Sources: Central Bank of Chile and Bloomberg.90951001051101159095100105110115IV.07IV.08IV.09IV.10ChileU.S.EurozoneU.K.   Figure 2Real exchange rates around the world(index, July 1994-July 2011 average = 100)Sources: Central Bank of Chile and Bank for International Settlements (BIS).(*) The range shows peaks and troughs of the local currency during indicated period. The scale has been adjusted to 180. The peak value for this country was 225.60801001201401601806080100120140160180RussiaBrazilCzech Rep.AustraliaHungaryCanadaIndonesiaSwitzerlandN. ZealandPolandIndiaPhilippinesTurkeyChinaChileThailandSouth AfricaIsraelNorwayMexicoPeruMalaysiaEurozoneJapanSouth KoreaSwedenU.S.U.K.Range (*)SpotAverage 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches Figure 3Real exchange rate (*)(index, 1986=100) (*) Preliminary for August 2011.Source: Central Bank of Chile.7080901001101208890929496980002040608101991-2010 average1996-2010 averageRER   Figure 4Change in Central Bank of Chile's international reserves(percentage of GDP)Source: Central Bank of Chile.(*)ThereservesincludethepurchaseofUS$12.0billionannouncedinJanuary2011.ToforecastGDP,growth and inflation projections in the September Report are used.-4-202468-4-2024689193959799010305070911 (*) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 Figure 5Central Bank of Chile balance sheet(billions of pesos, percent)(*) Corresponds to y-o-y exchange rate variation at December of each year.Source: Central Bank of Chile.-30-20-100102030-3.000-2.000-1.00001.0002.0003.0009798990001020304050607080910Net resultNERvariation (*)   Figure 6Inflation indicators(annual change, percent)Source: National Statistics Institute (INE). -4-2024681012-4-2024681012060708091011CPICPIX1CPIXCPI w/o foods & energy 
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches Figure 7Sovereign risk premiums (*)(basis points)(*) Measured using 5-yr CDS premiums.Fuente: Bloomberg.05001.0001.5002.0002.50005001.0001.5002.0002.500ene.10jul.10ene.11jul.11IrelandPortugalGreece10       Jul.    11     Jul.01002003004005000100200300400500ene.10jul.10ene.11jul.11ItalyFranceGermanySpain10       Jul.    11       Jul.   Figure 8World stock exchanges (*)(index, 01/01/2008=100; 01/03/2011=100)(*) Corresponds to MSCI indes in local currency.Source: Bloomberg.708090100110120708090100110120Jan.11Apr.11Jul.11204060801001202040608010012008091011Latin AmericaEmerging EuropeDeveloped marketsEmerging AsiaJan.11      Apr.11      Jul.11 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 Figure 9Commodity prices(index, 01/01/2007=100)(*) Using the Godman Sachs aggregate index.Sources: Central Bank of Chile and Bloomberg.0501001502002503000501001502002503000708091011CopperWTI oilAgricultural products (*)Gold   Figure 10(percent)(*) Dotted vertical line marks date of publication of June 2011's Monetary Policy Report.Source: Central Bank of Chile.Nominal interest rates on Central Bank of Chile bonds (*)4.755.005.255.505.756.006.256.504.755.005.255.505.756.006.256.50Jun.11Jul.11Ago.11BCP-2BCP-5BCP-10 
12 BIS central bankers’ speeches Table 1World growth(annual change, percent)2000-2007200920102011 (f)2012 (f)2013 (f)average(e)Jun.11ReportSep.11ReportJun.11ReportSep.11ReportSep.11ReportWorld at PPP4.2-0.65.04.13.94.54.04.5World at mkt exchange rate3.2-2.13.83.23.03.83.33.7United States2.6-3.53.02.71.63.22.02.8Eurozone2.2-4.11.71.7=1.71.51.22.1Japan1.7-6.34.0-0.6-0.53.12.81.8China10.59.210.38.99.08.68.38.7Rest of Asia5.10.17.84.84.94.94.55.0Latin America (excl. Chile)3.5-2.06.34.2=4.24.33.94.2Commodity exporters3.1-1.22.92.72.23.02.53.2Trading partners3.6-0.45.94.34.24.74.34.6(e) Estimate. (f) Forecast.Sources:CentralBankofChilebasedonasampleofinvestmentbanks,ConsensusForecasts,IMF,andstatisticsbureausofrespective countries.   Figure 11Actual and expected monetary policy rates around the world (1)(porcentaje)Sources: Central Bank of Chile, central banks of respective countries and Bloomberg. (1)Simpleaverageofmonetarypolicyratesofeachgroupofcountries.Grayarea,asfromSeptember2011,showsmarketexpectationsinBloombergsurvey.ForChile,theaveragedlinearinterpolationbetweentheAugustEESandtheFOSofthesecondhalfofAugustisused.(2)IncludestheEurozone,Japan,theU.K.andtheU.S.(3)IncludesBrazil,China,Colombia,theCzechRepublic,Hungary,Mexico,Peru, Poland, South Africa and South Korea.0123456789012345678905070911Developed (2)Emerging (3)Chile 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 13 Figure 12Contribution to trading partners' growth (*)(percentage points)(*) Gray area, as from 2011, shows forecast.Source:CentralBankofChilebasedonasampleofinvestmentbanks,ConsensusForecasts,IMFandstatistics bureaus of respective countries. -4-202468-3-2-1012345679095000510EmergingDevelopedTrading partners   Table 2International baseline scenario assumptions20092010 (e)2013 (f)IPoM   jun.    11IPoM   sep.    11IPoM   jun.    11IPoM   sep.   11IPoM   sep.     11(annual change, percent)Terms of trade4.623.8-1.6-1.8-2.1-5.3-2.6Trading partners' GDP-0.45.94.34.24.74.34.6World GDP at PPP-0.65.04.13.94.54.04.5World GDP at mkt exchange rates -2.13.83.23.03.83.33.7External prices (in US$)-6.25.89.09.82.82.92.1(level)LME copper price (US$cents/lb)234342415415400370350WTI oil price (US$/barrel)627999931038991Gasoline parity price (US$/m3)471598825816832797774Libor US$ (nominal, 90 days, %)0.70.30.30.30.90.30.3(e) Estimate. (f) Forecast.2011 (f)2012 (f)Source:CentralBankofChilebasedonasampleofinvestmentbanks,ConsensusForecasts,IMFandstatisticsbureausofrespective countries.  
14 BIS central bankers’ speeches Figure 13(1)  Seasonally-adjusted series. (2) Sold during moving quarter.Sources: National Automobile Association of Chile, Central Bank of Chile, National Chamber of Commerce, andRicaurte,M.2011,“IndicadoresdeMercadoLaboralparalaComparacióndelasCrisisAsiáticayFinanciera Internacional”. Preliminary document, Central Bank of Chile, June.Retail sales and new car sales (1) (2)Employment and unemployment (1)(index, centered on mean of period 1990-2011)(index, 2003=100)50100150200250300350100125150175200225250060708091011DurablesNon-durablesNew cars-40-2002040-40.00-20.000.0020.0040.009093969902050811EmploymentUnemployment   Table 3Economic growth and current account(annual change, percent) 200920102011 (f)2012 (f)GDP-1.75.26.25-6.754.25-5.25National income-1.915.76.64.2Domestic demand-5.916.49.14.5Domestic demand (w/o inventory change)-2.911.59.75.4Gross fixed capital formation-15.918.814.47.1Total consumption1.99.38.24.9Goods and services exports-6.41.96.55.0Goods and services imports-14.629.512.04.6Current account (% of GDP)1.61.9-1.0-2.1(f) Forecast.Source: Central Bank of Chile. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 15 Figure 14Sources: Central Bank of Chile and National Statistics Institute (INE).(*) Gray area, as from third quarter of 2011, shows forecast.CPI inflation (*)CPIX1 inflation (*)(annual change, percent) (annual change, percent) -4-20246810-4-2024681007091113Jun.2011 Report-4-20246810-4-2024681007091113Sep.2011 Report   Figure 15Inflation expectationsSource: Central Bank of Chile.(*)TheFOSusessurveyoffirsthalfofthemonth,exceptforAugust2011,whichusessurveyofsecondhalf of the month.EES and FOS surveys (*)Forward breakeven inflation based on swap rates(percent)(moving weekly average, percent) 0123456701234567060708091011FOS 1 yr aheadFOS 2 yrs aheadEES 1 yr aheadEES 2 yrs ahead01234567012345670607080910111 in 13 in 25 in 5 
16 BIS central bankers’ speeches Figure 16MPR and expectations(percent)Source: Central Bank of Chile.0123456789012345678907080910111213TPMEES, August 2011Forward IPoM septiembre 2011FOS, second half August 2011Forward, Sep.2011 Report 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jens Weidmann: The crisis as a challenge for the euro area Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, to the Verband der Familienunternehmer (Association of Family Enterprises), Cologne, 13 September 2011. *      *      * 1 Introduction Ladies and gentlemen I would like to thank you very much for inviting me to this event in Cologne. As you may know, I spent a number of years studying at the University of Bonn. It was then that I got to know and appreciate the Rhineland region, and I’m always very pleased to have the opportunity to return – even though the subject I’m here to discuss this evening is extremely challenging. More than three years after the onset of the banking crisis, and more than a year after the sovereign debt crisis first came to a head in the spring of 2010, the financial markets and people across the globe are still scrutinising the situation in the euro area.  As political efforts are being undertaken to solve the urgent problems associated with the sovereign debt crisis and alleviate its symptoms, there is a danger of many people losing confidence in decision-makers, agreements and institutions. People in Germany – and elsewhere – are worried about their currency. And I take these concerns very seriously. However, we must not forget that the Eurosystem can boast some remarkable successes in fulfilling its mandate. The euro’s record on internal and external value stability is comparable to that of the Deutsche Mark. Along with the single currency’s economic and political significance, we must not forget this fact when discussing the current crisis.  As President of the Bundesbank and a member of the ECB’s Governing Council, my core task is to safeguard the euro’s long-term stability. Credibly fulfilling this mandate not only provides the justification for central bank independence; it also lies at the very heart of public confidence in our single currency. Maintaining confidence in the euro requires, among other steps, the construction of a sustainable bridge between short-term crisis measures and a credible and stability-oriented framework for monetary union. There needs to be an institutional framework that offers a clear, coherent outlook and provides incentives for the individual parties to act reliably and sustainably. Having this outlook in place will make it easier to allay the short-term difficulties and ease the current tensions. This is the broad framework that we need for European Monetary Union; I would now like to look more closely at the details. The sovereign debt crisis has, without question, been the euro’s biggest test to date. The financial crisis revealed major fiscal and macroeconomic imbalances in some countries. At the same time, it unearthed weaknesses in the fundamental framework of monetary union and its actual implementation. The fact that almost everyone – including us – underestimated the huge challenges created by the increasing complexity and integration of the financial markets is sure to have played an important role in these developments. First and foremost, extensive consolidation and reform measures now need to be implemented in the countries that are experiencing difficulties in order to restore confidence in the stability of public finances, re-establish competitiveness and ensure a healthy national financial system. The first steps towards achieving this have already been taken. In some areas, however, there is a long road ahead. In addition, comprehensive changes must be made to financial market regulation and supervision to make the financial system more resilient. The resolutions expected at the G20 summit in Cannes will be another important step towards this objective. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Moreover – and this is the main focus of my speech here today – the institutional framework for monetary union must be adjusted so as to achieve the right balance between the responsibility of individual countries, liability and monitoring. My greatest concern is the current lack of a coherent outlook in this area. The steps announced, and those already taken, have shifted the balance of the framework in a direction that is not sustainable in the long term. This threatens to substantially harm the public standing of the euro.  In principle, I think that there are two economically sustainable approaches to designing a stability-oriented monetary union for the future. The first would be a return to the founding principles of the system agreed in the treaties, which still essentially applies; this would entail having European rules for national fiscal policy, countries retaining their fundamental fiscal policy independence, applying the no bail-out principle and financial markets disciplining fiscal policy. Despite all the comments to the contrary, I still believe that it is possible to successfully stabilise and consolidate this framework. The other approach would be to embark upon a major shift entailing a fundamental change in the federal structure of the EU. This would involve a transfer of national responsibilities, particularly for borrowing and incurring debt, to the EU.  I believe that political leaders need to take a prompt decision on which of these two routes to take. The middle road of communitising liability whilst retaining independent national fiscal policies threatens to be derailed by its own inconsistency. It would endanger the survival of a stability-oriented monetary union, and thus also the European integration achieved thus far.  2 Sound public finances as a crucial precondition for a stability-oriented monetary union The current crisis in Europe was caused in no small part by the imbalances in fiscal and economic policy in some member states, which, in combination with the financial market crisis, triggered the current sovereign debt crisis. The combination of a single monetary policy and decentralised fiscal and economic policies – an issue which had already been central to the debate when monetary union was founded – thus proved to be a flaw in European Monetary Union. The coordinating mechanisms designed to address this weakness were clearly inadequate. Sound public finances have always been of paramount importance to the internal and external stability of a currency – all the more so in a monetary union where national governments retain sovereignty over fiscal policy. The incentive for individual member states to incur debt is even higher in such a union; if sovereign debt rises in one country, some of the negative repercussions are passed on to the other member states. The risks that this entails were already clearly identified when European Monetary Union was established, and that is why rules for fiscal and monetary policy were laid down in the Maastricht Treaty. These rules aim to shield monetary policy from unsound fiscal policy. However, one factor was underestimated when monetary union was founded: the risk of contagion means that it is difficult for the other member states to deny assistance to the country at fault and thus force it to bear more of the costs and risks resulting from its misguided fiscal policy. This can therefore lead to a conflict between fully applying the no-bail-out principle and safeguarding financial market stability in the short term. Indeed, the more successful a monetary union, ie the more integrated its real economies and financial markets, the greater the possible contagion effects.  3 The existing legal framework for monetary union The founders of monetary union were essentially aware of the importance of sound public finances. They therefore imposed a set of rules on the euro area that aimed to prevent these kinds of imbalances from emerging where possible and to correct them where necessary. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Because of the temptation I have already outlined for decision-makers to to misuse monetary policy , it was stipulated that monetary policy would be independent and charged with safeguarding price stability in the euro area as a whole. In the euro area’s single monetary policy, financing government deficits in the individual member states was prohibited. As well as the inflation risks arising from the overly expansionary monetary policy that this would entail, there is another important reason for prohibiting such financing in a monetary union where the individual member states retain fiscal policy sovereignty. By supporting individual member states via the central bank balance sheet, monetary policy would redistribute financial burdens between the taxpayers of the different countries. If assistance for individual countries is considered essential for exceptional and overriding reasons, such as a threat to financial stability, it must generally be provided through fiscal policy, which is the responsibility of national governments and parliaments. The most recent ruling by Germany’s Federal Constitutional Count was probably based on this reasoning. Monetary policy in a monetary union therefore differs crucially from a purely national monetary policy, such as in the United States or the United Kingdom, where there is no danger of having to shunt risks resulting from unsound public finances between the taxpayers of different countries in order to avoid jeopardising financial stability. There is still a large degree of national fiscal autonomy within European Monetary Union. The principle of subsidiarity is firmly enshrined in the current legal framework and the national parliaments have the last word in fiscal and budgetary policy decisions. This is true of revenue and expenditure and, in particular, borrowing. The Maastricht Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact were designed to impose effective limits on government borrowing by restricting sovereign debt to non-critical levels and avoiding lasting deficits. However, the public often have little awareness of these fiscal rules beyond the two threshold figures of 3% for the annual deficit and 60% for the debt level (both in relation to gross domestic product). In fact, the rules are more comprehensive than this – including, for example, the objective of achieving a close-to-balance budget in the medium term.  4 The run-up to the crisis Despite the existence of this framework and the substantial successes achieved in consolidating public finances in the convergence phase before the euro was introduced, sovereign debt was not effectively contained in the subsequent phase – quite the opposite, in fact. Looking at the run-up to the crisis reveals, above all, a lack of political will to implement the rules, which were circumvented or even actively bent if there was no other way of avoiding sanctions. One major back door for getting around the rules was the fact that a majority vote among all member states was required at key points in the excessive deficit procedure in order for it to progress. Otmar Issing described this scenario rather colourfully as “sinners sitting in judgement over fellow sinners”, and it does indeed encourage strategic voting. In many cases, the member states consequently failed to achieve the fundamental budgetary objectives and pre-crisis borrowing was far higher than it would have been had the rules been applied consistently. Another aggravating factor was the weakness of the Commission, as the guardian of the treaties, in its confrontations with the member states. In some countries, a number of failures – many of which can be summarised as “a loss of competitiveness”, “asset price bubbles” and “excessive lending” – played a crucial role in the run-up to the crisis. It would take too long for me to discuss these issues in detail in this speech. However, we should remember that initially neither the national decision-makers, nor the European bodies, nor the financial market participants appear to have recognised the extent of these escalating problems. The preventative mechanisms and risk provisioning were insufficient. When these imbalances were corrected, this placed substantial additional pressure on some countries’ government budgets and financial systems. We must draw lessons for the future from these experiences, too.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  5 Routes to a sustainable institutional framework for monetary union  As a complement to short-term crisis measures, it is crucial to structure the institutional framework for European Monetary Union so that it is stable, inspires confidence and ultimately lends credibility to short-term crisis management. I would now like to look at the two possible routes for achieving this in more detail.  5.1 Strengthening the existing legal framework The current debt crisis in several euro-area countries has revealed the inadequacy of the existing procedures for preventing and resolving such crises. In response, numerous adjustments have since been made to the framework for monetary union. Some of these adjustments have yet to be specified in detail or approved by national parliaments. They do not aim to change the fundamental principles of monetary union. In particular, they expressly reaffirm the no bail-out principle, thus making it clear that individual member states are to bear responsibility for their fiscal policy decisions and investors for their investment decisions. As a short-term crisis measure, the European Financial Stability Facility (or EFSF) and the European Financial Stability Mechanism (or EFSM) were created in the summer of 2010 after Greece had been granted bilateral assistance loans. Recent decisions specify that the EFSF is to be expanded substantially. Assistance was granted to Ireland and Portugal via the EFSF, and it has recently been signalled that Greece may be granted additional aid. Another package of reforms aims to prevent future crises by amending the Stability and Growth Pact (or SGP), introducing a procedure for preventing and correcting macroeconomic imbalances and adopting a Euro Plus Pact (or EPP).  Furthermore, for emergency situations in which the preventative mechanisms do not suffice, a permanent crisis resolution mechanism (called the European Stability Mechanism, or ESM) is to be set up to avert dangers to the stability of the euro area as a whole. This mechanism is scheduled to replace the EFSF and the EFSM in mid-2013. In principle, this was the right decision. It reflects the dimension of increasing financial market integration, which was underestimated by the founders of monetary union and which was facilitated to a considerable degree by having a single currency. Nonetheless, it is crucial to ensure that the specific design of the support mechanisms does not discard key basic principles – such as subsidiarity, independent national responsibility for fiscal policy and the no bail-out principle, and thus also the disciplining function of the capital markets – under the smokescreen of financial stability. This would risk further increasing the euro-area countries’ propensity to incur debt and heightening the pressure on the single monetary policy to adopt an accommodative stance. I am therefore rather critical of some elements of the decisions taken by the euro area’s heads of state and government on 21 July. However, I must emphasise that I do not share the all-too common view that the existing framework is unsuitable for a monetary union. I am convinced that its founding principles remain appropriate for a stability-oriented monetary union, too. However, certain adjustments undoubtedly need to be made to this framework to reflect recent experiences. And I certainly do support many of the announced reforms.  Before I discuss the specific points on which I take a critical view, I would like to outline the core elements that a strengthened framework would need. Specifically, I believe that we need to give renewed force to the no bail-out principle, which is still enshrined in the relevant treaties, and to the disciplining of national fiscal policies via the capital markets that this principle entails. There are four key elements in this context: 1. Prevention: The planned strengthening of preventative procedures is key to ensuring that crisis prevention is more reliable in the future. However, to ensure that it actually works and avoids the build-up of unsustainable sovereign debt, there 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  needs to be a much greater automatism, particularly in the Stability and Growth Pact, for imposing sanctions when the deficit and debt limits are breached. The procedure for preventing and correcting macroeconomic imbalances and the Euro Plus Pact (EPP) can only act as supplementary tools for avoiding obvious and serious imbalances. In their use, we should nevertheless avoid attempts at macroeconomic fine-tuning. 2. Financial market stability: In addition, further suitable measures should be taken in the fields of financial market regulation and supervision to strengthen financial market stability, thus reducing the potential conflict between the objectives of safeguarding financial market stability and ensuring that private creditors remain liable (including in the event of a euro-area country defaulting).  3. Crisis management mechanism: There needs to be a crisis management mechanism as a last resort for averting financial crises that threaten the existence of the euro area. It should contain three key elements: attaching strict economic and fiscal policy conditions to assistance, ensuring appropriate interest rate premiums and a credible involvement of private investors in the event of a default.  Having a strict macroeconomic and fiscal adjustment programme and, above all, significant interest rate premiums over the rates paid by countries with high credit ratings can maintain the incentive for member states to return to the capital market as soon as possible.   Regarding the disciplining of national fiscal policy through the capital markets, the rules for monetary union should be adjusted so that, when a euro-area country looks likely to experience difficulties, private creditors cannot rapidly shift their liability to the taxpayers of the countries providing assistance. The introduction of collective action clauses (CACs) alone, scheduled to start in 2013 within the framework of the ESM, is highly unlikely to be sufficient to achieve this objective. The approach of adding a trigger clause to the terms and conditions of bonds stipulating that maturities will be automatically extended for a fixed period of time (such as three years) in the event of the ESM granting assistance to the country in question, as proposed by the Bundesbank, should therefore be supported.   I have already stressed that I am critical of key elements of the recent EU decisions concerning the design of the crisis resolution mechanism. In my view, they undermine some of the key basic requirements for an assistance mechanism in the existing legal framework, which is based on countries bearing responsibility for their own finances. One serious cause for concern is the fact that the new, looser credit conditions considerably reduce the incentives for countries receiving assistance to make fiscal and economic reforms to enable as rapid a return as possible to sounder public finances. Adopting these conditions in future assistance programmes (or even in the ESM) would perpetuate such problems and encourage countries to apply for assistance.  The planned secondary market purchases would also further weaken the incentives for countries to conduct an appropriate fiscal policy. If the bonds of countries that are not receiving assistance are purchased on the secondary market, it is unclear how these countries can be strictly obliged to fulfil conditions governing consolidation and reforms. It is also unclear how this can be brought into line with the requirement of granting assistance only as a measure of last resort to avert a risk to the stability of the euro area as a whole.   These decisions mean that member states with an unsound budgetary policy can count on receiving assistance, while countries with sound finances will increasingly be called on to provide funds. In addition, if the impression arises that the conditions attached to the assistance are open to negotiation if targets are missed, there is a 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  danger that the countries receiving assistance will not make sufficient efforts themselves.  This inconsistency can be illustrated through the following example: How can an improved sanction mechanism in the Stability and Growth Pact prevent unsound national fiscal policies if sanctions are threatened but, where rules continue to be breached, protection from the capital market is ultimately granted at extremely favourable conditions – indeed, far better conditions than those for some of the countries providing assistance?  4. Consistent implementation: The effectiveness of any set of rules hinges on its implementation – if the principle “pacta sunt servanda” ceases to apply, reliable economic relationships are no longer possible. Ultimately, it is up to the sovereign countries receiving assistance to decide whether or not to fulfil the conditions attached to receiving assistance. To avoid making a mockery of national responsibility, this framework must also clearly establish that no further assistance can be granted if the conditions are not met.  All in all, I believe that strengthening the existing legal framework essentially remains a viable and promising means of stabilising monetary union. However, this framework must ensure that conducting a sound fiscal policy is in the best interests of each individual country – even more so than before the crisis. And, when taking this route, we must not allow the design of the crisis resolution mechanisms to open the door to misguided incentives. 5.2 Core elements of a fiscal union with a substantial transfer of competences from national to EU level The fundamental alternative to strengthening the existing framework would be to undertake a major shift to a fiscal union, involving a partial transfer of fiscal policy competences to the EU.  Establishing a European fiscal union would not by any means require a complete centralisation of fiscal policy (including policies governing revenue and expenditure). In particular, the principle of subsidiarity implies that wide-ranging competences should remain at national level in order to ensure that the arrangements reflect the preferences of the individual countries’ citizens as closely as possible. In my view, enshrining strict deficit and debt limits for national budgets in EU legislation is pivotal to achieving a stable fiscal union and reliably shielding the Eurosystem’s single monetary policy from unsound public finances. These limits would then apply to all levels of national government, including central, state and local government and the social security systems; the EU would need to be granted ultimate powers of intervention to ensure that the limits are effectively implemented in practice. In a fiscal union, these powers of intervention would have to be extensive enough to ensure that national governments lose their sovereignty over fiscal policy when deficit and borrowing limits are breached, if not beforehand. Consequently, the national parliaments would no longer have ultimate decision-making authority over government budgets; their decisions would be subject to approval by a central body. I must emphasise that, contrary to public opinion, such a fiscal union would not necessarily have to entail joint liability. In principle, this kind of centralised solution could function successfully without joint liability. This would allow room for somewhat greater flexibility in national borrowing. Existing national deficit and debt limits could, in principle, be set and monitored by a democratically legitimised central body, such as the European Parliament. It should then be ensured that decisions exclusively affecting euro-area countries are only taken by representatives of these countries. However, the system for setting deficit and debt limits would need to follow consistent rules; it would have to be rule-based, much stricter than in the existing framework – reflecting recent experience – and should be made difficult to change, for example by requiring large majorities. Within the bounds of this framework, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  national fiscal policy could then essentially remain autonomous and, if permitted by the rules, could, for example, allow automatic stabilisers for cyclical smoothing to take effect and take out temporary own loans. The EU limits should constitute ceilings; there should, of course, be no obligation to fully exhaust them. Provided that stringent rules are implemented, this approach could make a crucial contribution to ensuring sound euro-area public finances in the medium term and overcoming the sovereign debt crisis. This kind of framework would shield the Eurosystem’s single monetary policy from unsound fiscal policy.  As I have said: introducing joint new borrowing or communitising existing debt by issuing Eurobonds, which are currently being so widely discussed, would not be at all necessary in this context. However, it would be possible to do so as a second step (but certainly only once fiscal policy sovereignty over deficits and debt had been transferred to the EU) without undermining the consistency of the legal framework, although this framework would have to be tightened even further.  At all events, even in a fiscal union, joint liability would raise the incentives for member states to incur debt. These incentives would therefore have to be restricted, for example through a strict ban on new borrowing at national and EU level. Otherwise, I believe that the fiscal union would be a long way from ensuring an adequate balance between liability and control. A communitisation of debt would be sure to result in a substantial redistribution from sound to unsound countries. In addition, Eurobonds, in and of themselves, would actually be rather counterproductive to solving the fundamental problem that led to the outbreak and spread of the sovereign debt crisis. In short, I believe that the risks associated with Eurobonds far outweigh their potential benefits.  Alongside reforms to restore competitiveness, such a fiscal union would provide a consistent legal framework. This would be a major step in the process of European integration – a significant move on the part of the EU, or at least the euro area, in the direction of a federal state. However, its implementation would require extensive treaty amendments and probably also amendments to national constitutions – doubtless including the German Constitution, as the German Federal Constitutional Court’s ruling has shown. We should be under no illusions: The route to fiscal union would be long and arduous. Without broad support from the people of the euro-area countries, this kind of shift would be almost inconceivable, and it is unclear whether this support actually exists. It is vital not to make the mistake of taking the steps in the wrong order. 6 The increasing misuse of monetary policy In principle, it is possible for monetary policy to safeguard price stability in either a decentralised or a centralised legal framework for monetary union, provided that the chosen system is adequate. However, substantial problems are likely to arise in future if an inconsistent framework is enshrined in law or – perhaps even worse – an inconsistent framework is not re-enshrined in law but is applied in practice regardless of the legal provisions.  The momentum of the crisis shows a worrying pattern in this respect, particularly from the point of view of a central bank.  Insufficient economic and fiscal policy measures in the member states lead to a loss of confidence on the markets, which focus on the new weaknesses.   Sooner or later the situation escalates, the country in question sees its bond yields rise and has difficulty accessing the capital market. The interest rate rise is all too hastily classified as unsustainable. Crisis meetings are then arranged, at which ad hoc measures are adopted and calls are made for monetary policy – which is supposedly the only institution directly able to intervene – to step into the breach to 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  stabilise the situation in the short term. The situation becomes yet more problematic if neither the countries concerned take measures to remedy the situation nor the countries potentially providing assistance wish to take on risks.   Monetary policy certainly does have tools that can calm the financial markets in the short term. However, taking such measures can blur the boundaries between the responsibilities of monetary and fiscal policy and overstretch the mandate of an independent central bank. In addition, they threaten to perceptibly weaken incentives for fiscal policymakers to take action themselves.   This in particular can subsequently lead to a delayed or inadequate implementation of fiscal policy measures, bringing us full circle and triggering a downward spiral in which monetary policy is left “holding the baby”.  It is certainly true that central banks, too, have to learn lessons from the crisis and rethink fundamental positions. I believe that one key lesson is, as I have mentioned already, the primary importance of efficient financial market regulation and supervision for an efficient framework for monetary union and, in particular, for a stability-oriented monetary policy and its interplay with the financial markets.  I am also aware that the real world is not black and white and that rules and actions can be interpreted differently. Nonetheless, following the Bundesbank’s tradition, I believe that it is particularly important for monetary policy to remain true to its principles – all the more so in a monetary union. But there is no place for dogmatism. Certain situations not only allow room for a certain degree of flexibility, they also require it.  Financial market stability is, without question, of great importance for monetary policy. Even so, this fact must not lead us to systematically overturn fundamental commitments and responsibilities. This would cast doubt over the legitimacy of an independent monetary policy, jeopardise its primary objective – safeguarding price stability – and compromise the confidence of the general public in monetary policy, which is of vital importance. Central banks have currently relieved fiscal policy of part of its burden of supporting individual member states or distressed banks. However, this has brought substantial risks onto the Eurosystem’s balance sheet. I firmly believe that these risks must now be reduced and on no account increased. It is therefore high time for fiscal policymakers to decide what risks they are willing to take on, both in combating the crisis and going forward. That is not the responsibility of monetary policy.  7 Closing remarks Ladies and gentlemen, I mentioned at the beginning of this speech that this is a complex and challenging subject. I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to discuss this issue in detail here today. I believe that the current developments are of vital importance for the future of the euro. The democratically elected parliaments must decide on the future fundamental design of European Monetary Union. This could mean maintaining the agreed framework and correcting the incentives so that they are conducive to stability. Alternatively, it could involve undertaking a major shift to a fiscal union, including a fundamental transfer of key areas of responsibility from national parliaments to democratically legitimised European bodies. However, I believe that the middle road embarked upon through some recent decisions is leading us in a direction that is not stable in the long term. Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 William C Dudley: Financial stability and economic growth Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Bretton Woods Committee International Council Meeting 2011, Washington DC, 23 September 2011. *      *      * It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to be here today. I want to emphasize in my remarks today three points. First, a stable financial system is a prerequisite for sustainable economic growth. Second, the financial system that operated in the years leading up to the crisis failed in this regard, generating terrible outcomes in terms of economic growth and unemployment, returns available to savers and access to credit for borrowers. Third, although we have made progress in reforming how we oversee and regulate the financial system, our work toward achieving a more stable and dynamic system able to deliver its essential services to both savers and borrowers is far from complete. We must keep pushing this agenda forward and not be deterred by those that defend the status quo. As always, the remarks that follow reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System. Let me start with a few words about where we are now. It is clear that the build-up of debt during the years prior to the crisis, as well as the crisis itself, has contributed to an unusually anemic recovery. This has occurred despite the best efforts of policymakers to stimulate demand through aggressive monetary and fiscal easing. The extraordinarily poor economic outcomes we see today underscore the importance of building a financial system that is resilient in its ability to provide credit to households and business throughout the business cycle. It also underscores the importance of limiting the types of financial and real imbalances that develop during times of prosperity. When such balances unwind, they can cause significant damage to the financial system and the economy.  A range of reforms are in train as the Dodd-Frank Act and other initiatives are implemented in the United States and abroad. Within the Federal Reserve System, we are building a more robust framework for financial stability. And, through the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), interagency coordination in identifying and mitigating risks to financial stability is being strengthened.  As we move to implement financial reform, we should not be dissuaded by those who argue that the costs of reform are too high or that the job is simply too difficult. I grant that not everyone is, or will be, happy with all the reform measures. Reasonable people can disagree about the best way to achieve certain public policy objectives or the appropriate speed of the transition. But I think that the fundamental point that the financial system needs to be changed in profound ways should be broadly accepted at this point.   Policymakers and market participants must acknowledge that the financial system is inherently unstable – that it is prone to booms and busts, and that these episodes can destabilize the real economy. As a consequence, at times, we must be willing to intervene to restrain financial booms in order to temper the busts.   Reform should be undertaken in ways that better align the economic incentives of participants in the financial system with the goal of financial stability.   We should strive to achieve a degree of transparency in the financial system that would enable market participants to make informed judgments about their financial market risks and exposures.   The core of the financial system – the major banks, non-bank financial intermediaries, and financial market infrastructures – must be made more resilient to adverse shocks and less susceptible to runs.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Recovery and resolution regimes must be effective in limiting the contagion to the broader financial system when major financial intermediaries or financial market infrastructures come under stress.   We must pay close attention to how all the components of the financial system interact. It can’t just be about particular institutions and infrastructures. Market processes and practices are also very important. Turning first to the issue of financial booms and busts, empirical observation makes it clear that financial markets are inherently unstable. Throughout history we have seen numerous sizable booms and damaging busts. The notion that financial markets are dynamically unstable is also supported by controlled experiments conducted by behavioral economists.  Now I accept the notion that some minimum degree of instability is unavoidable. That is the price society pays for maturity transformation and the other services provided by the financial sector – services that produce large public benefits. But I doubt that this should be the end of the story – we also have some control over the amplitude of booms and the severity of the busts.  Although it is impossible to attribute the instability of financial markets to any one single driving force, recent experience suggests that in many cases innovation plays an important role. I explore this point further in the printed version of my remarks – but for the purposes of our discussion today let me summarize it by saying that innovations that initially create real value generate feedback mechanisms that often fuel the development of excessive expectations – a boom that eventually reverses when the basic belief system that sustained it is contradicted by events. Such innovations can occur in the real economy – consider the Internet – or in the financial sector – think of subprime lending and structured finance products. Although the role of innovation has differed across various booms and busts, some important common elements are evident in many of these episodes.  Early on in the cycle, an innovation can lead to changes in fundamental valuations or the creation of new markets and financial products. Examples of this might include the technology boom that followed the creation of the Internet or the subprime lending and the associated structured finance innovations that supported the housing boom.  As market participants respond to the innovation, this may cause a surge in business activity. Consider the investment in fiber optic cable and telecommunications equipment in the late 1990s or the surge in U.S. housing demand in the 2000s. This surge in activity drives up profits and prices, which in turn sustains the boom. As part of this process, feedback mechanisms work to reinforce beliefs in the importance and sustainability of the innovation. In the tech bubble, for example, some new firms do displace traditional providers and network effects support scale and profitability and deter new entrants. In the case of the subprime lending boom, the provision of credit led to increased demand, which pushed up prices, and rising prices, in turn, held down credit losses. These feedback mechanisms reinforce belief in the sustainability of the boom, often extending the boom far beyond activity levels or valuations justified by how the innovation has changed the “fundamentals.”  The process often comes to an abrupt end, and generally does so when the basic belief system that underpinned the boom is contradicted by events. In the tech boom, prices fell when earnings didn’t materialize because only a few firms could achieve and sustain first-mover advantages. In the subprime mortgage episode, loss experience climbed sharply once the options of selling or refinancing at higher prices was no longer available. With the benefit of hindsight, the inherent contradictions supporting the boom are exposed. For example, the U.S. housing boom was unsustainable because it was not possible to indefinitely keep relaxing credit underwriting standards to qualify new buyers to stoke demand. It was also unsustainable because the rise in prices often led to a supply response that limited the prospect of further price increases. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Another class of threats to financial stability emerge from sudden reversals of market sentiment regarding economic policy and institutional arrangements. This is a complex issue which I will not explore in detail today, other than to note that here too, early profits all too often feed pro-cyclical behavior, undermining market discipline. This in turn facilitates the accumulation of both private and public imbalances that are painfully difficult to unwind when financing suddenly stops. When sudden reversals occur, large costs are imposed on the real economy and the financial system, costs that are not fully internalized by the market participants that may have benefited from the boom. The often significant negative externalities associated with financial market instability suggest that regulation and prudential standards should be aimed both at limiting the frequency and extent of booms and at building a more resilient financial system, so there is less damage when the busts inevitably occur. The goal here is not to use regulation to prevent or even limit innovation, whether real or financial.  Many innovations have generated significant benefits for the macro-economy. For example, the Internet, which lay at the heart of the tech bubble, generated myriad benefits. Similarly, innovations in the financial realm have enabled businesses to limit risk and specialize in their core competencies, and households to smooth consumption. This in turn has enabled the economy to be more productive.  Instead, a critical objective of prudential oversight and regulation should be to enhance the system so that financial transactions of all forms reflect an assessment of risk and return by both the borrower and the lender that is as accurate as possible, recognizing that we live in an inherently uncertain world. This means that our reform efforts should be aimed at strengthening the quality of information and the system of incentives governing risk-taking by both institutions and individuals. And on those occasions when regulators judge that a systematic understatement and mispricing of risk may be occurring, we need to find better and more effective ways to actively lean against those dynamics. This includes using the bully pulpit to point out why a particular boom is likely to prove unsustainable.  It also means ensuring that markets are structured so that investors with differing perspectives on the value of an asset are able to actively participate. Booms tend to go further when the ability to “go short” is limited or emerges only late in the game. Second, regulation needs to be oriented to establishing standards that will be appropriate throughout the cycle – for both the boom period and the bust. For example, in terms of subprime mortgage underwriting, this would have included enforcing standards with respect to loan valuation, loan-to-value ratios, household income verification, and the quality of loan documentation. As I have argued before, monetary policy will often, though not always, be too blunt a tool for such tasks. Generally, it will be better to develop and use more surgical instruments designed to fit the particular circumstances.  In addition, no matter how effectively we reform the financial system, it seems unlikely that we will ever be able to completely eliminate booms and busts. There will be problems in identifying the boom – distinguishing between what is sustainable and what is unsustainable. There also will be broader and even more subtle obstacles – booms, when they are underway, are typically enjoyable. As a result, regulatory interventions that temper booms normally are going to be unpopular. So in practice even activist regulators may struggle to act early enough and with sufficient force to arrest a boom before it becomes a bubble. This suggests that to make the financial system secure, we are going to have to do much more than just act to temper booms and busts.  In this regard, making financial markets and institutions, in their practices and structure, less prone to amplifying and propagating shocks is a critical step. This means, in particular, that regulation should be designed to create incentives that operate over sufficiently long time horizons so that the entire cycle of boom and bust is included.  For risk management systems, this includes using stress scenarios to place appropriate limits on concentration and risk exposures. The use of value at risk (VAR) models that 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches emphasize recent experience is clearly inadequate. In the case of compensation practices, firms and regulators need to continue to look for ways to tie compensation to the profitability of the firm over the cycle and rather than over shorter time frames, such as the calendar year, and making sure that compensation is appropriately adjusted for the risks that were taken. There also needs to be a framework for ensuring that collateral haircuts are high enough to provide meaningful protection in bad states of the world even if this means keeping collateral margins higher during the good times. Making progress on this front would help limit the propensity for leverage to increase when loss experience is low and to provide greater protection when volatility climbs and market conditions become less buoyant. In general, we need to continue to look to implement changes in systems and practices that will help dampen the pro-cyclicality of the system, and temper the amplitude of both booms and busts.  Attention to the incentives created by infrastructure design is also important. Poor infrastructure design can serve to mask and obscure participants’ understanding of the credit and liquidity risks that they are exposed to. A good example of this is the triparty repo market, which plays a central role in providing funding on a collateralized basis. This market for short-term credit evolved in the United States in a manner in which transactions between lenders and borrowers covered only part of each day – from late afternoon to early morning. During the middle of the day, the two large clearing banks supplied huge amounts of intraday credit to the major securities dealers. Borrowers’ assumed this credit would always be available to them, and did not appreciate the rollover risk to which they could be exposed if a clearing bank decided not to lend to them during the day. Similarly, triparty lenders underestimated their exposure to borrowers, believing that the clearing banks would always return their funds each morning. When triparty borrowers encountered funding pressures, these assumptions were starkly called into question. The private sector Triparty Repo Infrastructure Task Force, created in 2009, has made progress toward the objective of creating a more stable triparty market, but deeper change is needed to achieve real systemic risk reduction in this market. I will return to this subject later. As part of our financial stability effort, we also need to build in short-circuit mechanisms that help to dampen shocks and increase resilience. This is reflected in work underway in implementing the Basel III agreements relating to the capital conservation buffer and also on capital planning in our supervisory process. This includes requirements for financial intermediaries to cease paying dividends when economic circumstances deteriorate. It also includes developing a systematic framework so that banks can be required to raise capital to ensure that they have adequate resources to deal with adverse economic scenarios – even if those scenarios have a low probability of being realized.  These innovations are designed to limit behaviors that we saw during the financial crisis that made the financial system less robust. Banks were reluctant to cut their dividend payments and compensation because of fears that this would signal weakness. These payouts depleted capital and made these institutions more vulnerable to deteriorating economic circumstances.  Similarly, banks were reluctant to raise capital to protect themselves against particularly adverse states of the world. This was unfortunate because the collective behavior of banks to be less prepared for adverse states of the world, often made such adverse states of the world more likely. In an important sense, a poorly capitalized bank generates negative externalities, making the entire financial system less secure, with costs to other financial market participants, whereas the reverse is true of a well-capitalized bank.  As noted earlier, another important step is to increase transparency throughout the financial system. There are at least two important elements to this. First, regulators need to have comprehensive access to information about the financial institutions and markets that they oversee – including ones that may not be directly regulated. Without such information, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 diagnosis of emerging problems is more difficult and less timely, and appropriate remedies are more difficult to develop.  Second, financial institutions and other market participants need access to high quality information in terms of the financial condition of their counterparties. Balance sheet information including capital and liquidity positions and counterparty exposures would enable financial market participants to more accurately assess the condition of those with which they do business. Increased transparency would reduce the level of uncertainty, which contributes to risk aversion and financial crises. Greater transparency in terms of off balance-sheet activities such as OTC derivatives exposures might also be helpful for the same reasons. Greater transparency is often unpopular because it may reduce market power and reveal business strategies and, thereby, limit profits. But the private loss of profit opportunities must be balanced against the public good of greater financial stability.  Such steps reinforce the work underway to make the major financial intermediaries and financial market infrastructures more resistant to shocks when they inevitably occur. This includes appropriate capital and liquidity requirements and appropriate risk management practices for banks and financial market infrastructures.  Finally, when institutions do get into difficulty we need a credible way of enabling these institutions to recover or, if recovery is not possible, to be resolved in an orderly manner so that failure of any one institution doesn’t threaten to bring down the rest of the financial system.  So how are we doing relative to the agenda that I have laid out? In my opinion, we have made a good start, but there is a long ways to go. In many areas, we have identified the necessary tasks only in general terms. Progress in figuring out the details and the implementation path and how to coordinate the efforts on a cross-border basis is more limited.  I would particularly highlight the cross-border coordination problem – regulatory oversight is national, but many financial firms and infrastructures operate on a global basis. Effective reform requires mutually consistent global standards – and while international cooperation to date has been good on many fronts, progress is uneven, and the devil is in the details of implementation. We need all national authorities to resist the temptation to favor domestic financial interests over the interest of achieving a true level playing field globally. And we should resist the urge to favor locally controlled infrastructures where global solutions would better advance the collective financial stability interest. Instead we should work to ensure fair access to global infrastructures. Also, it is important that national regulators have access to data and a role in the regulatory oversight of such global infrastructures when that is relevant to their own national financial stability agendas.  In the United States, I think we have made more progress in bolstering the resilience of our banking institutions than we have on the other tracks. There are two elements to this. The first element is the increase in capital that has already occurred. The major U.S. banking institutions are much better capitalized today than they were in the fall of 2008.  The increase in capital reflects a number of factors – a long period of low capital payouts relative to income, significant equity raises, as well as sizable asset dispositions that have shrunk the balance sheet and bolstered capital. The fact that credit losses have abated and this has enabled banks to release reserves has also been important. The second element is the international agreement to implement new Basel III capital standards. Not only will Basel III significantly raise the Tier I capital standard when it is fully implemented in 2019, but also it raises the quality of capital by putting the emphasis on tangible common equity.  In addition, we and our partners in the international community are in the process of implementing capital surcharges for large, systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs), 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches with the size of the surcharge dependent on size, complexity, and interconnectiveness. I appreciate that it is impossible to calibrate “SIFIness” precisely, but this is not a valid argument for no surcharge.  The logic behind the SIFI surcharge is that the failure of a systemically important institution would generate a very large shock to the rest of the financial system. As a consequence, it makes sense to require higher capital for such firms to reduce their probability of failure. In addition, the Federal Reserve’s efforts to improve banks’ capital planning processes and evaluate their capital dispositions in the context of stress scenarios – the so-called Comprehensive Capital Assessment and Review (CCAR) process – is an important innovation. Most significantly, this process induces banks to improve their capital planning processes in light of potential stress scenarios. It also creates an enforcement mechanism so that dividends and share repurchases can be suspended more quickly when economic circumstances deteriorate.  On the liquidity side, there has also been progress. U.S. banks have bolstered their liquidity buffers and the Basel Committee has proposed a liquidity coverage ratio requirement that effectively would require large, systemically important banks to hold sufficient liquid assets so that they could reasonably conduct their operations for 30 days without having to raise any new funds. In addition, the industry is reengineering how the triparty repo system operates in order to significantly reduce the large intraday exposures of the two clearing banks in the system. This is important because, as we saw during the financial crisis, very large intraday exposures can prove destabilizing.  However, I would argue that progress on the liquidity front has not progressed as far as desired.1 First, many banks remain dependent on short-term funding to finance longer-term assets from counterparties that tend to flee at the first signs of distress. In particular, money market mutual funds remain vulnerable to runs. Such runs can occur even when the underlying risks remain negligible, making money market mutual funds a source of instability. Just a question from an investor about the fund manager’s exposures can cause the fund manager to withdraw funding from a counterparty. This may be market discipline, but it does not operate in a way that makes the financial system more stable. The SEC is leading an effort to reform the money market mutual fund industry.  Second, the Basel liquidity coverage ratio is under review to ensure that it accomplishes its goals without creating adverse unintended consequences. It will be implemented but in a somewhat altered form, since the proposal is not locked down to the same degree as the Basel III capital standards.  Ensuring that financial market utilities (FMUs) are robust is another important workstream with a number of important elements. For example, the Dodd-Frank Act has provisions that enable the Financial Stability Oversight Council to designate particular FMUs as systemically important and, therefore subject to tougher prudential standards. Internationally, the Committee on Payments and Settlement Systems (CPSS), which I chair, and the International Organization of Security Commissions (IOSCO), have proposed a comprehensive set of operational standards for FMUs, which I expect will be finalized early next year. We expect that these principles will be endorsed and adopted by the G20 countries, establishing a minimum standard for important FMUs around the world.  However, progress is slow and uneven. For example, it is unlikely that the G20 countries will meet the goal to clear all standardized over-the-counter derivative trades through central                                                  1  In general, I think progress on liquidity is inherently more difficult than on capital because tougher liquidity standards conflict with one of the basic function of banks-maturity transformation. Savers want to hold their funds in highly liquid, short-term assets. But borrowers want to lock up their funding over long time periods. Banks help bridge that gap. Pushing banks hard on the liquidity side runs up against this constraint. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 clearing counterparties by the end of 2012. Similarly, I have my doubts whether the next set of industry recommendations to reduce risk in the triparty repo market will be sufficient to eliminate all the major potential sources of instability – including inadequate risk management practices and lack of resiliency to a dealer default. Experience suggests that it is not easy for market participants to agree on measures that enhance financial stability when this goal conflicts with the commercial and business interests. If the private sector falls short in this instance, public authorities may need to intervene and impose more forceful regulatory solutions.  I also think that the scorecard is mixed with respect to making financial institutions, in their practices and structure, less prone to amplifying and propagating shocks. On one hand, the capital rules and the CCAR process should cause banks to husband their capital better during times of stress than was the case during the financial crisis. Also, compensation practices are improving in that more pay is deferred and over longer time periods. Similarly, risk management practices have improved. Institutions are better able to aggregate and assess their risk exposures within short time periods and stress testing means that there is a better understanding of how these exposures might perform in adverse environments.  But our task remains unfinished. While progress on reforming compensation practices is welcome, I recognize that there is still much to be done before we can truly say that incentives are lined up in a way that fully supports financial stability objectives.  We have work to do on the information front too. Consider the issue of international regulatory access to data. Currently U.S. bank regulators do not have access to the consolidated global balance-sheet information of the foreign banks that operate in the United States (or vice versa for that matter). Our examiners see data associated with the foreign firms’ U.S. operations, but not how that fits in with their operations abroad. Without certain specific types of consolidated global information, it is difficult to place the U.S. operations of a foreign firm in their global context, and make informed judgments about the adequacy of such firms’ capital and liquidity buffers. For example, liquidity is often managed on a global basis, and key business lines are frequently managed globally, even if they reside in multiple legal entities located in different jurisdictions. Making progress in establishing protocols that would enable bank regulators to share more relevant confidential supervisory information on a cross-border basis would be a significant advancement. Such enhanced collaboration offers attractive alternatives to ringfencing or other actions that seek to impose local solutions to risks facing globally active firms. Similarly, information about counterparty exposures is not broadly available. Occasionally, information is revealed following specific stress tests, but disclosure is very incomplete and irregular. Nor is good pricing information on many financial market instruments such as OTC derivatives readily available. This may ultimately change as such OTC derivatives instruments become more standardized, are centrally cleared, and the data associated with such trades are reported to trade repositories – but, as noted earlier, this still lies off in the future. Similarly, implementing a global legal entity identifier standard that would enable regulators (and potentially others), to easily aggregate information on a consolidated legal entity basis is still a work in process.  Similarly, there has been little progress made with respect to reengineering the financial system so that the transmission mechanisms act to dampen rather than amplify shocks. However, I wouldn’t be very critical here. This is particularly difficult work for several reasons. First, it is difficult because it relates to how all the parts of the financial system interact. It requires a holistic approach and an evaluation of how the financial system responds to shocks. Up to this point, regulatory reform efforts have been more focused on individual banks and infrastructures, rather than how the entire system functions. Second, it is difficult because the evaluation must extend to entities and activities that operate outside of the more tightly regulated core – including, of course, the so-called “shadow banking system.” In the U.S., some of this responsibility undoubtedly falls to the Financial Stability Oversight Council, 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches which was created by the Dodd-Frank Act. But this is a relatively new institutional arrangement and how well it will be able to perform its mission in practice remains to be determined. Similarly, on an international basis, the Financial Stability Board has undertaken an initiative to evaluate risks within the shadow banking system, but this effort is also still in a fledging stage.  Finally, turning to the last issue about how to deal with institutions that run into difficulty, there has been progress. In the United States, the Dodd-Frank Act (DFA) gave the FDIC the authority to resolve certain large systemically important financial firms, on the recommendation of the Federal Reserve and the FDIC, and after the Treasury Secretary makes certain determinations in consultation with the President. Among other things, DFA enables the FDIC to establish a bridge institution in which critical activities could be moved so that the failure of a major institution will not unduly disrupt the provision of key financial services. DFA also authorizes the Federal Reserve to require that such institutions develop recovery and resolution plans – plans that must be acceptable to the Federal Reserve and the FDIC. The need to produce such plans will likely create some incentive for rationalizing complex corporate structures and, presumably, make resolution easier to implement.  But a major challenge remains in implementing resolution effectively on a cross-border basis. The legal rules and regulatory regimes differ across legal jurisdictions. So, when a multinational banking organization becomes insolvent, each subsidiary and affiliate must be resolved in multiple bankruptcy proceedings, with the prospect of inconsistent treatment and larger than necessary losses in aggregate. Although the Financial Stability Board has taken up this issue, the legal impediments to progress here are significant despite the best efforts and intentions of regulators. The difficulty in implementing an efficient cross-border resolution is one of the reasons why the largest globally active firms are being asked to hold additional capital. In conclusion, let me emphasize the importance of the mission – to reform and better regulate the global financial system so it can perform its key financial intermediation function of funneling savings from investors to borrowers even under adverse circumstances. Clearly, the financial system we had in 2008 was woefully inadequate relative to this mission.  Both the official sector and the private sector have responsibilities with respect to the work that remains ahead. It falls on us as regulators to seek to minimize the costs and adjust as the unforeseen consequences of reform become apparent, and to be mindful of the adjustment costs and challenges facing many firms and markets. In particular, we need to understand as best we can how all the threads of the reform effort interact within one integrated global financial system. We also need to ensure that, where the law gives us latitude, that compliance and other costs are calibrated to be commensurate with the financial stability benefits generated by particular reform measures. In this respect, we must be particularly sensitive to the burden that the regulatory environment places on smaller, less systemically important institutions.  But the private sector has responsibilities too. Banking leaders and industry trade groups should propose smart solutions to achieve essential financial stability objectives and not simply lobby against change. The industry has an interest in a healthy financial system that can withstand shocks and adverse economic circumstances. More statesman-like engagement is both warranted and welcome.  Thank you very much for your attention. I am happy to take a few questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Managing emerging market challenges – Thailand’s and Asian perspectives Remarks by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the reception of the 2011 Emerging Markets Central Bank Governor of the Year Award for Asia, Emerging Markets, Washington DC, 24 September 2011. *      *      * Distinguished Ministers and Governors, Ladies and Gentlemen, It is my great honor to receive this prestigious award, and I would like to thank the Emerging Markets for your kind recognition. In fact, such recognition is unexpected as I simply fulfill my obligations as central bank governor. To be awarded for doing your job, I guess the job must be quite difficult or challenging. More importantly, I consider this award a recognition of the dedication of the staff of the Bank of Thailand, who have worked hard to ensure Thailand’s sustainable economic and financial stability over the years. As the Bank of Thailand enters its seventieth anniversary next year, our institution is faced with a great challenge to maintain price stability while sustaining growth in the midst of heightened global economic and financial risks. We have no luxury of taking a wait-and-see approach but to continue our best efforts to better manage the external spillovers on our economy and financial system. With continued volatile global capital movements, central banks in emerging markets need to ensure that our financial institutions and markets remain robust; that they can safely and efficiently manage foreign capital inflows as well as outflows, without disrupting the real economy. Thus, emerging market central banks must be prepared for policy contingencies ahead. At the core, monetary policy must continue to safeguard price stability, while taking into account concerns about economic growth and financial stability. The Bank of Thailand, on our part, will do our best to steer the Thai economy and financial system through the global turbulences, to ensure the continued well-being of the Thai people in years ahead. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jean-Claude Trichet: Preventing spillovers on the global economy Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Bretton Woods Committee, International Council Meeting 2011, Washington DC, 23 September 2011. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, It is now four years after the outbreak of the global financial crisis, and three years after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, which were stark reminders of how much financial integration and globalisation made all economies interdependent. This interdependence creates benefits but also adverse spillovers which may arise in all domains, from inadequate macro policy choices to private market imperfections. I will focus today on two key areas of policy interest to address spillovers in the global economy: (1) reforming global finance, and (2) strengthening policy discipline at the domestic and global level, before turning to how the euro area can contribute to global stability.  1. Reforming global finance At the Pittsburgh Summit in 2009, G20 leaders agreed “to do everything needed to repair our financial system and to maintain the global flow of capital”. The November 2011 G20 Cannes summit will take stock of where we stand in terms of implementation of this important reform agenda.  In a number of areas, important decision have already been taken, notably as regards the improvement of bank capital with the agreement on Basel III, and the development of macro-prudential frameworks. In other areas, we are close to concluding our work, in particular as regards a new global framework on systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs).  In those areas where decisions have already been taken by the international community, implementation is now key. The G20 yesterday committed to full implementation of Basel III along the agreed timelines. The EU has already started this process early with the European Commission putting its proposals on the table for the so-called Capital Requirements Directive IV, which will translate Basel III into the legal framework of the EU Member States.  In terms of macro-prudential framework, the European Systemic Risk Board has started its operation this year. All jurisdictions must ensure timely implementation so that we can ensure that we have done everything to make a difference as regards the resilience of the global, regional and national financial systems.  Let me briefly highlight three key areas on which we need to stay committed and where swift progress is of the essence. The first challenge may come from the shadow banking sector. The introduction of more stringent capital requirements may provide incentives for banks to shift part of their activities outside the regulatory realm. It is therefore decisive that we continue our work to improve our capacity to identify and assess the potential risks stemming from the shadow banking system. This includes regulatory reform of money market funds, securitisation and the interaction with the banking sector.  The second challenge is how to keep pace with financial innovation. Improving the OTC and commodity derivatives markets is a key part of this agenda, It is a complex matter and one in which alignment of details is essential to avoid regulatory arbitrage.  
2   The third challenge is to enhance transparency across the board: with regards to markets, institutions, and products. Insufficient information contributes to mispricing of risks, mistrust among market participants, which can result into downturns and crises. At our October meeting of G20 Finance Ministers and Central Banks Governors we will be discussing IOSCO “recommendations to promote markets’ integrity and efficiency to mitigate the risks posed to the financial system by the latest technological developments”.  2. Improving policy discipline globally Aside from a more resilient global financial system, we need to have more disciplined macro policies as the lack of discipline in macroeconomic policies in several countries led to the build-up of unsustainable external imbalances before the financial crisis. There is still a gap between the degree of economic integration and the willingness of policy makers to take into account interdependence and spillovers.  Keeping one’s house in order is no longer sufficient in an integrated world. Spillovers from the rest of the world can influence economies considerably. Multilateral surveillance is now being enhanced along two tracks. The informal G20 track and the formal IMF track. The G20 Framework for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth, incorporates a first systematic multilateral assessment of global imbalances. It comes at an appropriate time because four years after the crisis, global imbalances remain unsustainably high. The sum of the current account balance (in absolute terms) of the major economies are projected to remain close to 2.5% of world GDP in the next few years. This is less than their pre-crisis peak (over 3% of world GDP), but still twice as high as in the early 1990s, before the acceleration in financial and real globalization. It is now of foremost importance to implement the Framework effectively, and to fully live up to the expectations that the G20 process raised internationally. The G20 Cannes Summit will provide a litmus test. Multilateral surveillance of domestic policies of systemic countries to ensure their orientation towards medium term stability and sustainability is being strengthened in the IMF as well. The recently conducted first round of IMF spillover reports, the Consolidated Multilateral Surveillance Report to the IMFC and the current triennial review of IMF surveillance can be seen as useful steps towards a broader and more comprehensive framework.  3. Strengthening governance in the euro area  The need to strengthen discipline is understood strongly on our side of the Atlantic, so that the euro area can do its part in contributing to global stability. The earlier economic governance framework has proved to be insufficiently binding while lacking appropriate comprehensiveness. The requirements for a very significant reinforcement of the fiscal surveillance of the Stability and Growth Pact and for the creation of a new surveillance of competitive indicators and macroeconomic policy have been discussed widely and in much detail by euro area authorities. We have embarked on a deep and comprehensive reform of its economic governance to reinforce economic policy coordination. The Governing Council of the ECB has called for a “quantum leap” in the economic governance of the euro area. This includes in particular (i) greater automaticity of sanctioning mechanisms, particularly in the Stability and Growth Pact (ii) as well as truly independent fiscal and economic analyses of macroeconomic imbalances. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  The recent conclusion of the negotiations between the European Parliament and the EU Council on the economic governance reform package are welcome. Fiscal surveillance will become stronger and more coherent with the reinforcement of the Stability and Growth Pact. While falling short of the quantum leap that the ECB was advocating, this agreement strengthens the initial Commission proposals in many ways and is thus a step in the right direction.  The EU budgetary frameworks will also be strengthened, including through the introduction of fiscal rules at the national level. The so-called “European Semester” can be expected to provide ex-ante and integrated guidance to the Member States for the formulation of national budgets and structural reforms for the following year. This will be complemented by the introduction of a macroeconomic surveillance procedure, which closes an important gap in the economic governance framework. It is key for this framework to be rigorously applied, including in terms of the indicators used, in order to consolidate the effectiveness of this new procedure to assess in particular euro area Member States experiencing sustained losses of competitiveness and large current account deficits. The focus needs to be on the prevention of situations creating risks to economic, budgetary and financial stability in the euro area. In addition, this macroeconomic surveillance procedure should rely on transparent and effective trigger mechanisms. Conclusions Let me conclude with three key messages to policy makers – in advanced and emerging market economies alike – who all have a role to play to address the challenges that are ahead of us.  First, what has already been decided has to be implemented expeditiously, comprehensively and fully. This requires resolve and fortitude on the part of the public authorities, but also lucidity on the part of the private sector. Second, there can be no complacency as regards the unfinished part of our reform agenda for a stronger international financial architecture. And I cannot help saying that on top of what is clearly identified by the international community as the urgent issues under discussion in the Financial Stability Board and the G20, we are far from understanding the potential global systemic instability that is associated today with the sheer size of the non-banking sector which experienced an exponential growth over the last 20 years.  Third, as regards the euro area and the sovereign debt crisis, of which the euro area is currently the epicentre, the euro area central banks, and the ECB in particular, have been permanently calling for sound economic policy management, in particular in the fiscal domain, for structural reforms and for reinforced economic governance. As independent institutions that are devoted to stability and that are medium- to long-term oriented, we are an anchor of stability and confidence. This is especially valuable in the turbulent market environment that we are witnessing and that is characterised by acute tensions of some sovereign signatures which are causing negative spillovers on others. Only a few weeks ago, the central bankers were all meeting in the BIS headquarters in Basel in our Global Economy Meeting. Reporting to the press afterwards, I stressed that we were all very closely “united in purpose”: each of us in our own economy, with its different features and challenges, striving to solidly anchor inflation expectations, preserve stability and consolidate confidence. Meeting here in Washington, authorities have the opportunity to display the same unity in purpose to address their economic challenges at home, prevent negative spillovers for the global economy and consolidate confidence in the world recovery.  Now, at the end of this exposition, it might be useful for me to tell you what is the assessment that the European Systemic Risk Board has expressed after its last meeting only two days ago:  
4   Since its previous meeting on 22 June 2011, risks to the stability of the EU financial system have increased considerably. Key risks stem from potential further adverse feedback effects between sovereign risks, funding vulnerabilities with the EU banking sector, and a weakening growth outlook both at the global and the EU level. Over the past few months, sovereign stress had moved from smaller economies to some of the larger EU countries. Signs of stress are evident in many European government bond markets, while the high volatility in equity markets indicates that tensions have spread across capital markets around the world. The situation has been aggravated by the progressive drying-up of bank funding markets, and availability of US dollar funding to EU banks had also decreased significantly. In that context, central banks have decided on coordinated US dollar liquidity-providing operations with longer maturities. The high interconnectedness in the EU financial system has led to a rapidly rising risk of significant contagion. This is threatening financial stability in the EU as a whole and adversely impacts the real economy in Europe and beyond. Looking ahead, decisive and swift action is required from all authorities. In the immediate future this includes: (1) implementing, fully and rapidly, the measures agreed upon at the 21 July meeting of the Heads of State or Government of the euro area; (2) adopting sustainable fiscal policies and growth-enhancing structural measures so as to achieve or maintain credibility of sovereign signatures in global markets; and (3) enhancing the coordination and consistency of communication.  Authorities must act in unison with a total commitment to safeguard financial stability. Supervisors should coordinate efforts to strengthen bank capital, including having recourse to backstop facilities, taking benefit from the possibility of the European Financial Stability Facility to lend to governments in order to recapitalise banks, including in non-programme countries.  I thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Spencer Dale: Productivity and monetary policy Speech by Mr Spencer Dale, Executive Director, Monetary Policy, and Chief Economist of the Bank of England, at the South Tyneside Manufacturing Forum, London, 21 September 2011. *      *      * Thank you for the invitation to speak to you this morning.  It is a pleasure to be in the North East and to have the opportunity to speak to a forum of business leaders from the manufacturing sector. As our economy recovers and rebalances towards a more sustainable pattern of growth and demand, manufacturing and the export sector more generally will need to play an increasing role. So I’m really pleased to have the opportunity to speak to a group of companies at the forefront of this process.  The topic of my talk today is one that is close to many of your hearts. Indeed, it concerns the life blood of the long-term success of each and every one of your companies. It is also central to the setting of monetary policy.  Productivity As you know far better than I, strong, sustained productivity growth is vital for ensuring that your companies remain competitive in the global market place.  Productivity is equally important for the long-term health and prosperity of our economy as a whole. To paraphrase one economist “productivity isn’t everything, but in the long-run it is almost everything”. (Krugman 1994). Productivity matters for monetary policy since it plays a crucial role in determining the supply capacity of our economy. The balance between an economy’s capacity to supply goods and services and what is actually demanded is a fundamental driver of inflationary pressure in the medium term, and so central to the MPC’s task. The recent behaviour of productivity has been puzzling and worrying in equal measure. The level of measured productivity in the UK private sector today is lower than it was at the time of the financial crisis.1 We have had over three years of stagnant productivity. If private sector productivity had continued to grow at the average rate seen prior to the crisis of around two and half percent or so, the level of productivity today would be around 9% higher (Chart 1).2,3 What might account for the UK’s productivity shortfall? And what implications might it have for monetary policy?                                                  1 The private sector has been approximated by excluding employment and output data for the public administration and defence, education and health sectors, reflecting that a significant proportion of these sectors are within the public sector. Workforce Jobs data on sectoral employment have been scaled to match aggregate employment levels indicated by the Labour Force Survey. Resulting calculations for the private sector are estimates only. Official ONS productivity estimates are for the whole economy and so differ slightly. 2 The productivity shortfall is measured in terms of output per head. The scale of the shortfall would be slightly less if measured in terms of output per hour worked, but the same qualitative patterns (and puzzles) are apparent in productivity per hour measures. 3 The UK is not alone: OECD data reveal that several of the world’s largest economies (including Germany, France and Italy) have also been experiencing sluggish productivity growth by historical standards. One exception to this is the US, where productivity has actually grown at rates in excess of the pre-crisis average over much of the past three years.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches As I fear may often seem to be the case with economists – I’m not going to offer you a simple answer. There is no single smoking gun. Rather I think there are a number of candidate explanations, each of which is likely to have played some role. In the next section of my talk, I’ll highlight three broad classes of explanation – which range from the relatively benign to more worrying diagnoses – and try to provide some guide as to their relative importance.  I’ll then discuss how the uncertainty surrounding recent developments in productivity complicates the setting of monetary policy. The MPC needs to form an assessment of the strength of supply as well as demand when setting policy. I’ll conclude with some thoughts on recent developments in the economy more generally and how they have affected my policy decisions.  Productivity weakness: a reality or an illusion? So what could account for the recent poor productivity performance?  One possibility is that the weakness of measured productivity growth may exaggerate the true extent of underlying weakness. Let me explain.  An encouraging aspect of the recent recession is that although unemployment increased, it rose by far less than we might have feared given the depth of the recession. The recent data on employment and unemployment are worrying in that context, with unemployment edging up over the summer, after having previously fallen by over 50,000 from its peak in early 2010. If this weakening in the labour market continues that could materially change the relationship between output and employment.  But to date, companies appeared to have held onto a greater proportion of their labour force than in past recessions. My own experience of speaking to businesses at the depth of the recession is that this was driven by a desire to retain valuable skills and experience. Many companies had learned from past experience how difficult it is to re-employ skilled workers once let go. But a consequence of this labour hoarding is that the amount of output produced per worker fell very sharply, in many cases partly because working hours were cut back. And although there has been some rebound since then, the level of labour productivity has still not recovered to its previous level. This greater retention of labour suggests that firms may be sitting on a substantial degree of spare capacity. Underlying productivity – the level of productivity that would be possible if workers and capital were utilised at normal levels of intensity – may have continued to improve even though measured productivity has not. But this will only become apparent if and when demand recovers and the workforce is fully utilised. Although I place some weight on this explanation, I worry that it is contradicted by what business leaders – just like you – typically say and, more importantly, by what they have been doing. Despite all this apparent hoarding of labour, when responding to business surveys and questions from our network of Agents, companies often say that they have relatively little spare capacity. Now there are good reasons why a company’s notion of spare capacity may differ from that of an economist, and so there’s a danger that we over-interpret these responses.4 But it is not just what the managers of those businesses say, it is also what they have been doing. Over the past year, despite only sluggish output growth, private sector employment increased by almost half a million people – the strongest increase in                                                  4 As noted in the August 2011 Inflation Report, one possibility is that surveys capture companies’ immediately available capacity rather than their long-run capacity. So companies may be reporting pressures relative to the capacity that can be used immediately and at little additional cost, and excluding, for example, production lines that were temporarily mothballed during the recession, but which could be reactivated as demand increases. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 employment since 1997. It is difficult to understand why firms should increase employment so significantly if their existing workforce is not fully utilised.  Some of this behaviour may be explicable if employment growth were concentrated in sectors of the economy which are expanding most quickly, especially those orientated towards the export sector. But it is striking that this pattern of rising employment and weak productivity is common across most sectors of the economy (Chart 2).5 It is also possible that firms in some parts of our economy are having to work flat out just to generate the same amount of business. Estate agents, for example, trying to match buyers and sellers in a thin housing market. Or M&A teams pitching for new business. The extra effort that is required may explain why these types of companies do not report much spare capacity. But it does not help to explain why companies facing these types of pressures should want to expand greatly their workforces.  It is hard to reconcile the number of new jobs created over the past year with the belief that firms are sitting on a substantial margin of spare capacity.  The recent weakness in productivity may also have been exaggerated by the sheer difficulty of measuring economic activity in real time. We know that early estimates of output are often revised as more comprehensive data become available. Recent productivity may look less disappointing if subsequent estimates of output are marked up. And indeed, based in part on the pattern of past revisions, the MPC does think that the current and recent level of measured output is more likely to be revised up than down (Chart 3).6 But such revisions are likely to provide only a partial explanation of the productivity puzzle. For example, if GDP were to be revised in line with the path the MPC judge most likely, that would account for only around one fifth of the 9% productivity shortfall.7 If labour hoarding and data revisions provide only a partial explanation of the recent sluggishness of productivity growth, what else might account for it?  Difficulty of extrapolating from the past The second explanation is that it might be misleading to extrapolate from previous trends when gauging the extent of the productivity puzzle. The past is not necessarily a good guide to the future. In particular, there are reasons to think that past productivity growth in both the energy extraction sector and the financial services sector may provide a poor guide to more recent trends in underlying growth in those sectors.  In the twenty years prior to the financial crisis, productivity in the energy sector grew at an average annual rate of over 3%. But the pace of productivity growth slowed markedly in the past decade or so as North Sea oil fields aged and energy extraction became more difficult. Indeed, since the mid-2000s, productivity has actually been falling (Chart 4). In contrast, productivity growth in the financial services sector increased very sharply in the 10 years prior to the financial crisis, underpinned by the process of financial liberalisation and                                                  5 A related mechanism relates to changes in employment shares from high productivity sectors to lower productivity sectors. The scale of the changes in sectoral employment shares to date can account for some, but only a small proportion, of the productivity shortfall.  6 See the box on pages 22–23 of the August 2011 Inflation Report. 7 Employment data may also be prone to revision reflecting possible sampling errors. Headline productivity figures are based on the regular Labour Force Survey of households. The Workforce Jobs measure of employment reported by businesses has been weaker over the recovery to date. If the LFS measure were revised towards Workforce Jobs, that could raise productivity per head by around 2 percentage points. But survey evidence broadly supports the LFS measure of employment and Workforce Jobs data have been revised in the past towards the LFS measure. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches strong growth in financial sector balance sheets. It does not seem sensible – certainly with the benefit of hindsight – to think that this strong growth would continue indefinitely.  Re-estimating the scale of the productivity puzzle using more plausible estimates for trend productivity growth in these two sectors reduces the size of the productivity shortfall by up to 2 percentage points – that is from around 9% to 7% – with the majority of that difference reflecting slower underlying productivity growth within the energy extraction sector.  Extrapolating from the past may also be misleading if some businesses were operating at above normal levels of capacity utilisation prior to the recession. If that were the case, some of the subsequent slowdown in productivity growth would simply reflect the need for companies to adjust to more sustainable operating levels. And that indeed appears to be the case, with business surveys pointing to above average capacity pressures in both the manufacturing and services sector prior to the recession. The implied required adjustment may account for around a further 1% point of the productivity shortfall.8 Taking account of changes in productivity trends within key sectors of the economy and of the position of the economy prior to the start of the recession may account for around one third of the productivity shortfall. But even if we combine both of these factors with the impact of the likely upward revision to GDP, this still leaves a sizeable productivity puzzle – of around one half of the productivity shortfall – to explain.  The third explanation is that underlying productivity growth has been weakened by the impact of the financial crisis. It is notable that this explanation is consistent with evidence from business surveys of spare capacity which suggest that underlying productivity growth in the manufacturing and services sector has essentially stagnated since the start of the recession (Charts 5 and 6).9 What might account for this flat lining in potential productivity? Impact of financial crisis In an accounting sense, this stalling in productivity growth must be attributable to one of two factors. A slowing in the rate at which companies have added to the physical capital used by each member of their workforce. Or a slowing in the pace of efficiency gains associated with the way in which companies combine capital and labour to produce output, known in the jargon as total factor productivity.  In reality, it is unlikely that a slowing in the pace of capital accumulation contributed significantly to the weakness of productivity. This is largely a matter of arithmetic. Annual business investment flows are small relative to the size of the capital stock. So even though business investment fell by around a quarter in the year following the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and remains 20% below its pre-crisis level, it is unlikely to have had a significant impact on the stock of capital available per worker.10                                                  8 Evidence from business surveys (eg BCC, CBI) and the Bank’s Agents suggest that capacity utilisation was above normal in both manufacturing and services sectors. Qualitative survey balances can be adjusted to match the mean and variance of an estimated productivity gap from which inference about productivity may be drawn. See Charts 3.7 and 3.8 in the August 2011 Inflation Report. 9 Potential productivity is constructed using the BCC surveys of capacity utilisation and productivity data from the ONS for the manufacturing sector and private services excluding finance sector. The BCC survey asks firms whether they are operating at or below full capacity. Since the survey measures are qualitative, they have been mean and variance adjusted over the period 1989 to 2006 to infer a measure of the gap between actual and potential productivity. The trends shown in charts 5 and 6 are chosen such that the shortfall between actual and potential productivity maps closely to the mean-and-variance-adjusted survey measures of spare capacity. 10 The annual flow of business investment prior to the recession averaged around 7% of the UK capital stock. A 20% reduction in business investment for 5 years would result in the capital stock being only around 2% lower (assuming plausible assumptions for the rate of depreciation). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 It is possible that this simple arithmetic underestimates the impact of the falls in investment spending, particularly if the falls were concentrated in highly-productive forms of investment. Perhaps because in the face of the deep recession companies were less willing to undertake riskier, high-return investment projects, and the constraints on UK banks made them less willing to finance them. But even so, this skewing would have to be very marked to have had a material impact on the quality of the capital stock.11 The capital stock is also likely to have been eroded by increased levels of capital scrapping, as some companies were forced out of business and others scaled back their operations in order to survive. Although increased levels of capital scrapping are likely to have played some role, they seem unlikely to provide the key to the productivity puzzle. In particular, although corporate liquidations have increased in the recession, that increase has been relatively contained and significantly less than we might have feared given the depth of the recession. Rather if the evidence from the business surveys is to be believed, and the growth of productive potential in the manufacturing and services sector has indeed largely stalled in recent years, this is more likely to reflect a slowing in total factor productivity (or TFP for short). I know what some of you might be thinking: this sounds like another one of those unobservable, abstract concepts so beloved by economists, but with little connection to the real world. And you would have a point! But think of it as efficiency gains. The fact that companies, as they hone their working practices and improve their internal processes, are able to increase the amount of output they produce for a given level of labour and capital input.  Did the financial crisis and recession dampen the pace of efficiency gains in our economy, at least temporarily? Recessions are actually often credited with improving average levels of efficiency, as less productive firms are forced out of business and others drive through productivity gains in order to stay afloat. Only the fittest – and the most efficient – survive. But this recession differed to those in our recent experience since it was triggered by a financial crisis. Banks’ ability to lend was reduced. Credit conditions tightened. The implications of this for the efficiency with which companies operate are potentially far reaching. Many smaller companies and new businesses, which are a critical source of innovation in our economy, have struggled to secure the finance they need to grow and expand. Company start-ups fell sharply during the recession, and evidence from the Bank’s Agents suggests that many smaller businesses are still struggling to access funds at affordable rates. In that context, it is worth recalling that small companies, employing less than 100 employees, hold over 40% of UK patents, even though they account for less than 20% of total investment.12 Even for those companies that are able to borrow funds, the tightening in credit conditions is likely to have impeded the efficiency of supply. Some companies have become more cautious, preferring to hang onto liquidity or pay down debt rather than invest in increased levels of training and R&D. The increased cost of working capital has led many firms to cut back substantially on their inventory levels, disrupting the efficiency of supply chains. More                                                  11 The impact on the physical capital stock would be compounded to the extent that the recession also weighed on the growth in human capital. In particular, employees ability to “learn by doing” on the job or through job related training is likely to have been reduced as a result of the decline in average hours during the recession. Weale (2010) suggests that the learning by doing channel could eventually reduce aggregate labour productivity by around ½%. 12 “Investigating the characteristics of patents and the businesses which hold them”, Thomas, A., Economic and Labour Market Review, April 2011 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches generally, the amount of management time devoted to raising finance and managing banking relationships has increased very substantially, diverting attention from the search for new products and new markets.  It is impossible to quantify with any precision the effect that strains within the banking system have had on the growth of productivity over the past few years. But evidence from previous periods of financial turmoil suggests that the effect might be material. In particular, research by the IMF suggests that persistent falls in TFP growth following banking crises can account on average for around one third of the loss of output seen following such episodes (IMF 2009). So where does all this leave us?  As I warned you upfront, I don’t think there is a single, simple explanation for the recent surprising weakness of productivity. Some of it may well get revised away. And some of it may be because our sights were set too high based on past trends. But I also think there are good reasons to think that the recession, and particularly the impact of the financial crisis, may have dampened underlying productivity growth in recent years. At the risk of stating the bleeding obvious, we need the banks to be working for our economy to grow and prosper. Productivity and monetary policy Why does all this matter for monetary policy? The medium-term outlook for inflation depends critically on the balance of demand and supply in the economy. If demand is greater than the goods and services that can be supplied, prices will tend to rise. And vice versa. As such, when setting monetary policy, the MPC needs to make an assessment about current and future trends in supply, as well as demand. The discussions about economic growth we typically read about in newspapers and see on TV are normally posed in terms of demand. Is gloom on the high street spreading? Claims and counter-claims about the likely impact of the fiscal consolidation. But the MPC also needs to consider the prospects for supply. How quickly is the capital stock likely to grow? And, importantly, will the recent weakness in productivity persist or reverse? Typically, the growth rates of factors determining the supply potential of our economy  – population, the capital stock, structural productivity – are far less volatile than those of demand. As such, it is often natural for the main focus of policy to be concentrated on the prospects for demand. But judgements about supply also matter, particularly so in the aftermath of a deep recession. In recessions, demand typically falls by more than supply. An output gap opens up – the economy can supply more than is currently demanded. And unless that gap is closed, it will push down on costs and prices. The job of monetary policymakers is to loosen policy, so that demand is brought back into balance with supply and inflation remains close to target. Exactly how expansionary policy should be depends critically on the size of the output gap.  But assessing the size of the output gap is very difficult, for exactly the reasons we have been discussing today. Early estimates of economic activity can be revised substantially, so it is hard to know just how weak demand and output really are. And it is equally difficult to know the extent to which the supply potential of the economy has been affected by the recession.13 This difficultly greatly complicates the setting of monetary policy. Indeed, in a series of influential papers, Athanasios Orphanides (eg Orphanides 2003) has argued that over-estimates of the size of the output gap played an important role in the policy mistakes that led to the period of persistently high inflation in the US in the 1970s and 80s.                                                   13 Or indeed, if shocks to supply were instrumental in causing the recession. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 I hope that we are learning some of the lessons from the past. Taken at face value, the depth of the recession might suggest there is considerable spare capacity within our economy. And indeed there is considerable slack within the labour market – unemployment has risen by almost 900,000 since the start of the recession – and this has acted to contain wage pressures. But the degree of slack within firms is probably significantly less than implied by the shortfall in productivity for all the reasons I’ve just explained. An assessment of the output gap requires an evaluation of the current level of supply. But the MPC also needs to form a view about the pace at which the supply capacity of the economy is growing. When faced with a period of weak output growth, it is tempting to conclude the policy should be eased in order to boost the pace of growth and so stop the output gap widening further. And that may well be the right policy prescription. But just how much demand should be boosted depends on the extent to which the weak demand growth is matched by sluggish growth in potential supply. If indeed underlying productivity growth in our economy has been weak in the recent past  – perhaps due to the lingering effects of the financial crisis – this may well continue for a while yet. To be clear, this is not the same as saying that the growth rate of the supply potential of our economy has been permanently scarred by the financial crisis. But rather over the next two or three years – which is the horizon which matters for monetary policy – we shouldn’t automatically assume that underlying productivity will necessary grow at the sorts of rates to which we have become accustomed to in the past.  Policymakers need to think about supply as well as demand when responding to weak output growth.  Recent policy developments Let me conclude with some brief comments about the current policy outlook. You may know that between February and August of this year, I was one of the members of the MPC that had been voting to raise Bank Rate. As I mentioned at the time, my vote was not based on the nice reasons that the economic recovery looked firmly entrenched and the exceptional monetary easing implemented at the height of the crisis was no longer required.  Rather, it was driven by nasty reasons. I wasn’t confident about the strength of the recovery and I was worried about the downside risks to growth. But I was even more worried about the outlook for inflation. In particular, the risks from continuing global price pressures, and the risk that the prolonged period of high inflation would affect the credibility of monetary policy. And as I’ve just discussed, the growing belief that the degree of spare capacity in our economy was probably less than might appear at first sight.  But I also suggested that policymakers should approach their task with considerable pragmatism, and that if some of the downside risks to growth materialised, I’d reverse my vote. And that indeed is what has happened. The outlook for demand over the past few months has weakened quite materially. Consequently, at the August MPC meeting, I reversed my position and voted to maintain Bank Rate at 0.5% and the stock of asset purchases at £200 billion. And as shown in the minutes published this morning, I voted the same way at this month’s MPC meeting. So what has happened to our economy over the past few months? The deterioration in the outlook largely reflects developments outside of our shores. Growth in the world economy, including in our core trading partners in Europe and the US, has slowed. Concerns about the fiscal positions of some countries, particularly within the euro area, have intensified. This in turn has fuelled worries and uncertainties about the resilience of the international banking system. And perhaps most fundamentally of all, confidence that the authorities have the ability to respond to these challenges in a decisive and timely 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches manner has diminished. These four factors have fed on each other, leading to a pronounced downward spiral. The UK has been caught in the fallout from these external developments. The strong growth in our exports seen through much of the past year has faltered, with knock on implications for the growth of manufacturing output. Renewed turmoil within financial markets has led to a sharp reduction in asset prices and to increased funding pressures on our banks. And confidence, both within companies and households, has taken another downward step. The role of monetary policy in such circumstances is to support demand, so as to help bring inflation back to target in the medium term. And that is exactly what the MPC is doing. Interest rates remain at exceptionally low levels. The programme of quantitative easing undertaken last year continues to provide significant stimulus to demand. It is also noteworthy that market interest rates two and three years ahead have declined markedly over the past couple of months, leading a material easing in monetary conditions. If the economic situation continues to deteriorate, some additional loosening in monetary policy might be needed. But that decision will need to be weighed against the backdrop of continuing high inflation, with inflation set to climb higher over the next few months. And, as I’ve emphasised today, it will also need to take account of the extent to which the slowing in output reflects weak growth in supply as well as demand.  Chart Pack  Chart 1: Private sector output per head(a) Chart 2: Private sector output per head(a) 50607080901001101987199119951999200320072011Continuation of pre-recession trend (b)Index:2008Q1=100 Source: ONS (including the Labour Force Survey) and Bank calculations. (a) Private sector approximated by excluding employment and output data for public administration and defence, education and health sectors. Workforce Jobs sectoral employment splits scaled to match total LFS employment levels. (b) Trend calculated by projecting forward output per head from 2008 Q2 using the average quarterly growth rate between 1987 Q1 and 2008 Q1. -20-15-10-50510Manufacturing Construction FinanceBusiness services Consumer services Other servicesPrivate sectorRecession(from 2008Q1 to 2009Q3)Recovery(from 2009Q3 to 2011Q2)Change in productivity relative to level implied by trend(b) Source: ONS (including the Labour Force Survey) and Bank calculations (a) Calculated using Workforce Jobs sectoral employment splits scaled to match total LFS employment levels. (b) Percentage deviation from trend. Trend calculated by projecting forward output per job from 2008 Q2 using the average quarterly growth rate between 1987 Q1 and 2008 Q1.    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 Chart 3: Bank estimates of the level of GDP(c) Chart 4: Output per head in the  UK energy extraction industry 9092949698100102104200620072008200920102011Index: 2008 Q1=100Latest ONSdata Source: ONS and Bank calculations. (c) Chained-volume measures. The fan chart depicts an estimated probability distribution for GDP over the past. It can be interpreted in the same way as the fan charts in Section 5 of the August 2011 Inflation Report.   0204060801001201401601801987199119951999200320072011DataFitted trendLabour productivity, index2008=100 Source: ONS (including the Labour Force Survey) and Bank calculations. (a) Calculated using Workforce Jobs sectoral employment splits scaled to match total LFS employment levels. (b) Trends are calculated over the periods 1987 Q1 to 2005 Q4 and 2006 Q1 to 2011 Q2    Chart 5: Measured productivity and an estimate of trend underlying productivity,  based on the BCC survey of space capacity within firms in  private services (ex. finance). Chart 6:  Measured productivity and an estimate  of trend underlying productivity, based on the BCC survey of space capacity within firms in manufacturing.  46810198919931997200120052009ProductivityTrendLabour productivity, output per head  Source: ONS (including the Labour Force Survey), British Chambers of Commerce and Bank calculations. 46810121416198919931997200120052009ProductivityTrend implied by BCC surveyLabour productivity, output per head Source: ONS (including the Labour Force Survey), British Chambers of Commerce and Bank calculations. 
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches References IMF World Economic Outlook, “Sustaining the Recovery”, October 2009. Krugman, P (1994), “The Age of Diminished Expectations: US Economic Policy in the 1980s”, MIT Press, Cambridge. Mason, G., and Bishop, K (2011). “The impact of recession on adult training: Evidence from the UK in 2008–09”, paper prepared for the EUROFRAME Conference on “Labour Markets after the crisis: policy challenges for the EU economies”. The Global Competitiveness Report 2011–2012, World Economic Forum Thomas, A (2011), “Investigating the characteristics of patents and the businesses which hold them”, Economic and Labour Market Review, Vol. 5: No. 4, 68–86. Weale, M (2010), “After the recession: Thoughts on the growth potential of the UK”. Speech delivered at the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills Analysts’ Conference, London, available at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech461.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 K C Chakrabarty: Impact of global financial crisis on financial consumers – global and Indian perspective on need for consumer protection – role of ombudsmen Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Annual Conference of the International Network of Financial Services Ombudsman Schemes – INFO 2011, Vancouver, 21 September 2011. *      *      * Assistance provided by Shri Rajesh Verma and Shri D.G. Kale in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. Introduction Mr. Douglas Melville, Chairman INFO 2011, all the delegates attending the annual conference of INFO, Ladies and Gentlemen, It gives me immense pleasure to be here in British Columbia and particularly, Vancouver, the beautiful city and share my thoughts on a subject that has occupied centre stage ever since the global financial system has been hit by crisis leading to concerns being raised about the efficacy of laws, regulations and their implementation with the stated objective of protecting the consumer. All the Ombudsmen who are present here may definitely be exercised over the limited role they may be able to play in such situations. Nonetheless, it would be worthwhile looking at certain fundamental issues which are at the root of the need for financial consumer protection. The focus of current international discourse is on financial sector stability. It may not be out of place to recall what the great American President Abraham Lincoln had to say “If we could first know where we are, and whither we are tending, we could better judge what to do and how to do it”. Financial Sector stability, as we all know, in simple terms, is the absence of instability in the financial system. As a policy objective, it refers to the avoidance of financial crisis as also to the ability of the financial system to limit, contain and deal with the emergence of imbalances before they constitute a threat to the economic processes. Financial sector stability also has deep linkages to the principle of financial consumer protection. Securing the customer As I come from India, I would like to convey the message of Mahatma Gandhi who said “A customer is the most important visitor on our premises. He is not dependent on us. We are dependent on him. He is not an interruption in our work – he is the purpose of it. We are not doing him a favour by serving him. He is doing us a favour by giving us the opportunity to serve him”. Thus, irrespective of whether the business has good or bad times, the consumer and his protection are central to the existence of business. Consumer protection is achievable by having appropriate commercial laws and open competition. But our experience in dealing with provision of financial products and services indicates that the law is heavily loaded in favour of the financial services industry. As far as competition is concerned, it has no implications for the most vulnerable sections of the society. Further, the legal processes tend to be expensive and unaffordable in terms of both time and money. The good times for the financial services industry have meant expensive services and products for the common person while bad times have meant inadequate or no supply of even basic financial services. Can the above contradictions be balanced without having consumer protection at its core? What did the consumer gain when the times were good for the financial services industry and why is he made to suffer today, for no fault of his, just because the industry has fallen into bad times? The disconnect between business strategy and consumer protection can only be 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches a recipe for disaster. When Mr. Bill Gates made the famous statement “world needs banking but it does not need banks” everyone perhaps was euphoric that we would soon breach the final frontier of banking. But it is going to be quite some time before we say good bye to banks. The recent past has seen product innovation and product penetration through use of technology. The challenge posed by the rapid changes in products and service delivery models is our ability to scale up our efforts regarding financial education and customer awareness. A financially literate and enlightened customer would be able to better judge the suitability of a product to meet his requirements. The question I am often asked is: “Why as a regulator, are you concerned about customer care and protection? Why is it not left to the market forces and competition to take care of?” The answer to this lies in the fact that in a service industry where market forces and competition play out freely, this may well be the case. However, banking / financial services industry being a highly regulated service industry with very stiff entry norms, consumer protection cannot entirely be left to the market forces. Hence, the regulator has a role. Availability of financial services / products at affordable prices on an uninterrupted basis is the purpose and result of financial sector stability. Responsible marketing, responsible lending, responsible grievance redress mechanism and responsible consumer protection are not mutually exclusive but are inter-dependent. The public deposits and the funds available to the financial services industry represent a nation’s wealth. As such, the least we can think of is protecting the owners of this wealth, not merely in terms of deposit insurance but also in terms of day to day transactions and contractual relationships a consumer has with the banking and financial services industry. Consumer trust and protection has always been an issue of interest and concern for policy makers and the entire financial industry. The debate has become particularly acute over the last few years in view of the recent market developments. In times of globalization, new opportunities in terms of new financial products, new instruments and technologies became available posing new challenges for the consumers such as understanding the risks associated with complex products. The current levels of transparency and the consequent difficulty of consumers in identifying and understanding the fine print from a large volume of information leads to an information asymmetry between the financial intermediary and the consumer. From the perspective of policy makers, including the Reserve Bank of India and other financial sector regulators, financial literacy is a must to gauge the needs of the population and financial institutions, so that financial resources can be translated into higher economic growth while minimizing the financial stability risks. It is widely believed that the complex financial instruments that contributed to the financial crisis essentially had their basis in the boom period home loans, the credit quality of which was poorly assessed. Apart from the credit quality issues which went against the interest of the lenders, the interest of the borrowers were also severely compromised as they were lured into the complex yet alluring deals without being assessed for their repaying capacity based on their prospective income and net worth. Costs of such irresponsible lending and borrowing were borne by tens of millions of tax payers in the form of bailout of beleaguered institutions. The financial services industry players need to evolve efficient consumer policies that must be based on two main pillars: financial education and transparent information on one side and competition on the other. These aspects are central to foster the confidence of consumers and help them make informed financial decisions and select the products best suited for their needs. Competition is an important dimension of consumer policy which has a positive impact on prices, quality of service and choice of products. Was this evident when we were going through turmoil in the global financial services industry? Perhaps not. We, therefore, have to harmonize the role of regulation, competition and financial education to achieve the twin objectives of consumer protection and financial sector stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Financial consumers need protection because they are at a structural disadvantage inasmuch as they have difficulty in exercising their market power since their heterogeneity and mass make it difficult for them to organize themselves into pressure groups. Additionally, the fixed costs of procuring information can be high. A greater degree of protection may therefore make sense. Information asymmetry between financial service providers and customers, especially in emerging economies, works to the advantage of the former. Therefore, transparency rules or disclosure regulations should, at the minimum, seek to create standardized and comparable information about pricing, suitability of the product to different population groups, terms and conditions and risks to customers and supervisory authorities. Full disclosure of quality information should be combined with mechanisms to ensure that clients properly understand the information provided and their impact on their personal financial decisions. For countries where banking with formal institutions is still emerging, consumer protection measures must be a top priority. In all such cases the targeted client groups come from the most vulnerable and low income segments. This is a major challenge for the credibility and sustainability of the whole financial sector. If not properly addressed, some of the problems faced by these consumers could lead to a long-term mistrust in formal financial institutions and loss of confidence in the banking system. It is, therefore, imperative that all consumers should benefit from the same level of security and protection, whatever be the institution they operate with. Unchecked market forces and lax policies, combined with relaxed regulatory oversight, can result in customers being exploited while efforts to open financial markets to serve the bottom of the pyramid are made through financial inclusion measures. While financial inclusion is a necessary pre-condition for financial stability and inclusive economic development, the negativities that may affect a poor ill-informed new customer can be enormous – from high level of indebtedness due to excessively high prices and predatory lending, to complete loss of savings and assets created out of loans and those collaterally charged to the banks. Hence, the financial services industry cannot blindly follow a strategy of customer acquisition without providing new accesses to new customers by using the ICT led financial inclusion models or brick and mortar structures or the business correspondent model. These initiatives must not be seen as costs but need to be reckoned as investment necessary for business stability. It is important to highlight that customers have rights but responsibilities also. While financial service providers have to ask the relevant questions to their prospective customers and ensure that the proposed products and services are the most appropriate according to their needs and means, it is the customers’ responsibility also to provide relevant, complete and accurate information on their financial situation and taking their personal as well as financial circumstances into account when making their decisions. The responsibility of the financial service provider may, therefore, be read and assessed in the light of the customer’s responsibilities. Financial Service providers need to understand that for their businesses to survive, their customers’ must survive and for that, they need to understand the appropriateness of the products themselves to be able to explain it to their customers. The financial entities must not use the vulnerable sections to cross-subsidize the clientele with power to bargain and command a price of their choice. The reasonableness of service charges / interest rates must be ensured by way of commitment to the cause of financial inclusion. Further, the service charges / penalties must not be disproportionate to the level of default. The bundling of products by banks with a view to generate more non-interest income would fall in the category of exploitative pricing. Every bank / financial service provider, in order to expand its customer base, needs to understand the requirements of their customers, the risks involved and return to be achieved.  The USA, which was affected the most by the crisis, had, in the aftermath of the crisis, initiated exemplary policy and other structural reforms to guard against financial instability (Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Customer Protection Act). Among the measures initiated, the customer protection aspect had received prime attention resulting in enactment 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches of Customer Protection Act and creation of Customer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) to assure that markets for financial products and services worked in a fair, transparent, and competitive manner and were subject to meaningful and consistent oversight. In India, setting up of Financial Stability and Development Council has also been with a similar view to strengthen and institutionalize the mechanism for maintaining Financial Stability by way of macro-prudential supervision together with focus on developmental aspects of customer protection, viz. financial literacy and financial inclusion. Where the banking ombudsman comes in The role of the Ombudsmen adjudicating financial consumer disputes is onerous and the recent upheavals in the market place have only heightened the consumers’ expectations. The existence of a legal framework is a must for consumer protection. The Ombudsmen, by definition, deal with individual grievances about which the common person is agitated. They cannot substitute effective legal and regulatory systems. Expecting them to bring about systemic improvements of a sustainable nature by resorting to class action may be to expect too much from the schemes. The Ombudsman Schemes achieve two important objectives viz., timely disposal of grievances and continuing the relationship between the financial service provider and the consumer. While the courts of law decide cases in finality, many a times bringing contractual relations to an end, the decisions or awards passed by Ombudsmen generally do not have such implications. What needs to be done is to have a constant interaction between law makers, regulators, standards & codes setting bodies and the Ombudsmen to sort out systemic issues that may be leading to individual grievances. The regulators also need to be aware of their responsibility of protecting the vulnerable sections of the poor in matters of pricing, fair treatment, non-discriminatory approach to consumer care and transparency in dealings with customers. Very often, the Ombudsmen are bogged down with issues of jurisdiction, either pecuniary or physical. This should not hinder them from encouraging a conciliatory approach to redress the grievances. We just cannot leave it to the care of the market forces and competition and expect them to serve the cause of the consumers. The standards and codes setting bodies must evaluate the quality and effectiveness of consumer care measures including the financial education initiatives taken by the service providers. The Ombudsmen need to move out of their Offices to spread awareness about existing redress systems available within the framework of the financial services industry. All the initiatives must be aimed at empowering the customer to be able to make a studied and reasonable choice of a financial product or service. The effectiveness of the Ombudsmen is not to be judged by the number of complaints handled every year but by the cases that resulted in bringing about sustainable continuous systemic improvement. In this age of networking, fora like the INFO play an important role in broadening our outlook and understanding of issues from a local as well as global perspective. While globalization has had its share of success in improving markets and competition, it has also exposed the limitations of national regulators in protecting their consumers from actions arising out of trans-border transactions. Hence, the Ombudsmen who are part of INFO and the regulators must adopt the high level principles on financial consumer protection that have been put in public domain by G-20 OCED. What are we doing in India In India, for the banking industry, we have the following broad structure for consumer protection that is underpinned by Deposit insurance. India has the statutory framework for consumer protection by way of a Consumer Protection Act. We also have the Banking Codes and Standards Board of India and a Banking Ombudsman Scheme. The Banking Ombudsman Scheme has been in existence for over fifteen years and is cost free for access 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 by the common person. The Banking Ombudsman Scheme (BOS) is fully funded and managed by India’s central bank i.e. the Reserve Bank of India. As of now, bank customers can lodge a complaint with any of the fifteen Offices of the Banking Ombudsman situated across the country, on twenty seven different grounds of deficiency in banking services. These grounds of complaint cover all the delivery channels as also customer touch points. The number of complaints handled under the BO Scheme during the year 2010–11 was 71274 as against 79266 during 2009–10. Though these numbers may not reflect the true picture about the quality of consumer care or the hardships faced by the common persons, given the vastness of our country and the large customer base numbering over 800 million, we are seized of the need for bringing about greater awareness about the Ombudsman Scheme, especially in small towns and villages. The bigger challenge facing us is that of financial inclusion and financial education. To address these issues, we have embarked on an ambitious plan of financial inclusion and are committed to providing access to financial services to every village with a population of 2000 or above by March 2012. The challenge of financial education, in a multi lingual and multi ethnic country like India, poses many operational difficulties, given the low levels of financial literacy and a population of 30% which is uneducated. We are trying to tide over this situation by adopting multi-disciplinary and multi-channel strategies. Despite having undertaken a number of initiatives for ensuring fair treatment to customers, it was realized that the efficacy of the tiered mechanism for customer grievance redress in banks was far from satisfactory. It was necessary to further develop a credible and effective functional system of attending to customer complaints by strengthening banks’ internal structures to attend not only to the basic customer needs but the special needs of disadvantaged groups such as pensioners and small borrowers, including farmers. Taking into account these considerations, a Committee was constituted by the Reserve Bank. The committee was to look into the banking services rendered to retail and small customers and pensioners, structure and efficacy of the existing grievance redress mechanism, the functioning of Banking Ombudsman Scheme, possibility of leveraging technology for better customer service in the light of increasing use of Internet and IT for bank products and services, etc. and to recommend steps for improvements. Conclusion The lessons that the global financial crisis had to teach us have been expensive and painful. Let us not blindly believe in the ability of the markets and competition to take care of all segments of the population. There are sections of financial consumers who always have the highest sense of protection and there are the vulnerable sections of the society who feel left out. We, therefore, have to move to an order where the market forces, competition, effective regulation and a vibrant Ombudsman scheme all co-exist and handle matters concerning financial consumers’ protection in a harmonized way. As I conclude, I would like to thank the organizers of INFO 2011 and in particular, the host country Canada. It is a matter of pride that Canada has decided to host this event a second time around in the last five years. It speaks volumes for their concern for the cause of the financial sector consumer. Thank you, Ladies and Gentlemen. Annex The major highlights of the recommendations made by the Committee on Customer Service in Banks constituted by the Reserve Bank of India are as follows:  Creation of a toll free Common Bank Call Number  Providing plain vanilla savings account without prescription of minimum balance 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Prescription of service charges for basic services  Providing small remittances at reasonable price  Providing floating rate housing loans on non-discriminatory basis  Compensation for delayed return / loss of title deeds in the custody of banks  Zero Liability against loss in ATM and Online Transactions  Enhancement of DICGC cover up to Rs 5,00,000/-  Transition to Chip based card (EMV) with Photograph  Every bank to have a Chief Customer Service Officer (CCSO) for grievance redress 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Gane Simbe: Financial empowerment of women in the Solomon Islands Address by Mr Gane Simbe, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Solomon Islands, during the launching of the Rokotanikeni Women Association book “Women and Money Solomon Islands”, Central Bank of Solomon Islands, Honiara, 22 August 2011. *      *      * Thank you for inviting me to participate in one of the mile-stones in the progress made by the Rokotanikeni Women’s Association to bring participation, equity and raising the standard of living of women in the village; through financial services provided to its members.  Financial empowerment of women, through the financial literacy and provision of affordable financial services is one of the key strategic goals of the National Financial Inclusion goals of the Solomon Islands Government that is being assigned to the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce, and chaired by the Governor of the CBSI. We want to see, at least 30,000 new women accessing affordable financial services by 2015.  Rokotanikeni, is one examples of the kinds of member initiatives which could help our Country achieve this goal. From humble beginning, the leaders of Rokotanikeni, have patiently worked to see their membership grow. And they have seen the empowerment that their Saving Club can bring to the members. The Saving Club enlightens the membership that the opportunity to save money does not belong to only those who have formal employment. Rotanikeni is putting into practice the principle of natural growth; “start small and grow big”. A huge tree starts with a small seed and grows over time. Similarly, little money, saved overtime can grow. And this is strategic model being applied in Rokotanikeni Women Association-growing little by little over time.  The Launch of the “Women and Money Solomon Islands” financial literacy book I am sure will enhance the education of our women, in financial matters. Educating women in Solomon Islands about money and its management, is crucial, not only is the fact that women are better financial managers than men, but women are the teachers in their homes to pass on to our children about financial management as our Country matches forward towards a more monetarised economy.  In conclusion, may I take this opportunity to congratulate, Rokotanikeni and its leadership. You have shown us, that women can bring changes that can impact and empower their association members.  Thank you, and congratulations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus: Raising the bar in compliance and enforcement Opening address by Ms Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the International Conference on Financial Crime and Terrorism Financing (IFCTF) 2011 – “Raising the Bar in Compliance and Enforcement”, Kuala Lumpur, 19 September 2011. *      *      * It is my pleasure to wish all of you a warm welcome to this Third Annual International Conference on Financial Crime and Terrorism Financing. We are indeed privileged today to have the presence of Yang Berhormat Dato’ Seri Hishammuddin Tun Hussein, Minister of Home Affairs of Malaysia, who has kindly agreed to deliver the keynote address, and officiate the opening of this conference. His presence reflects the significance placed by the Government of Malaysia on the roles and contributions of the financial sector in supporting the national agenda to combat and reduce crime, particularly economic and financial crime as well as terrorist financing, which is crucial in maintaining the integrity and stability of our financial system. On behalf of the financial sector, I wish to extend our gratitude to Yang Berhormat Dato’ Seri for gracing today’s event. I also am heartened by the continuous and encouraging participation of the private and public sectors in this conference. Now in its third year, this conference has become a hallmark event that brings together various stakeholders in Malaysia and from abroad, to discuss issues relating to financial crimes and terrorist financing. In addition, this conference continues to receive support from, and participation of, renowned international experts and our regional counterparts. I bid you a warm welcome to Malaysia, and would like to take this opportunity to extend our appreciation for your support and contributions. Allow me to also to congratulate the organiser of this event, the Compliance Officers Networking Group of Malaysia (CONG) and the collaborating partners, namely the Institute of Bankers Malaysia, the Securities Industry Development Corporation, the Malaysian Insurance Institute, Islamic Banking and Finance Institute Malaysia (IBFIM) and the Asian Institute of Finance for successfully putting this event together. I have been made to understand that for the first time, this conference has also received support from the academia, with the participation of Universiti Teknologi MARA as a collaborating partner.  Financial crime continues to evolve in modus operandi, multiply in scale and complexity, and hence, the greater the potential harm they can inflict on the smooth functioning of the financial markets and payment systems, financial sector stability and economic development globally. As an unintended consequence of enhanced access to financial services and greater mobility of funds, facilitated by increased globalisation, technological advancements and ongoing efforts to promote financial sector development and financial inclusion, the opportunity and attractiveness for criminal elements to abuse the financial sector, and use it as a conduit to move illicit funds, and to disguise criminal activities, have increased. The International Monetary Fund or the IMF has estimated the amount of money laundered worldwide to be in the region of 2% to 5% of global GDP annually or equivalent to USD800 billion to USD2 trillion a year. Indeed, the financial community now regards financial crime such as fraud, money laundering and terrorist financing, including cyber terrorism and crime, as one of the top operational risks that they face. While the direct cost of financial crimes to individual financial institutions may be substantial, it pales in comparison to the damage to the overall financial system that can arise from the failure to implement adequate measures to effectively combat financial crimes, in particular those relating to money laundering and terrorist financing. Such costs include reputational damage to the institution and country, loss of confidence of key stakeholders such as 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches depositors, investors and the public at large and perhaps more damaging, the loss of or restricted access to international financial system, including correspondent banking relationships. With the increasing trend by supranational bodies to publicly name jurisdictions that are seen to be uncooperative, and to call on their respective members and the broader international community to implement appropriate countermeasures in dealing with institutions and entities from these jurisdictions, the implications, both financially and socially, can be devastating to the countries concerned. Over the years, the risk areas and thus the scope of regulations to prevent the use of the financial system as a conduit for illegal and other undesirable activities that can pose threats to global security have also increased. From money laundering to terrorist financing, the regulations and standards are being extended to comprehensively address new and emerging threats. This is evident in the ongoing review of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 40+9 Recommendations, where among others, several policy goals and initiatives for combating corruption, and addressing proliferation financing more effectively, are being thoroughly discussed and deliberated. A major development in the review of the standards, that is relevant to the industry, is the higher emphasis that will be placed on assessing the effectiveness of measures implemented to counter the risks of money laundering and terrorist financing, rather than merely looking at technical compliance. This is indeed very relevant to the theme of this year’s conference “Raising the Bar in Compliance and Enforcement”. As Malaysia’s AML/CFT regime grows in maturity, the benchmark for compliance by financial institutions will be measured more in terms of its effectiveness in deterring and preventing financial crimes before they occur, and in effectively supporting the relevant law enforcement agencies to bring the perpetrators to justice when such crimes happen, despite our best efforts. In this regard, I urge the industry to take advantage of the knowledge and experience of the panel of experts assembled here at this conference, to better understand and prepare for the implications of the review of the FATF 40+9 Recommendations, and the expectations on financial institutions and boards of directors moving forward.  For Bank Negara Malaysia, the enhancement to the nation’s infrastructure to combat financial crimes will remain as one of our key priorities. In this regard, our role as Malaysia’s primary financial regulator will continue to focus three broad areas. The first is to deter and prevent criminals from abusing the financial system to be the conduit for illegal activities by ensuring the continued effectiveness of Malaysia’s legal and other relevant infrastructure, systems and processes in combating financial crimes. Secondly, is to ensure all financial institutions continue to strengthen their defences against such threats and risks via our regulatory policies as well as risk-based supervisory and surveillance activities; and thirdly, to strengthen collaboration between the financial industry with other domestic and international stakeholders in AML/CFT initiatives to protect the integrity and stability of our financial system, including implementing capacity building programmes, such as this Conference.  While the financial sector has, over the years, strengthened its risk management and control functions to combat financial crimes, a higher degree of emphasis and attention by senior management and the Board, on issues relating to AML/CFT, can further improve the standards of compliance and the effectiveness of measures put in place to fight against money laundering and terrorist financing. We also observed that financial institutions exhibiting effective defences against financial crimes shared four common attributes in their AML/CFT framework. These are: (i) well developed and clearly articulated policies and procedures; (ii) effective governance structure, particularly on the compliance function; (iii) incorporation of AML/CFT compliance assessments in the audit and capacity development programmes; and (iv) increased and effective use of information technology and management information systems for AML/CFT risk monitoring and management. therefore, talent development in this area is becoming increasingly critical. A well trained workforce is a valuable asset that would contribute to the implementation of an effective compliance framework with impactful results. This can be achieved through the formulation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 of structured and coordinated capacity development programmes aimed at elevating the level of technical skills, leadership and professionalism.  On this note, Bank Negara Malaysia lauds the initiative by the financial sector in formulating the AML/CFT Certification Programme for compliance officers that will be launched during this conference. This conference and indeed the theme “Raising the Bar in Compliance and Enforcement” is very timely and relevant. It is our hope this and other similar platforms will foster greater collaboration and sharing of ideas among the industry, compliance practitioners, regulators, law enforcement agencies and other relevant stakeholders and further contribute towards the enhancement of our framework and initiatives to combat financial crimes and preserve our financial and macro-economic stability. With that, I wish to thank you for your kind attention and wish you a productive conference.  
Daniel K Tarullo: Industrial organization and systemic risk – an agenda for further research Speech by Mr Daniel K Tarullo, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Conference on the Regulation of Systemic Risk, Federal Reserve Board, Washington DC, 15 September 2011. *      *      * In previous speeches I have called on researchers to devote more attention to investigating economies of scale and scope in financial services. This conference provides the ideal occasion and audience for me to elaborate on that request and, indeed, to expand it by suggesting a broader range of topics on which the questions and perspectives of Industrial Organization (IO) may be relevant to financial economists probing the nature of systemic risk and the causes of financial crises. Before addressing this subject directly, let me take a few minutes to place it in the context of the changes in regulatory focus motivated by the financial crisis.  The familiar, “microprudential” approach to regulation focuses on risk within individual firms. The ability to borrow at a risk-free rate conferred by deposit insurance, combined with the limited liability that is standard in corporate structures, presents banks with incentives to take on socially inefficient risks. This well-known moral hazard problem traditionally has been addressed through regulation and supervision directed specifically at protection of the deposit insurance fund. Thus, for example, traditional bank holding company regulation was actually fairly narrowly defined: It sought to protect insured depository institutions from the risks of their uninsured affiliates and to limit use of insured deposits to fund activities in other parts of the holding company. The potential effects of an individual bank’s behavior on the financial system as a whole – much less that of a bank holding company or unregulated financial firm – were generally not addressed in prudential regulatory laws and only unevenly considered in supervisory practice.  Of course, the picture was not quite so monolithic as I have just portrayed it. The moral hazard associated with too-big-to-fail institutions, which worried some researchers and a handful of supervisors, was a concern that touched upon the stability of the financial system more generally. And a few prescient observers had for many years called for a complementary, “macroprudential” approach to financial regulation that considers the effects of the financial condition of, and actions taken by, individual actors on the financial system as a whole.1 But these were far from being dominant features of pre-crisis regulation.  Since the crisis, both academic work and regulatory reform have given a much more prominent place to macroprudential regulation. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) introduced a variety of new policy levers, including capital surcharges, resolution plan requirements, consideration of systemic risk effects in reviewing and ruling on applications for mergers among financial firms, and even the ability to require the reduction in size or scope of large financial conglomerates.  At a conceptual level, effective implementation of these policy tools requires that we incorporate systemic risk into the normative framework of what constitutes a socially efficient outcome. The goal of macroprudential regulation is to require firms to internalize the                                                  1  In 1979, the Bank of England published a report in which it defined macroprudential regulation as an approach concerned with “problems that bear upon the market as a whole as distinct from an individual bank, and which may not be obvious at the micro-prudential level.” See “The Use of Prudential Measures in the International Banking Markets,” October 24, 1979, pp. 1–2, in BISA 7.18(15) – Papers Lamfalussy, LAM25/F67. See also BIS Quarterly Review, March 2010, pp. 59–67 for more on the early use of the term “macroprudential.” BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 
externalities they impose on the stability of the financial system as a whole. Thus, we need a way to incorporate systemic externalities into the models of firm and investor behavior that inform regulatory and supervisory policies. At the same time, we have to evaluate the costs associated with systemic events, which by their nature are relatively rare, in light of the basic goals of promoting productive efficiency, access to credit, and financial innovation.  Here – in filling out this analytic framework – is where the perspectives, questions, and conclusions of IO literature may usefully be applied. Many financial markets are far from perfectly competitive. Instead, they are characterized by large firms with significant market shares and sustained positive economic profits, a fact not always reflected in financial analysis and regulation. Yet IO economists, who have studied a variety of topics arising from concentrated market structures, have themselves generally focused on areas other than financial markets, with the important but limited exception of competition issues in commercial banking. I would venture to guess that the very peculiarities of financial markets that motivated the evolution of an entire subdiscipline in economics complicate application of conventional IO learning to these markets. This is why I believe that some interchange between IO and finance researchers is important.  While much of the interchange I have in mind will simply add nuance to existing work, we must recognize that some earlier findings about optimal market structure or regulatory policy may not hold once researchers incorporate systemic risk considerations into normative standards about what constitutes an efficient outcome. As specific regulatory proposals or acquisitions are considered, we may well identify tensions between the traditional IO approach to antitrust and regulation, on the one hand, and the goal of maintaining the stability of the financial system, on the other.  In the remainder of this talk, I will discuss three topics from the IO literature that seem promising for systemic risk research: first, the need for a deeper understanding of scale and scope economies in the production of financial services; second, the ways in which patterns of competition and cooperation among large financial firms can affect systemic risk; and third, how market structure can affect firm incentives and thereby impose externalities on the financial system.  Scale and scope economies in financial services Well before the financial crisis and my arrival at the Federal Reserve, I had found that the relative dearth of empirical work on the nature of economies of scale and scope in large financial firms hindered the development and execution of optimal regulatory and supervisory policies. Some regulatory features added by the Dodd-Frank Act only increase the importance of more such work to fill out our understanding of the social utility of the largest, most complex financial firms. Ultimately, we want to understand what these scale or scope economies imply for the degree to which large size or functional reach across many types of financial activities is essential for the efficient allocation of capital and liquidity and for the international competitiveness of domestic firms.  Significant economies of scale in terms of production costs have been demonstrated for services related to payment networks. Generally, though, even where intuition suggests economies in some other areas – such as the breadth of securities distribution networks and the ability to provide all forms of financing in significant amounts – evidence for the existence of such economies is limited and mixed. Moreover, even where significant scale is necessary to achieve certain economies, an important question will be what the minimum efficient scale – or, perhaps more realistically, the minimum feasible scale – actually is. It is possible that a firm would need to be quite large and diversified to achieve these economies, but still not as large and diversified as some of today’s firms have become.  There are some promising lines of inquiry begun by academics, including funding-cost advantages enjoyed by large firms; possible diseconomies of scope resulting from firm 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
complexity; and the effect of market concentration and firm size on intra- and inter-firm diversification. As I noted earlier, there has also been a considerable amount of work on scale economies in commercial banking.2 However, more needs to be done on these and other subjects. Indeed, from a policy perspective, the value of some of the scholarship done to date may be limited. For example, if funding-cost advantages in fact derive from market perceptions that a very large firm was too-big-to-fail, the phenomenon is really one of competitive advantage grounded in moral hazard, not one of true efficiencies. Similarly, the use of profitability of large firms as a surrogate for efficiency – as found in some studies – would be more helpful for policymaking if researchers find a way to control for the possibility that higher revenues are associated with market power or branding.  Let me illustrate with two examples how these issues of scale and scope economies relate to the increased regulatory emphasis on systemic risk.  First is the Federal Reserve’s review of proposed mergers and acquisitions under the Bank Holding Company Act. Of course, economies of scale and scope have always played a part in the analysis of the competitive effects of proposed mergers. But the Dodd-Frank Act now requires that we also consider whether a proposed merger would lead to greater or more concentrated risks to financial stability. Consider, for instance, how we would evaluate the financial stability effects of a proposed merger of two medium-sized institutions. Among other things, we would need to assess the expansion of the acquiring institution’s systemic footprint. Then, we would have to balance the potential increased costs across the system were the institution to fail against the potential benefits from either a lesser likelihood of failure or, with respect to essential financial functions, a greater capacity to step in and fill the gap if one of the firms’ large competitors were to fail. In performing these kinds of analyses, we will draw on the extensive work on systemic risk we have already done in connection with our development of capital requirements, the designation of systemically important firms by the Financial Stability Oversight Council, and other matters.  It is important to note that, while Congress instructed us to consider the extent to which a proposed acquisition would pose a greater risk to financial stability, it clearly did not instruct us to reject an acquisition simply because there would be any increase in such risks. Instead, it appears we have been instructed to add any increased systemic risk to the list of adverse effects that could result from the merger and then determine whether the benefits to the public of the acquisition outweigh these adverse effects. If, for example, there are few indications that scale or scope efficiencies would be gained, then anticipated adverse effects on systemic stability could be expected to have a greater impact on our ultimate decision. If, on the other hand, there are genuine scale or scope efficiencies to be realized, then a more complicated set of trade-offs may be needed. The more developed our knowledge about economies of scale and scope in large financial conglomerates becomes, the more nuanced an analysis of these effects we will be able to make.  The new authority for orderly liquidation of systemically important institutions is a second example of a systemic regulation in which an understanding of scale and scope is important. At least some advocates of orderly liquidation regimes seem to favor resolution plans that silo activities as much as possible. However, in the presence of significant economies of scope, this approach might result in loss of efficient forms of organization. In these circumstances, resolution plans that seek to preserve the scope economies even as a firm is dismembered might result in better liquidation outcomes. In addition, siloing activities in the context of a resolution plan could affect day-to-day operations during normal times and might                                                  2  For a review of recent literature on these topics, see Financial Stability Oversight Council (2011), Study of the Effects of Size and Complexity of Financial Institutions on Capital Market Efficiency and Economic Growth (Washington: Financial Stability Oversight Council, January). Also see, Loretta Mester (2010), “Scale Economies in Banking and Financial Regulatory Reform,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, The Region, vol. 24 (September), pp. 10–13. BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 
reduce efficiency by preventing firms from realizing economies of scope, resulting in increased costs of financial services for households and businesses.  Both these examples suggest how regulators might, in certain instances, be required to make trade-offs between systemic risk and efficiency considerations. An additional concern would arise if some countries made the trade-off by limiting the size or configuration of their financial firms for systemic risk reasons at the cost of realizing genuine economies of scope or scale, while other countries did not. In this case, firms from the first group of countries might well be at a competitive disadvantage in the provision of certain cross-border activities. The existence of international agreements such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s capital surcharge on systemically important institutions should allay this concern but, depending on national choices associated with systemic risk mitigation, might not eliminate it.  But I am getting ahead of things here. Returning to my starting point, I reiterate that the importance of this research agenda lies precisely in determining how significant these trade-offs might be. The events of the past few years make brutally clear the potential for societal damage associated with systemic risk. Considerable work has already been done by academics and policymakers to develop systemic risk metrics, and thus to lay the groundwork for sound macroprudential regulatory measures. As we and our counterparts in other countries move forward with the implementation of these measures, a complementary stream of work on scale and scope would substantially enhance these efforts.  I recognize that studying scale and scope economies in large financial conglomerates presents some practical challenges. The small number of very large and diversified financial firms, the difficulties delineating specific activities of interest, and the problems in measuring economic costs all complicate the undertaking. So too, disentangling real economies from the funding advantages associated with moral hazard, or the supra-competitive profits associated with a concentrated industry structure, may not be easy. Perhaps, then, in the short term, the research community and regulators may benefit from case studies that inform the direction of future research.  Cooperation and competition among financial institutions The second topic I want to address today is the impact on financial stability of simultaneous competition and cooperation among large financial institutions. The IO literature gives us examples in which limited cooperation between otherwise competing firms can increase social welfare. In these models, cooperation can overcome resource constraints, limited information, or externalities, and thereby induce welfare-enhancing investments that would not have been undertaken by firms acting individually.3 Large financial institutions have come together to provide infrastructure services such as exchanges, clearinghouses, and even information providers such as Markit Partners. Other forms of cooperation among moderate-sized institutions, such as syndicated lending and underwriting partnerships, serve to reduce information costs, overcome resource constraints, and diversify risk. In antitrust terms, the practices I have in mind here would be subject to a rule of reason analysis that assesses both the potential for increased social welfare from limited cooperation and the negative direct or spillover effects on competition.  The industrial organization literature has shown that enduring cooperation is most likely when firms interact repeatedly and can observe each others’ behavior. In order to model cooperation among large financial firms, however, an additional factor needs to be incorporated. Unlike the firms depicted in much of the IO literature, financial conglomerates                                                  3  See, for example, Robert H. Porter (1995), “The Role of Information in U.S. Offshore Oil and Gas Lease Auctions,” Econometrica, vol. 63 (January), pp. 1–27. 4 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
transact with one another on a continual basis and enter into contractual arrangements that impose future obligations. In other words, cooperation is often institutionalized so that the day-to-day operations of a given firm depend crucially on the institutions with which it cooperates. This, of course, is one – though not the only – reason why systemic crises are a recurring feature of the financial system.  Understanding the role of cooperation among financial conglomerates that are interconnected through counterparty relationships and correlated exposures may be challenging, but it could be quite important for effective macroprudential regulation. Cooperation among large firms can, in principle, buffer the impact of systemic events.4 On the other hand, the expectation of future cooperation from one’s competitors can induce riskier behavior on the part of individual firms. And, perhaps more troubling, the sudden breakdown of cooperation during a systemic event can accelerate the transmission of adverse consequences throughout the financial system.  Regulators must consider how new resolution frameworks such as that created by Dodd-Frank will affect market participants’ beliefs about what will happen in the case of distress at a large financial institution and, consequently, how cooperative behavior among financial counterparties might change. Orderly liquidation authority can be understood as a “credible threat” on the part of regulators to allow a troubled institution to fail. Resolution plan requirements may allow other firms to better anticipate the consequences of such a failure and, as a result, to reduce the cost of uncertainty for those firms. Both of these features of Dodd-Frank have, in theory, the potential to weaken implicit cooperative arrangements during a crisis. Even so, game theorists would point out that the anticipated breakdown of cooperation in the future would alter the types of arrangements firms would be willing to enter into in the first place, and that this could, in turn, reduce risky behavior and the likelihood that a crisis would occur.  This is obviously a complex issue, with potentially different conclusions depending on the context of a specific regulatory system and industry structure. But pursuit of this line of inquiry might yield notable policy implications. That is, understanding how a systemic resolution mechanism could maintain, reduce, or reverse incentives to engage in what might otherwise be socially desirable cooperation could affect the optimal design of that mechanism and other elements of financial regulation.  Market structure and externalities The third topic I want to mention today is how systemic risk may be affected by the interaction of market structure and externalities where firms’ incentives are at odds with social efficiency. The IO literature has identified examples in which, depending on the circumstances, concentrated market structures can exacerbate, reduce, or even create new negative externalities. While the finance literature has extensively studied externalities associated with various forms of intermediation, researchers are only beginning to explore how optimal behavior from a firm’s perspective might be shaped by its competitive environment and how, in turn, the aggregation of firm decisions in various environments could affect economy-wide risk.  One particularly promising area for inquiry is the relationship among industry structure, firm incentives to diversify risk, and systemic risk. In principle, larger firms are better able to diversify their balance sheets and thereby insulate themselves from idiosyncratic risks. However, some researchers have argued that when the financial system is dominated by a few large firms, the result may be that these few large firms have balance sheets that are                                                  4  Bruce I. Carlin, Miguel Sousa Lobo, and S. Viswanathan (2007), “Episodic Liquidity Crises: Cooperative and Predatory Trading,” Journal of Finance, vol. 62 (October), pp. 2235–74. BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 
highly correlated, creating significant common risk exposures.5 In such instances, a common shock to a class of assets held by the large firms could be expected to have systemic effects through some combination of domino and fire-sale effects.6 There would be considerable value in further research that explored the potential tradeoffs between industry structures in which relatively smaller, less diversified firms are more prone to idiosyncratic failure versus industry structures in which very large, diversified firms are individually less vulnerable to idiosyncratic failure but collectively more likely to create systemic risk because of their common exposures.  One can imagine other strands of IO literature providing insights when applied to the financial sector. Let me suggest a couple of possibilities. First is the subject of financial innovation. This audience hardly needs reminding that certain forms of financial engineering lay at the heart of the recent financial crisis. Indeed, analysis of these practices has yielded some of the most important finance work of the last few years. The observation that some forms of financial innovation were profit-maximizing for the individual firms that pursued them, while simultaneously increasing systemic risk, has a parallel in IO research. Work in this area shows how the competitive structure of an industry can create incentives for socially suboptimal behavior through, for example, inefficiently low levels of information acquisition or excessive product variety. In thinking about this issue, I was also reminded of the older work on how product differentiation may substitute for price competition in concentrated industries.7  We are unlikely to see renewed use of the specific financial products that precipitated or amplified the financial crisis. But financial regulation faces an ongoing challenge in trying to identify and respond to new practices that increase systemic risk, while not suppressing financial innovation that can improve the efficiency of capital allocation. In furtherance of this regulatory objective, it could be useful to complement finance research with an inquiry into whether and how industry structure or other competitive factors act to increase, or possibly dampen, such risks.  My second example where researchers might usefully draw on IO insights is incentive-based compensation practices at financial firms. There is now widespread agreement that the very high-powered, short-run incentives in the compensation structure of finance professionals prior to the crisis may have induced them to take certain kinds of risks that were detrimental to shareholders of their firms, the overall financial system, or both. While firms have already changed compensation practices, both on their own initiative and in response to guidance from the Board, the complexity of some of these issues will require continuing attention.& These efforts might be advanced through adapting lessons from the IO literature on how competitive forces can affect the way that individual firms solve principal-agent problems, and how those decisions affect economy-wide risk when aggregated across firms.  Conclusion In some respects, my talk today has been a financial regulator’s wish list for research at the intersection of IO and finance, intended as a complement to the formidable finance research agenda that has already been generated and is on display at this conference. Some of the items on this list – such as the scale and scope economies issue – are of clear and                                                  5  Wolf Wagner (2010), “Diversification at Financial Institutions and Systemic Crises,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, vol.19 (July), pp. 373–86. 6  See Daniel K. Tarullo (2011), “Regulating Systemic Risk,” remarks delivered at the 2011 Credit Markets Symposium, Charlotte, NC, March 31. 7  See, for example, Simon P. Anderson, Andre de Palma, and Jacques-Francois Thisse (1992), Discrete Choice Theory of Product Differentiation (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press). 6 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 immediate significance for systemic risk regulation. Others are perhaps more speculative. And I hope to have provoked you, and readers of this speech, to add some items to the agenda.  As is often true, efforts to tackle new questions and to confront new problems may not lend themselves immediately to well-worn research approaches. Contributions in this area may come in many forms, including case studies and other less conventional approaches to research. I hope that, at least in the early stages of research into these issues, referees and journal editors will be sympathetic to any research that may advance our knowledge in this new area.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Timothy Lane: Curbing contagion – options and challenges for building more robust financial market infrastructure Remarks by Mr Timothy Lane, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication Annual Sibos Conference, Toronto, Ontario, 19 September 2011. *      *      * Introduction Good afternoon and, to our guests from abroad, welcome to Canada. This conference is taking place at a troubled time. Concerns over sovereign debt have intensified, particularly in Europe’s periphery. Economic growth in the United States and other advanced economies now appears to be significantly weaker than expected. In the face of these developments, there has been mounting skepticism in a number of countries over whether policy-makers will be able to do what it takes to address these problems. The current bout of turbulence, like the financial crisis of three years ago, serves as a reminder of why it is fundamentally important to have a resilient financial system. Periods of market turbulence are a fact of life. In a resilient system, financial shocks are absorbed, creating losses for individual investors, but leaving the system intact. If the system is not sufficiently resilient, however, shocks can be amplified. We saw this in 2008, when losses in a relatively small segment of the U.S. housing market cascaded into a near-meltdown of the global financial system. That process reflected a mixture of frailties – excessive leverage, reliance on forms of liquidity that proved illusory in stressful times, the use of securitized products with risks that were not fully understood, the complex web of counterparty relationships that spread risk and bred fear in core funding markets, and the absence of resolution mechanisms to deal with insolvency in systemically important institutions without endangering the entire system. In the wake of that crisis, leaders of the G-20 countries launched a broad agenda of reforms. These reforms aim to ensure that financial institutions have adequate levels of loss-absorbing capital and liquidity to cope with periods of market stress; to establish robust financial market infrastructure; and to develop stronger resolution mechanisms for financial institutions, particularly across borders. When implemented, the G-20 reforms will create a more resilient global financial system. Canada will benefit significantly from these reforms. Even though our financial system performed much better through the crisis than those of many other advanced countries, we are certainly not immune to events beyond our borders. In my talk this afternoon I want to focus on one element of the G-20 reform agenda: building robust financial market infrastructure. That infrastructure includes a number of components: payment and securities settlement systems, trading venues and exchanges, information and price providers, and collateral management systems. For the most part, these key elements not only functioned well during the crisis, they were in fact a source of strength. Just after the onset of the crisis, the CLS Bank, which settles foreign exchange transactions, successfully processed roughly three times its normal daily volume of transactions; and CDSX, which clears and settles trades in Canadian-dollar-denominated debt securities, handled double its normal volume. Efficient clearing and settlement systems such as these were able to perform a stabilizing role during the crisis. That is exactly what they were intended to do. The crisis did, however, illuminate some key areas in which financial market infrastructure needed to be broadened and put to better use. Here, I am talking about expanding the use of central counterparties or CCPs to replace bilateral clearing and settlement for a number of core markets. In my presentation today I am going to review how bilateral clearing contributed to contagion during the financial crisis, describe why greater use of resilient 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches financial infrastructure is needed and tell you how CCPs will strengthen the financial system. CCPs are of particular interest to us at the Bank of Canada because we are responsible for overseeing systemically important financial infrastructure that affects the stability of the Canadian financial system and, therefore, the health of the economy. What happens when robust market infrastructure is not in place? During the crisis, we had two stark illustrations of why greater use of financial infrastructure is needed. The crisis did not start or end with the following shortcomings in bilateral clearing and settlement, but they were channels through which problems in an obscure part of the U.S. housing market cascaded into a global crisis. Although these are familiar stories, they illustrate the need for change. One instance is the near-failure of Bear Stearns. Bear Stearns wasn’t one of the largest investment banks in the United States, but it was one of the most leveraged, with large broker-dealer and proprietary operations. It played a pivotal role in the global repo market, holding collateral for transactions and acting as a counterparty for repo financing. When the firm’s mounting losses, extensive leverage and reliance on potentially unstable short-term funding markets threatened to cause its failure, there was a risk that Bear Stearns’ collapse would cause serious disruptions in the repo market – a core funding market. Anticipations of disruptions in Bear Stearns’ operations led cash investors and collateral providers alike to withdraw, initiating a process of leverage reduction through asset sales. Funding conditions for collateral providers deteriorated sharply, and the liquidity and efficiency of related markets were severely affected. In the event, Bear Stearns was rescued and the immediate threat averted, but the danger was real. A second instance is related to Lehman Brothers and its role as a counterparty in myriad bilaterally settled over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives transactions. Lehman’s default and the doubts it raised about the viability of the few remaining investment dealers struck at the heart of both the funding and the OTC derivatives market. The strains broadened to a general evaporation of market liquidity and a retrenchment from risk. In both cases, a basic problem was counterparty risk associated with financial contracts that are cleared and settled bilaterally. Holders of such bilaterally cleared repos and OTC derivatives were exposed not only to the market risk associated with the position taken in the financial instruments themselves, but also the risk that their counterparty would be unable to honour its commitment. Counterparty risk became a key channel of contagion, posing a major threat to the global financial system. In contrast, some of Lehman’s derivatives, notably interest rate swaps valued at $9 trillion, were cleared through a CCP, which successfully managed the impact of Lehman’s failure. What are the objectives for reform? At the Pittsburgh Summit, the G-20 leaders moved to put the lessons learned from the crisis into practice. Specifically, they called for all standardized OTC derivatives to be centrally cleared and, where appropriate, traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms. In addition, all trades, whether centrally cleared or not, are to be reported to trade repositories.1 Efforts are under way in a number of countries, including Canada, to establish arrangements for clearing interest rate swaps and other OTC derivatives that were not previously centrally cleared. In Canada, we are also developing a new CCP for repo and fixed-income transactions.                                                  1 http://www.g20.org/Documents/pittsburgh_summit_leaders_statement_250909.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 These reforms will have far-reaching effects on global and Canadian financial markets. The move to CCPs is intended to reduce the complexity of the network and enhance netting efficiencies, and to establish robust risk management practices and clear default procedures. Since CCPs – which interpose themselves between buyer and seller in financial markets –  concentrate risk by becoming the counterparty to all transactions, they must have stringent risk-management standards. The use of sufficiently robust CCPs is likely to increase the strength of the financial system. It will also reduce the counterparty credit exposures of major participants, which will be reflected in capital requirements for financial institutions. To be safely cleared the contracts that CCPs process must, at a minimum, be sufficiently standardized. And the push to standardize OTC derivatives contracts will have important ancillary benefits for how these markets function. Standardization will create more liquid, transparent and efficient markets for the contracts. It will also help set the stage for shifting trading onto exchanges or electronic trading platforms. The challenges of the G-20 reforms The G-20 objectives are necessary and appropriate, but achieving them is going to be challenging, for several reasons. First, they may require the development of new CCP services, a complex and time-consuming process. We are experiencing this in Canada in connection with the work now underway to build a CCP for repos and fixed-income transactions. The Canadian industry selected the Canadian Derivatives Clearing Corporation (CDCC) to develop this facility. The process of creating a CCP for repos in Canada, although not yet complete, has been instructive. Two fundamental requirements are that the CCP has adequate and robust risk-control systems and the capacity to implement them. Operational issues, such as developing and testing the relevant software – both for the CCP and its participants – and its interaction with existing systems, also take time to resolve. The challenges of establishing a CCP for repos are considerable. But at least the overall parameters are clear. Fulfilling the G-20 commitments on OTC derivatives is a more complex task, requiring coordination among many stakeholders, with a wide range of possible outcomes. The complexity of clearing OTC derivatives Central clearing of OTC derivatives transactions will reduce systemic risk by decreasing the likelihood that one failing institution will bring down others. But, given the globalized nature of the industry, there are several ways to make the transition to CCPs. Clearing could take place on large international CCPs serving the global market (such as ICE Clear, CME or LCH.Clearnet), or new central clearing services could be established in individual countries.2 We are seeing a variety of arrangements emerging. In some countries, such as Japan and Singapore, new central clearing services are under development. Other countries are likely to rely on offshore CCPs or – as in Canada – are still evaluating their options. The task before us is to ensure that this emerging configuration of CCPs achieves a significant reduction of systemic risk, both at the global level and for Canada. The G-20 commitment sets a very tight timetable for developing a strategy to meet this challenge. The selection of an appropriate CCP strategy for OTC derivatives is a particularly important issue for Canadian market participants and regulators. To put it in perspective, Canadian-                                                 2 Five Canadian banks currently qualify to be direct participants in LCH.Clearnet, the primary CCP for interest rate swaps. And interest rate swaps are the most important OTC derivatives products in the Canadian market. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches dollar OTC derivative contracts have a notional outstanding value of just under $9 trillion. Moreover, OTC derivatives, especially interest rate swaps, are closely connected via arbitrage and financing relationships with other financial markets in Canada, including other derivative, bond and money markets. That’s big enough and connected enough that any disruptions would likely result in significant reverberations throughout our markets. At the same time, these derivatives markets are innately global: for example, over half of the trading in Canadian-dollar interest rate products involves at least one party that is not a resident of Canada; and Canadian-dollar OTC derivatives products are only about 2 per cent of the global market. Whatever solution we adopt must come to grips with both of these realities  – the systemic importance of OTC derivatives to Canada and the globalized nature of the market. Large offshore CCPs serving multiple markets Given the globalized nature of the market, clearing through large offshore CCPs has important advantages. These CCPs can benefit from economies of scale and, potentially, provide greater scope for netting and risk mutualization. A key concern, however, is access. Until recently, access was limited to the largest financial institutions with global reach. Access is now is being broadened, but the global dealers – the so-called “G-14” – have considerable entrenched advantages in settlement costs. Those institutions that do not have direct access to offshore CCPs would have to clear indirectly through one of the direct clearing members. The primary rationale for restricting access is risk control. Direct clearing members of a CCP are required to share the losses and take over positions in the event that another member fails – which requires that they have large financial resources and a wide scope of activities. But here lies an important challenge. In carrying out the G-20 mandate requiring all OTC derivatives to be centrally cleared, it is essential to ensure that we do not unduly concentrate risk in a relatively small number of institutions that are direct clearing members of global CCPs. These were the very institutions that spread and amplified contagion through the global financial system in 2008. This potential concentration of risk has several dimensions. First, if one of the direct clearing members fails, that poses risks to the CCP and to the other direct clearing members. Second, the failure of one of these large institutions would pose risks to institutions that clear indirectly through it. Third, the offshore dealers may be able to use their dominance in direct clearing to heighten their competitive edge in other financial market activities, such as trading and other investment banking services. That, in turn, could lead to greater concentration of business, and of risk, across a whole range of activities. So if we are going to rely on central clearing through large offshore CCPs, direct access has to be broadened in a manner compatible with ensuring that these CCPs have robust risk controls. Indeed, financial market infrastructure standards are now being revised to ensure that CCPs and their members can withstand such shocks. There is also a need to ensure that indirect clearing is safe and efficient. Here, a key priority is to ensure that these indirect clearers’ positions are protected through appropriate segregation of collateral and portability of positions in the event that the direct clearer fails. The Bank of Canada is working at the international level, in co-operation with our colleagues at other Canadian agencies, to design measures for the safe and effective use of offshore CCPs no matter where they are located. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Domestic CCPs While offshore CCPs may be a suitable choice for some jurisdictions, a few countries have decided to develop their own CCPs, particularly for products that can have important repercussions on their domestic financial systems. So what would be the advantage of building a Canadian CCP to clear OTC Canadian-dollar interest rate derivatives? First and foremost, it would be more straightforward for Canadian authorities – including the Bank of Canada – to exercise our responsibilities for overseeing systemically important financial infrastructure if a CCP were located in Canada. We would also be better placed to manage a crisis and provide emergency liquidity support for a Canadian CCP should that be necessary. While cooperative arrangements for oversight and crisis management of offshore CCPs can be developed, and are currently being discussed at the international level, this work is still in progress. Such arrangements will need to be adequate to enable the Bank to fulfill its responsibilities for overseeing and safeguarding the stability of the Canadian financial system. A domestic CCP could offer other advantages as well. It could, in some situations, reduce  – although certainly not eliminate – the impact on Canadian markets of financial shocks from abroad. It could be tailored to the needs of the Canadian financial system and support the development of market expertise and innovation. The key questions are whether a domestic CCP would be economically viable and whether it would support financial stability and efficiency. We know that much of the OTC market is global in nature and that, for a Canadian clearing service for OTC interest rate swaps to be a success, wide participation of both Canadian and global firms is necessary. Without that, the market could become fragmented, market liquidity could decline and the domestic CCP’s own risk controls could be undermined. Yet another key question is whether a domestic CCP would adequately address the clearing needs of Canadian financial institutions. As a related point, a Canadian CCP would need to be reasonably cost-effective; otherwise it could push transactions offshore, undermining its potential benefits. Developing links between CCPs in different jurisdictions could help to minimize fragmentation of the market. But establishing such links would be a complicated undertaking, and risk within the links would have to be properly managed. In practice, while a few CCP links exist and are in operation (for cash markets, in particular), there is not yet a generally accepted model that could be used for the establishment of links among CCPs clearing trades in OTC derivatives. In assessing the best clearing strategy for Canadian OTC derivatives, the Bank of Canada is moving forward on two fronts. First, we are working with our domestic and international counterparts to ensure that global CCPs, particularly those of systemic importance to Canada, are able to deliver the intended benefits of financial stability. Second, we are actively exploring the possibility of developing a Canadian-domiciled CCP, in collaboration with the financial industry and other public policy institutions. We must choose the arrangements that best support the stability and efficiency of Canada’s financial system. Conclusion We are in the midst of an enormous financial regulatory transformation, easily the most sweeping set of reforms in 70 years. Not only are the issues complex, they present cross-border challenges that must be addressed at both the global level and in Canada. The Bank supports the objectives of the G-20 reform agenda. Reform is critical if we are to prevent a crisis similar to that of 2008 from occurring. However, we must be alert to the risk of unintended consequences. At the Bank of Canada, we are working actively, both here and internationally, to ensure that the proposed reforms to the global and domestic financial infrastructure substantially improve the functioning of the financial system and significantly reduce systemic risk. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Lars Nyberg: The ESRB – reflections after 9 months of operation Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), Oslo, 27 September 2011. *      *      * The financial crisis that started in 2007–8 exposed serious weaknesses in the regulatory system. Firstly, it turned out that the banks had too little capital and that the quality of that capital was not good enough. Furthermore, issues of liquidity had largely been neglected by regulators. All this has been addressed by the Basel III compromise, which is to be slowly implemented over the years to come – too slowly in the view of some countries, too quickly according to others. Secondly, the crisis revealed some embarrassing weaknesses in the EU framework for financial stability. The quality of supervision varied substantially between countries and coordination within Europe was insufficient, to say the least. Perhaps even more importantly, the concept of macro-prudential supervision (I will return to this concept in a while) was largely unheard of. To address these issues, the Commission, in late 2008, set up a group (where I had the honour of being a member) led by Jacques de Larosière with the mandate of presenting a roadmap for strengthening the European supervisory framework. The group delivered its report in March 2009. One of the main ideas was the creation of a new institution, which eventually came to be called the European Systemic Risk Board and which is my subject for today. Thirdly, the crisis made it apparent that the framework for the resolution of failing banks was grossly inadequate. Although steps have been taken to address this question in several countries, a lot of issues remain to be solved, particularly relating to cross-border failures. But this is not for today’s discussion. The EU’s financial trilemma The core of the challenge facing the EU is conceptually quite simple. In Europe, we have built a framework based on the logically inconsistent idea of having one single market controlled by 27 sovereign nations. From a financial stability point of view, this is definitely no recipe for success. On the contrary, it is a source of coordination problems and conflicts of interest among the EU countries. This challenge has been described by Professor Dirk Schoenmaker as the “financial trilemma of Europe”. We have three goals – financial stability, integration, and national sovereignty – but only two of these can be reached. Figure 1  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Until the financial crisis, the combination of financial integration and national sovereignty seemed to work well in the EU (Figure 1). Financial crises were not considered to be likely and financial stability came far down on the political agenda. In connection with the financial crisis, however, policy makers have been forced to realise that increased financial stability has to come at the cost of either financial integration or national sovereignty. In principle, there are two options.  Firstly, there is the federal approach, where you allow for a full delegation of powers to the EU level, including regulation, supervision and crisis management (Figure 2).  Secondly, you can abandon the idea of the internal market and return to a system with full national control of domestic financial systems (Figure 3). Figure 2 Figure 3    The de Laroisière group opted for a third way – the middle way – to reform the EU financial system. In terms of the financial trilemma, this means keeping financial integration and, at the same time, trying to find a reasonable compromise between financial stability and national sovereignty (Figure 4). Somewhat stronger cooperation, but still resting on national sovereignty. Figure 4   Financial stability National  sovereignty Financial integration  Given the present European crisis, you may well ask whether this is a possible compromise or whether it will be just another damp squib. Only time will tell. But within this concept, there is room to move towards stronger European cooperation.  The EU’s new supervisory structure The de Laroisière proposal rested on two major institutional pillars. The first related to the previous “level 3” committees, which were to be strengthened, transformed into authorities, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 and given as much power as possible without having to change the European Treaty. Out of this came the three European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs), namely the European Banking Authority (EBA) in London, the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) in Frankfurt and the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) in Paris. We discussed whether these three authorities could be merged into one, but that was considered premature. Suggesting such a merger might have delayed the whole political process (Figure 5). Trying to move the three to the same city was considered equally impossible. Figure 5 The EU’s new supervisory structure               The second pillar was the European Systemic Risk Board, the ESRB. The main idea with the ESRB was to look beyond the supervision of individual institutions and focus on the risks relevant to the financial system as a whole. There was a widespread feeling that supervisors in many countries could not see the wood for the trees – and certainly not any woods in any other countries. So the new body should work with issues systemic to parts or to the whole of Europe. As time has passed, this task has become known as “macro-prudential supervision”. The institutional set-up of the ESRB Legally, the ESRB is an independent EU body located in Frankfurt and with a Secretariat provided by the European Central Bank. The President of the ECB is also the Chair of the ESRB. The ESRB has no binding powers. Instead, it can issue warnings and recommendations to national authorities and to EU institutions. These warnings and recommendations can be either public or private. The effectiveness of its recommendations will depend on the attitude of the addressees to the “comply or explain” principle. This principle simply says that either you do as recommended or you explain why you have chosen not to comply. To work, it requires respect for the institution issuing the recommendations.     European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) European Banking Authority (EBA) European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA)
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Figure 6 The structure of the ESRB General Board(65 members, 37 votingmembers)SteeringCommittee(14 members)AdvisoryTechnicalCommittee(62 members)AdvisoryScientificCommittee(16 members)Secretariat(about20 people)ECB The ESRB is unique in that it brings together representatives from central banks and financial supervisory authorities from all 27 Member States, as well as representatives from the three European supervisory authorities and from the European Commission. However, this also makes the General Board a large body consisting of 65 members – 37 voting and 28 non-voting. Decisions are taken by simple majority, but a majority of two thirds is needed to adopt recommendations or to make a warning or recommendation public. The fact that ESRB decide by voting rather than by consensus is important, since blocking minorities can be avoided. The majority of voting rights are held by the national central banks (27 voting rights) while the national financial supervisory authorities have one non-voting representative per Member State in the General Board. This gives the central banks a strong role. Figure 7 Voting rights of the General Board  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Obviously, this requires efficient preparations for meetings. A Steering Committee with 14 members has therefore been established with the purpose of guiding the work to be presented to the General Board. The majority of the Steering Committee members represent the EU institutions and in addition there are four elected members from the national central banks. Two advisory committees have also been set up – the Advisory Technical Committee, chaired by Stefan Ingves of the Riksbank and the Advisory Scientific Committee chaired by Professor Martin Hellwig of the Max Planck Institute. The Advisory Technical Committee (ATC) mirrors the composition of the General Board with 62 members. The Advisory Scientific Committee (ASC) is smaller, consisting of only 15 academics and the chair of the ATC. I have been a member of the ESRB and the ATC at its first meetings Box 1 Steering Committee Members           The ESRB General Board held its inaugural meeting in January and has since met three times. It will meet again in December. The meetings were prepared by the Secretariat, the Steering Committee and the Advisory Technical Committee. The ATC has also been supported by the work of several working and expert groups. The ESRB’s work so far I hardly need to point out that the ESRB started in a very difficult period when systemic risks in Europe seemed to be greater than ever and when political and economic issues were tightly interconnected. Obviously, the work of the ESRB has largely focused on the immediate challenges of the current situation. But work is also taking place on more long-term structural challenges to the EU financial system.  The vicious financial triangle At its June meeting, the ESRB concluded that the most serious threat to financial stability in the EU stems from the interplay between the vulnerabilities of public finances in certain EU member states and the banking system, with potential contagion effects across the Union and beyond. At the last meeting on September 21, the ESRB stated that the risk to stability has increased considerably. I think we can all agree with this conclusion. Over the summer, the weakening prospects for economic growth have further added to the difficulties. We now face a dangerous interplay between fragile public finances, weak banking sectors and low economic activity both at global and EU levels – the vicious financial triangle. It was right of the ESRB to put this issue at the very top of its agenda, in spite of its highly political content. Anything else would have  ESRB Chair (ECB President) and first  Vice-Chair  ECB Vice-President  Governors of 4 Central Banks  European Commission representative  Chairpersons of the three ESAs  President of the EFC  ATC Chair  ASC Chair 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches seriously hurt the credibility of the ESRB. It is vital that the politicians now stick to their previous commitments and do whatever else is needed to restore market confidence. To limit potential adverse spill-overs, the ESRB has also discussed how to improve the resilience of the EU financial system. The ESRB has highlighted the importance of the stress tests performed by the EBA, the European Banking Supervisors – not least as a way to improve the transparency of the financial system. The ESRB has therefore called on the competent authorities in the EU and its Member States to contribute to clear and rigorous assessments of the banks involved. It has also called for national private or public back-stops to be put in place to deal with the potential need for bank capital. Last week, the ESRB sharpened this message asking supervisors to coordinate efforts to strengthen bank capital. I find the stress-testing to be a very useful exercise. I also believe that the disclosure of relevant data is an important tool for building market confidence, reducing uncertainty and promoting financial stability. However, there is still room for improvement. No doubt the macro-scenario could have been more conservative and possible contagion between banks and countries could have been handled better. The ESRB will have an important role to play in the construction of future stress tests. Bank funding vulnerabilities In June, the ESRB also pointed out that bank funding vulnerabilities could pose a threat to financial stability. The ESRB noted at the September meeting the progressive drying-up of bank term funding markets, and that the availability of US dollar funding to EU banks also had decreased significantly. In Sweden, we have, for some time now, highlighted the risk of Swedish banks’ reliance on short-term funding in foreign currency. The Riksbank’s stress tests indicate that the Swedish banks have a good capacity to handle bigger loan losses, but that they take somewhat larger liquidity risks than many other European banks. Lending in foreign currency The ESRB has also looked into the risk stemming from lending in foreign currencies to unhedged borrowers. This risk has been highlighted by recent fluctuations of some currencies and the potential impact on unhedged household’s capacity to repay loans taken out in foreign currency. In view of this, the ESRB has developed policy proposals targeting credit, liquidity and funding risks, as well as the risk of miss-pricing loans. In Hungary and Austria problems related to foreign exchange lending have become acute due to the appreciation of the Swiss franc. In Sweden, we have experience from excessive foreign-currency lending, both from excesses in Sweden in the 1990s and, more recently, from the Swedish banks’ foreign currency lending in the Baltic States. Challenges – to define the concept of macro-prudential supervision The ESRB is still a new body and it will take some time before it has fully settled in to its work. The concept of macro-prudential supervision is new and is often interpreted very differently by different people, depending on their background. An important task for the ESRB will therefore be to make this concept more precise. What should a macro-prudential mandate look like? How should we define macro-prudential tools? What institutions should use the different tools, and how should these be held responsible for using (or not using) them? These are important questions that are being discussed in many countries, not only in Europe. One important instrument that has been discussed widely in the Basel framework is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 the countercyclical capital buffer. This instrument has clear cross-border effects and we should, in the ESRB, be able to discuss the principles for setting these buffers.  – to gain credibility As the ESRB does not have any binding powers, it needs to earn credibility if the principle of “comply or explain” is to work in practice. As I see it, this can be done in three ways. Firstly, the ESRB’s risk assessments and recommendations to act upon them need to be of high quality and to be presented in a timely manner.  In doing this, the ESRB should take advantage of its unique composition of representatives from the EU institutions, as well as national central banks and financial supervisory authorities. This institutional set-up gives the ESRB a great opportunity to gather relevant information from all key players in the EU financial system. For this to function in practice it is necessary that all actors are willing to share relevant information so that the ESRB can perform its tasks properly. However, sharing information, although simple in theory, often turns out to be difficult in practice. Secondly, the risk assessments and recommendations need to be well-understood and accepted.  This will require efficient communication. The issuance of warnings and recommendations is one way to communicate, either in public or in private. So far, there have been press conferences after the General Board’s meetings. Under the ESRB regulations, the ESRB is also required to publish an annual report. This report will be presented by the chair of the ESRB to the European Parliament and the Council in an annual hearing. But there is a clear need to further develop the ESRB communication. This is important, not only to legitimise the work of the ESRB but also to increase public awareness of systemic risk and macro-prudential policy. The ESRB could make a substantial contribution to promoting discussions in this field, both nationally and at the international level.  Thirdly, Member States must be willing to accept warnings and recommendations from the ESRB. This may perhaps be the most difficult objective to achieve. Accepting warnings and recommendations may be difficult to accept when there is a political cost. It is therefore vital that the ESRB proves its independence and that it can express its views even when politically inconvenient.  The “comply or explain” principle is a powerful tool In my view, the ESRB has had a better start than might have been expected, given its size and composition. It has focused not only on identifying risks, but also on suggesting how to handle them. And the risks discussed have been the relevant ones, in spite of their political sensitivity. Certainly, a lot remains to be done before the ESRB will have established its working procedures. And it remains to be seen what it will be able to produce under normal conditions, out of the present crisis mode. But, properly managed, it should develop into a useful institution, forcing countries and authorities to act in time to avoid difficult and dangerous situations. Comply or explain is a powerful tool, if respected. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Erkki Liikanen: Europe under stress – ways ahead Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Atlantic Council, Washington DC, 26 September 2011. *      *      * I have spent the last days at IMF meetings here in Washington. The growth forecasts for the United States have been revised down. The same was done to Europe mainly due to the sovereign debt crisis. The US and Lehman were the center of the crisis in 2008, now it is more about Europe and sovereign debt. Europe must be seen in a global context. The present problems in Europe are nobody else’s fault, but Europe is dependent on what happens in the rest of the world. That was seen in 2008–2009, and it is visible now. The global economic situation is today a matter of clearly more serious concern than it was a few months ago.  One need not even refer to the published macroeconomic forecasts to see this. It is visible in the confidence indicators of businesses and households. It is also demonstrated in the financial markets, where stock market indices have plummeted and long term interest rates have decreased since last spring. Significantly, the decrease in yields can also be observed in the market for inflation-indexed debt, which suggests that it is really a question of weakening of growth prospects – rather than expectations of deflation, for example. But it is not the only the forecaster’s baseline that has changed. Also the downside risks to economic performance have increased. This greater uncertainty can be seen in many places. It shows up in the gold price which has soared, as you know; and much more importantly, it shows up as flight to (perceived) quality in the financial markets. The flight to quality is a predictable consequence of current financial conditions: the fragility of some countries and banks, combined with the heightened uncertainty regarding the future. Investors react by trying to move funds from more indebted countries to “safe havens”. At the same time, banks are increasingly cautious and selective about lending to their peers – to the detriment to the operation of the interbank markets. Banks prefer dealing with the Central Banks instead. In short, liquidity preference has again started to dominate the markets. As I said, Europe in general and the euro area in particular has become the centre of attention of the financial markets. This is not so because of the average condition of the European economy: indeed, judging by several objective criteria, Europe is not worse off economically than the other comparable economic areas.  In 2011, the public deficit of the euro area should be around 4.5% of GDP, while in the United States or Japan it will be about 10% of GDP. As we know, the accumulated government debt is much lower in the euro area than in Japan, and of the same order of magnitude as in the U.S. Moreover, the currency is solid. The euro is a credible currency which over the last 12 years has kept its value in terms of price stability in a remarkable way in comparison with its preceding national currencies in the previous decades. The stability of the currency itself is not disputed and there is no evidence of distrust in it, be it in the long-term yields on euro denominated AAA rated bonds, or in inflation expectation surveys, or in the exchange rate itself, which is stronger vis-a-vis the dollar now than when the single European currency was launched in 1999.  But of course, there are urgent problems in the euro area today. But they are not predominantly aggregate problems; rather, they are problems of divergence within the area, and structural deficits in several individual member countries. These came to the surface at the time of eruption of the global crisis in 2008, when the yield differentials on euro area government bonds started to widen. The problems of divergence and deficits have revealed 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches serious weaknesses in the economic and fiscal governance of the euro area which are now in the process of being corrected.  This summer has witnessed renewed problems as markets have worried about the effects of a possible new global economic slowdown on Europe, at a time when European leaders were slow to demonstrate their determination to deal with the problems of debt, deficits and divergence.  In order to restore credibility and to weather even less favorable global economic conditions, Europe must move forward on three main fronts at the same time. These are the fronts of 1) fiscal correction,  2) bank capitalization, and  3) economic governance.  The necessity of convincing action in these areas has been well recognized in principle and work is under way.  For instance, in their meeting on July 21, this year, the heads of state or government of the euro area countries made a number of important decisions which, when implemented, will take Europe a long way towards dealing with the present problems.  Also, the EU finance ministers reached just over a week ago (in their meeting in Wroclaw, Poland) an agreement on strengthening the economic governance procedures of the euro area. The European Parliament votes on the governance package – the so called six pack – this week and I expect it to be in force as of beginning of 2012. The political process in Europe is sometimes painfully slow. It is also very complicated and can be confusing to an outside observer. This is because of the very nature of our Union. EU is an entity with a lot of jointly legislated and mutually binding norms. But a common executive is really operative in certain limited areas only, such as trade, competition and agricultural policies – and in monetary policy, in the form of the ECB. In most areas, however, EU does not operate by a common executive agency; it operates by common rules. In these areas, the competence of the EU executive – the commission – works through the regulation and surveillance of the national governments’ actions.  The structure of several national executives, operating under Union treaties and directives, and the complicated process of making these norms, explains why EU works differently from the U.S., which has a unitary executive at the federal level, vested in the President. The way the EU is operates often stretches the patience of the financial markets, who would like to see quick and clear-cut decisions instead of slow negotiations by large committees and councils.  A rule-based system of coordination works best if the rules are good, if they are followed and enforced, and if the world is stable. Under conditions of large and surprising shocks, like the recent great recession, and soft enforcement of the common rules, the EU’s economic governance has not worked effectively enough, and this is a major underlying reason for the present problems. ** I return now to the three fronts on which advance is necessary to restore stability. The first of the fronts, fiscal correction, means that countries having a fragile fiscal position now must correct it, as they have indeed committed to do. These countries fall into three categories. The first is Greece, which is actually deemed a special case now. The new EU/IMF adjustment program for Greece is crucial to foster sustainable economic growth and stabilize public finances. Strict and rigorous implementation of this program is absolutely necessary. Besides fiscal consolidation, the privatization measures and structural reforms agreed in the program are essential for revitalizing the Greek economy and to create growth over time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 In the summit of July 21, 2011, the heads of state and government made a number of important decisions which pertain also to the Greek situation and its impact on the European financial markets. First of all, they agreed to support the new program for Greece. There was also a decision for enhanced flexibility in the use of the EFSF, including intervention in the secondary markets, if warranted by exceptional financial market circumstances and risks to financial stability.  The approach to private sector involvement in the euro area was also clarified. It was recognized that Greece is in an exceptional situation and that for that reason it requires exceptional and unique solutions. A part of that is a voluntary bond exchange program for the private investors. At the same time, all euro area member countries reaffirmed their determination to honor fully their own individual sovereign signature. The ECB has been outspoken in this matter. It has made clear that it was advising that any contribution asked of the private sector should be voluntary, as is the case.  Nevertheless, and despite all financial support, which is given in the form of loans, it is clear that the task of rebalancing the Greek economy must be carried out by Greece itself.  Besides Greece, we have two other countries which have an adjustment program, i.e. Ireland and Portugal. These countries are implementing their programs which will restore the public finances to a sustainable path. Especially Portugal needs also to make structural reforms which increase the growth potential of the country. I am confident that the programs will proceed as agreed. One might note that in the case of Ireland at least, the confidence of the financial markets has recently been improving already. Portugal has taken a positive start. The adjustment programs of the program countries in Europe are jointly monitored by the EU, IMF and the ECB, and financed by the temporary European Financial Stability vehicle, the EFSF. The EFSF is financed through the issuance of bonds guaranteed by the European states. Because of this reason, rigorous monitoring of the program countries is necessary. It is important that individual countries are responsible and also feel responsible for their own fiscal policies. It is also important that the guarantor countries see that the programs are implemented in a rigorous way. The third category of countries is constituted by two larger economies, which have not needed a support program, but have been subject to market suspicions – that is Italy and Spain. Both of these countries had a serious budgetary consolidation already in their stability programs approved last spring 2011. Moreover, during the summer both countries enacted significant additional measures which I think exceeded the expectations of their peers. Especially Italy, which has larger accumulated debt, has undertaken bold budgetary cuts. Both countries have speeded up their budgetary consolidation and are implementing balanced budget rules to their constitutions.  ** Turning now to banking, we can see that the markets and banks themselves are not happy with the condition of the banking system, as shares have declined and interbank markets are not working as well as one would hope and expect.  In Europe, the systemic liquidity of the sector is supported by the European Central Bank which continues to provide liquidity on a full allotment basis, against a broad range of collateral, both marketable and non-marketable. The ECB has committed itself to continuing this flexible method of liquidity provision as long as necessary. And the amount of collateral available in the market is large enough to allow even much greater creation of liquidity than at present, if demanded.  I think that the main problem with the banking system is that a further recapitalization of banks is already long overdue. This is the case throughout the world. Perhaps this task is especially urgent for the euro area, because uncertainty regarding the health of banks aggravates the negative effects of economic imbalances and divergence in the area. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches This should be the task primarily of the shareholders of the weaker banks, who should refrain from taking dividends or should inject more capital if needed. In some cases, government investment in bank equity may also be necessary.  Coming from Finland, I can understand very well the political problems involved in cleaning up the banking system. In the 1990’s, after the great Finnish banking crisis, the Finnish government had to support the asset management company that handled the banks’ problem assets, in amounts that at one point reached about 10 per cent of GDP. Most of this money was later recovered, but in the meantime taxpayers were furious. The public frustration with the costs of the banking crisis has not been forgotten in my country. Despite the short-term discomfort it entails, the resolution of banking problems is necessary for us to move forward to a lasting recovery. On the one hand, the recapitalization of the weaker but viable banks is necessary to restore confidence. On the other hand, the well-managed closure of weakest banks is necessary, so that they do not distort the market for the viable banks. An important part of the decisions of July 21 by the euro area heads of state or government was that the use of funds raised by the European Financial Stability Facility was agreed to be made more flexible. This will make the EFSF a better tool in supporting the present tasks of crisis management. According to the decisions, loans from the EFSF can be used to recapitalize banks – not only in the program countries, but in other countries as well.  ** The third front of advance for the EU is the improvement of fiscal and economic governance. While the fiscal correction front deals with the present imbalances, the governance front will mainly be directed towards the future, in order to reduce the likelihood of recurrence of deficit problems. Of course, credible institutions which would ensure future stability should reflect back on the present situation as well, improving credibility and confidence already now.  When the monetary union was planned in Europe, there was much debate about the degree of economic convergence between countries that would be necessary for a monetary union. Some people thought that a high degree of economic convergence was a necessary precondition, whereas others argued that membership in a monetary union and the necessity to hold on to it would perforce bring about the necessary adjustments and convergence. Because of the insistence of Germany and others, emphasis was placed on economic convergence when the monetary union was established: reasonable entry criteria were set for membership in the union, and members’ fiscal behavior was regulated by the Stability and Growth Pact. Now we know that this emphasis on convergence did not carry enough force. In 2005, the pact was actually made more flexible than originally, despite the resistance of the ECB. That happened when some big countries faced the prospect of being subjected to the EU’s “excessive deficit procedure.” Then, shaken by the steep recession of 2008, several countries got unexpectedly to the danger zone. The current crisis has demonstrated very clearly that an ambitious reform of the economic governance framework is in the interest of the European Union, its members, and the euro area in particular.  Now, we need even tighter economic convergence, and we need better economic governance within the EMU. We must strengthen economic governance mechanisms in the euro area to minimize the risk of additional crises in government finances in the future.  The “Euro Plus” pact signed last spring was a step in the right direction. The signatories – all euro area countries and some other EU countries – committed themselves to several important reforms, such as to implement the EU’s budget guidelines to their national legislation. These nationally implemented norms could help “internalize” the fiscal discipline in each country and render the matter less of an issue of EU policing of the countries’ current fiscal actions. The Euro Plus pact also broadened the scope of policy coordination. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Previously, the stress had been on deficits and debt; now, the competiveness issues (such as relative labor costs) and financial stability were also included.  As I already mentioned, the EU is just now adopting an important legislative package which will strengthen the stability and growth pact and the macroeconomic surveillance framework of the EU.  This package includes, among other things, a directive on the budgetary frameworks of the member countries. This will be important for what is called the “European semester” – the new annual review of members’ budgets BEFORE their adoption nationally. The package will also make the sanctions enforcing the Stability and Growth Pact more automatic, by the so-called reverse voting mechanism.  Both the preventive and the corrective arms of the Stability and Growth Pact will be made stricter. In the preventive arm, policy coordination will extend to the growth rate of public expenditure of the member countries; in the corrective arm, the debt norm (60 per cent of the GDP) will be promoted to an equal position to the deficit norm (3 per cent).  Also macroeconomic policy coordination is strengthened by the “six pack” legislative package. It includes regulation of macroeconomic imbalances which is aimed to prevent the accumulation of imbalances or loss of competiveness of any member of the euro area. The imbalances covered include current account deficits and surpluses, among other things. This policy coordination is underpinned by sanctions which are levied on a country which does not follow the recommendations of the EU council to address these excessive imbalances. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Yves Mersch: Financial crisis and the challenge of supervision Welcome address by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at the ESE (European Supervisor Education Initiative) Conference 2011: “Financial crisis and the challenge of supervision”, Luxembourg, 28 September 2011. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a great pleasure and an honor to host the 2011 European Supervisor Education Initiative conference on Financial Crises and the Challenge of Supervision here in Luxembourg. I am pleased to note that so many participants from the supervisory and central banking community are attending. I am convinced, that stimulating input by the distinguished discussants will be beneficial to all participants. The Banque centrale du Luxembourg, given its mandate of prudential liquidity supervision and its role in macro-prudential policies, has joined the European Supervisor Education Initiative in 2010. Against the background of renewed vulnerabilities and turbulences in markets, the subject of the conference is indeed very timely. Liquidity risk, together with sovereign and funding risk constitute for the time being the main threats to the EU-banking system. The recent intensification of tensions in the sovereign debt market has led to contagion risk of systemic nature. From a supervisory perspective, let me redraw that the past financial crisis have evidenced the fact that micro-prudential supervisory instruments and tools alone, if used in an isolated way, may no longer be sufficient to address the challenges posed by financial instability. The need has been highlighted to restructure regulation and supervision and to go beyond a purely micro-prudential approach in this regard. Focussing on the development of a macro-prudential framework should better position authorities to contribute to reducing pro-cyclicality and improving the financial sector’s resilience to adverse shocks.  In response to the regulatory challenges, the European System of Financial Supervision (ESFS) has been established, under which the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) has been made responsible for the macro-prudential oversight of the financial system as a whole. The work of the ESRB, which is founded on close cooperation between central banks, national supervisory authorities, the European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) and policy makers, will contribute to the mitigation of systemic risk within the financial system.  However, despite the significant progress in institutional architecture at the European level, crucial areas within global and national financial systems remain fragile and vulnerable to unexpected shocks. All countries face a varying degree of challenges. In Luxembourg we still have significant gaps, particularly with respect to institutional reforms and the adjustment of our model of supervision. In this regard, I am aware that there is no perfect supervisory model, nevertheless, we must try to profit from the recent experiences of other neighbour countries in order to mitigate systemic vulnerabilities and enhance financial stability. As you know, different countries; U.K., Belgium, France and recently Switzerland, have adjusted their model to be more integrated.  So it would appear self-evident that central banks, given their role as lenders of last resort and their responsibilities in monetary policy and liquidity management, should play a key role in safeguarding financial stability. However, the lender of last resort might be the most important backstop during periods of financial turbulences, nevertheless this should not be a “free lunch”. In order to fulfill their responsibilities effectively, central banks should be equipped with a clear and independent macro-prudential mandate and toolbox to assess and mitigate macro-prudential risks at the systemic level. This proposal is coherent with the 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches recommendations of the de Larosière report which attributed an umbrella role to central banks in the supervisory framework. In this regard, it must be assured that national macro-prudential authorities have the flexibility to adjust regulatory requirements over the business cycle. Thus, I welcome the Commission’s proposal regarding CRD IV in particular, the countercyclical capital buffer. However, the macro-prudential regime must find a balance between preserving national flexibility – as the business cycle varies between European countries – and maintaining a level playing field so as not to distort competition within the Single Market.  As I mentioned, aside from the institutional arrangements, many challenges remain to be resolved. The G-20 and the European Commission have taken some initiatives in addressing the regulatory deficiencies highlighted by the crisis. These include Basel III, OTC derivatives, the shadow banking system, high frequency trading, central counterparties (CCPs) and crisis resolution mechanisms, etc... Such proposals remain at an early stage and still face the challenges of jurisdictional realities.  Let me now focus on some specific issues that may arise under the new regulatory regime. With respect to liquidity, two new instruments have been proposed i.e. the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR). These quantities are intended to improve financial institutions’ liquidity risk profiles and the resulting increase in resilience should help to mitigate funding and market liquidity risk. In combination with a more robust and efficient supervisory landscape, the new liquidity standards should also help to bolster internal liquidity risk management practices. This issue remains crucial as the recent sovereign debt turbulences have increased the level of liquidity pressure experienced by banks. At the same time, tensions in foreign currency funding for financial institutions have become acute and it seems to be important that these concerns be addressed within the context of the new regulation. Going forward at the national level, the BCL has seen the need to incorporate these ratios into its current risk-based liquidity surveillance framework which relies on a combination of qualitative and quantitative elements. In addition, regular on-site visits and continuous off-site monitoring are currently combined with a five day forward-looking liquidity reporting by banks.  The BCL also sees the need to conduct surveys and studies in order to assess the liquidity situation of financial institutions. Indeed, with regard to the new liquidity ratios, an empirical analysis was performed in Luxembourg. The results revealed that a one-size fits all approach to liquidity supervision might not be appropriate given the diversity of banks’ business models. Thus I wonder if it would more useful to complement the focus on financial institutions by taking into account their activities. Therefore, a maximum harmonized rulebook, disallowing flexibility on a national level, does not strike the right balance between efficient liquidity surveillance and increased resilience of banks. The issue of the maintenance of liquidity buffers at national level for host entities of cross-border banking groups shall deserve particular attention in this regard. It is profoundly in the interest of all actors that these new requirements be implemented in a consistent and timely manner. During the transitional period however, further analysis is required in order to ensure an appropriate calibration. Unintended consequences due to restricting the ability of banks to manage their short and long-term liquidity or to undertake the maturity transformation process which represent the core of financial intermediary activities need to be weighed against the intended benefits.  Furthermore, care should also be taken to avoid incentivising banks to shift some of their activities to the non-regulated banking system; the so-called “parallel” or ”shadow” banking sector. Currently, only preliminary information on the level of interconnectedness between regulated and non-regulated entities is available to supervisors. Additional work is needed in this regard, in order to improve the efficiency of financial regulation across markets and jurisdictions. Looking forward potential new risks stemming from micro-structural issues such 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 as UCITS exchange-traded funds and high frequency trading, which I mentioned before, need to be properly addressed. Regarding the access of credit institutions to central bank funding, their eligibility should be based on their financial soundness, as assessed through their solvency and liquidity robustness. It is therefore of crucial importance for central banks to have access to relevant and detailed micro-prudential information and assessments on their monetary policy counterparts. Moreover, this assessment cannot be dissociated from prudential information on the banking group to which the respective counterpart belongs. This calls for an enhanced participation by central banks and their involvement both in the EU College of Supervisors and cross border stability groups. Before I conclude, I think it would be appropriate to point out that the increased level of interconnectedness of financial systems and banking groups highlights the need for improved cross-border cooperation and crisis management.  Finally, let me mention human capital requirements as another key area which often goes, unmentioned yet is important for improving the quality and efficacy of supervision. By combining the competencies and skills of supervisors and central banks, the ESE initiative certainly contributes to enhancing the convergence of practices. Under this welcome initiative, the efforts of the Banque centrale du Luxembourg will continue to enhance the approach adopted by the ESE initiative.  Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish you a pleasant stay in Luxembourg, and an interesting and successful conference. I am sure the presentations as well as the panel discussions will include interesting and fresh ideas and insights from which all participants can benefit in their ongoing tasks, be it at local or cross-border level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Thomas Jordan: Does the Swiss National Bank need equity? Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, to the Statistisch-Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft, Basel, 28 September 2011. *      *      * The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). The Swiss National Bank (SNB) had to report heavy losses for 2010 and the first half of 2011 due to the strength of the Swiss franc – or, more precisely, due to valuation changes on its foreign currency reserves. Consequently, it suffered a substantial reduction in its equity. Understandably in such a situation, concerns began to be voiced in public. Questions often posed in this context include: Might the SNB lose its capacity to act as a result of a negative equity level? And, if its equity were negative, would the SNB have to be recapitalised, or might it even have to go into administration? The short answer to these questions is “No”, because the SNB cannot be compared with commercial banks or other private enterprises. For one thing, a central bank cannot become illiquid. This means that a central bank’s capacity to act is not constrained if its equity turns negative. Moreover, unlike other enterprises, it is not forced to implement recovery measures or go into administration. For another, central banks enjoy a funding advantage over private companies, owing to their banknote-issuing privilege. Moreover, they generate surplus income over the long term. Thus, over time, a central bank like the SNB can usually rebuild its equity level all on its own after a loss. Nevertheless, even for a central bank, a long period of negative equity is not without its problems, as it can undermine the bank’s credibility and its independence in the longer term. For these reasons, it is important for the SNB to maintain a sufficient level of equity. To ensure that the SNB can carry out its monetary policy mandate without restriction, also in the long term, in the interests of the country as a whole it is essential that its capital base be adequately rebuilt. This means that the necessary profits must be earned, and retained. In the long run, the entire economy will benefit.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 José De Gregorio: IMF challenges and policies for the global economy Statement by Mr José De Gregorio, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, speaking on behalf of the Southern Cone Countries of Latin America International Monetary and Financial Committee Meeting, Washington DC, 24 September 2011. *      *      * In the past few months, the near-term prospects for the global economy have worsened significantly and financial risks have increased. What some time ago was a modest, albeit unbalanced recovery, risks turning into a new economic downturn, particularly in major Advanced Economies (AEs). This new scenario poses urgent challenges to the IMF and to the membership in terms of decisive political and policy responses to solve fundamental weaknesses and mitigate the negative impact of this new downturn. Against this backdrop, the Fund’s surveillance capacities, and a well-functioning International Monetary System (IMS), are being and will again be put to the test only a couple of years after the 2008–2009 Great Recession and financial crisis. I.  The immediate challenges ahead and the fund’s policy advice Two forces are influencing each other and weighing down on economic prospects in major advanced economies. On the one hand, uncertainty and volatility have increased to their highest levels since October 2008, constraining credit and leading to more cautious behavior by households and financial institutions. On the other hand, fully credible medium-term fiscal consolidation in those economies with high debt burdens is still lacking, prompting even higher sovereign spreads and more calls for short-term fiscal retrenchment when private demand has yet to recover to its pre-crisis levels. The policy debate surrounding the appropriate fiscal and monetary policy mix, as well as the assessment of public debt sustainability, have become muddled. It would be paradoxical that only a few years after witnessing an example of successful global policy coordination and sound financial policies, which staved off another Great Depression, the lessons learned were to be ignored. The Fund can provide guidance and leadership on a number of issues, and the membership should heed its advice. In particular, we would like to note that:  The political will to achieve meaningful short-term fiscal adjustment is more present in those core AEs where public sector financing conditions are benefiting the most from flight to quality, whereas in cases of more acute solvency concerns, and thus higher spreads, adjustment fatigue is dangerously settling in.  The negative growth implications of further short-term fiscal retrenchment have not been given proper regard by the global community. The bulk of the evidence, and appropriate risk considerations in the weak economic environment of today, suggest much caution should be exercised when implementing short-term fiscal consolidation measures, especially in those cases where the long-term sustainability of public finances is not threatened.  Structural reform fatigue is settling in, with electorates weary in both creditor and debtor countries to pursue tough measures to ensure medium-term fiscal consolidation and containment of the sovereign crisis in Europe. Moreover, financial markets remain jittery as the final outcomes of agreed commitments are not a foregone conclusion.  The risk of disorderly outcomes is high, and balance sheet repair, especially of those banks most exposed to the European periphery, should be bolstered. Hoping for the best is no substitute for preparing for the worst, and the markets are well 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches aware of that. More extreme measures on debt restructuring might be unavoidable if fiscal transfers are ruled out and fatigue settles in debtor countries.  In an environment of financial uncertainty and fiscal retrenchment, monetary policy should remain supportive. Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) and smaller, financially stable AEs, are threading carefully in this uncertain environment, and as we saw a few years ago, it is unlikely that full decoupling will occur under most scenarios. The Fund’s advice should properly recognize that the rebalancing challenges are not the same across this heterogeneous group of economies; thus, an adequate level of differentiation in terms of policy advice is called for. In this regard, we would like to note that:  If the external scenario should worsen significantly, many EMEs with flexible exchange rates and inflation-targeting regimes would have scope to adjust monetary policy, thanks to a timely process of raising interest rates to contain overheating risks. Going forward, these economies will be able to react flexibly to changing global circumstances in a context of anchored inflationary expectations.  Other EMEs have limited room for maneuver, as their economies have expanded beyond their potential output, with widening fiscal and external deficits, and thus today face the risk that external shocks might unhinge inflationary expectations and force pro-cyclical monetary and fiscal policy adjustments.  A third group of EMEs has maintained structurally high national saving rates throughout the expansion phase of the global cycle and might be subject to a natural deceleration as the global economy cools down. In these cases, undertaking reforms to boost domestic demand would help sustain both medium-term global rebalancing and short-term policy accommodation.  Economies that are being affected by high commodity prices, particularly Low-Income Countries (LICs), should strive to develop targeted policies to the most vulnerable groups through efficient cash transfers, instead of across-the-board subsidies. The international community should strive to support these efforts through similar measures, as demand subsidies or export constraints in non-LIC economies exacerbate commodity price pressures. Policy advice by the Fund should be tailored to these different groups of economies. Policy recommendations that are appropriate for some economies are not necessarily suitable for other economies. One salient theme, however, is that fiscal policy space is more limited across the spectrum than it was in the run up to the 2008–2009 financial crisis. Moving from broad policy recommendations to concrete messages on policy implementation is required to draw the policy-makers’ attention and establish a constructive dialogue. The Consolidated Multilateral Surveillance Report is a positive step in that direction. II.  The medium-term challenges and the fund’s action plan Under the current circumstances, the Fund should focus on its short-term policy challenges. Indeed, one of the main issues that the Fund is tackling right now, namely the Triennial Surveillance Review, will be shaped directly by the lessons that the practice and traction of surveillance reveal in the current uncertain environment. Such surveillance practices will be the basis on which to revamp the surveillance framework, for instance, through an integrated surveillance decision that encompasses both its bilateral and multilateral aspects. The Fund’s resource adequacy is, in our view, directly linked to the functioning of Regional Financial Arrangements (RFA) and the existence of bilateral central bank swap lines. It is welcome that major central banks are currently cooperating in this area. A reasonable 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 question is whether current Fund resources, plus those available through RFAs and bilateral swap lines, are sufficient to deal with a significant major financial dislocation.  Assessing these resource needs is critical to evaluate whether, for instance, the New Arrangements to Borrow will have to remain active, even if the quota increase is fully implemented by next year. Moreover, the discussion of resources would have to be linked to a broader rethinking of the need for alternative lending instruments to bolster the global safety net. This topic should be given higher priority at the current juncture and not, as in our previous IMFC meeting, simply as part of a broader agenda for IMS reform. The activation and deactivation, and the criteria for conditionality, for the Flexible Credit Line or similar instruments could be reviewed, towards making them closer substitutes to bilateral swap lines that have been implemented by major central banks. This would help reduce the stigma associated with the Fund’s toolkit, and would contribute to ensure adequate liquidity provision in times of market stress. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Corriere della Sera Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted by Ms Marika De Feo and published on 28 September 2011. *      *      * Corriere della Sera: Mr President, are you satisfied with the outcome of the meetings in Washington? Jean-Claude Trichet: It is always extremely important for world leaders in the areas of economy and finance to exchange views, compare notes and work out a diagnosis of the situation which is lucid and without any complacency. We are in the fourth year of a very demanding global crisis. The epicentre of the crisis is in Europe, but it is a global crisis. On behalf of the ECB’s Governing Council, I called on all European authorities to be up to the very demanding challenges of the times and to demonstrate their sense of direction. And I told our partners in the rest of the world that we needed support and strong encouragement for European affairs, but not public lectures.  The G20 pledged on Thursday to “take all necessary actions to preserve the stability of banking systems and financial markets”. Which strong and collective action do you suggest?  First, the full, comprehensive and speedy implementation of all decisions already taken individually and collectively in Europe and in the world. As regards the Europeans, full and swift implementation of the decisions taken on 21 July.  Second, as has been underlined by the European Systemic Risk Board, coordinated efforts to strengthen bank capital, including recourse to backstop facilities.  Third, we need to stand ready to respond to new challenges that can arise at any time. Permanent and credible alertness is more important than ever in the present circumstances.  Are governments responsible for the dangerous development of the crisis?  I am on record as having stressed, on behalf of the Governing Council, since the inception of the euro, that fiscal soundness was of the essence, that the Stability and Growth Pact was fundamental in a single currency area without a federal budget, and that the surveillance of competitive indicators by peers was absolutely necessary. All this is clearly documented.  Now, in the present very demanding circumstances, what counts is that all authorities are up to their responsibilities. Now is the time for effective action, implementation, verbal discipline and a stronger team spirit on the part of the European executive branches.  European countries were urged to boost the rescue fund (EFSF) to contain contagion and avoid recession. What do you think of that? Could the EFSF be leveraged, for example, through the European Central Bank, or receive a bank licence? Or is it better to anticipate the creation of the ESM, as Germans suggest?  I call for the full and swift implementation of the decisions of 21 July taken by the 17 Heads of State or Government. And for them to stand ready to face up to acute new challenges in a period which is so demanding.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Mr President, growth seems to have deteriorated quickly, downside risks to growth are augmenting. Are these reasons strong enough for the ECB to become more aggressive in the fight against the crisis, involving also monetary policy?  As you know, we consider that being a very solid anchor of stability and confidence in the turbulent times we are experiencing is a fundamental contribution to growth and job creation. The remarkable anchoring of inflation expectations, which is due to our credible monetary policy, protects us against the risk of inflation and the risk of deflation. You know our well-established concept: we are never pre-committed, and our interest rates are always designed to deliver price stability in line with our definition and the anchoring of expectations.  Would the ECB go as far as introducing also other liquidity operations, for example 12-month liquidity operations, as was suggested in Washington?  Do not forget that we are presently refinancing all our banks on the basis of full allotment at a fixed rate at one-week, one-month and three-month maturities. This is the most important of our non-standard measures, designed to help restore a better monetary policy transmission mechanism. These non-standard measures have to be exactly commensurate to the degree of abnormal functioning of markets in the assessment of the Governing Council.  Do you think that the downgrading of Italy recently decided by Standard & Poor’s is justified?  I do not comment on decisions by rating agencies. Investors and savers know that what counts is their own judgement. What counts are fundamentals and actions taken by governments and parliaments to enhance and consolidate confidence.  And are you satisfied with these actions until now?  As you know, we sent messages to Italy that were followed by action and, after some hesitation, the decisions were confirmed rapidly by the parliament. Of course, this is work in progress, all this has to be implemented as soon as possible, and there are other measures upon which the authorities are reflecting.  Which measures are still missing?  We would encourage everything that goes in the direction of structural reforms to unleash the capacity of Italy to grow faster, to have a better growth potential. The potential of Italy is immense, and the present growth potential is not in line with the overall capacity of Italy. I think there is a general consensus among economists on this, and everything that goes in the direction of unleashing productive forces is welcome.  Which other strengths do you see in the potential of the Italian economy?  One of the major strengths of Italy is its entrepreneurial spirit. The capacity of individuals and families to start a business, take risks and be devoted to their enterprises is exceptional. But this entrepreneurial spirit, which is shared by society as a whole, needs to be allowed to develop fully through structural reforms aimed at increasing the flexibility of the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 What more should be done to increase growth? For instance, reducing protection in non-tradable sectors and monopolies, approving the liberalisation of closed professions, higher pension age, making labour markets more flexible and an overall increase in productivity?  A lot of things can be done, in particular but not exclusively the liberalisation of closed professions, improved flexibility of the labour markets, improved education and training, and measures to boost innovation.  How do you evaluate the fact that Italy is going to have a primary surplus as a percentage of GDP from next year onwards?  It is of course something which is important, and maybe not sufficiently well-known by external observers. We encourage Italy to follow this path and to do all that is necessary in order to consolidate this primary surplus and reach the goal of having balanced overall public finances in 2013.  Do you think that this objective can be reached with the measures taken until now?  What counts is the goal. The decisions which were taken recently make it possible to advance significantly in the direction of that goal. Whether new decisions will have to be taken, taking into account the overall situation and the evolution of the real economy, is an open question. But the goal is the goal; it has been affirmed, and it is very important.  Would it have been better to publish the messages you sent to Italy?  As you know, we have sent messages and we do that on a permanent basis, through various means, addressed to individual governments. We do not make them public. But we are calling for all governments without exception to permanently ensure sound fiscal and macroeconomic policies. We do this every month in the Eurogroup and in ECOFIN, so this is not something extraordinary.  The SMP is temporary, how long will you go on with the programme?  We are implementing this programme – like all non-standard measures – for monetary policy reasons, to restore a better transmission of our monetary policy, because some markets or segments are disrupted and not functioning properly. These disruptions, in the case of the Securities Markets Programme (SMP), are due to the fact that governments, individually, still have to ensure their full credibility in the markets, and that the peer surveillance called for by the Stability and Growth Pact was not exercised correctly. It was on the basis of the commitments of 21 July made by the EU Heads of State or Government that the Governing Council of the ECB decided to activate the SMP, taking into account the commitment of governments to give the EFSF the capacity to intervene on the secondary market.  Are you buying sovereign bonds to help Italy in particular?  No. We are embarking on the SMP to help restore a better transmission mechanism for monetary policy at a time when governments have not yet implemented their decision of 21 July.  What will happen when you stop this programme?  I already explained how we see this programme and the commitment of the governments to step in individually and collectively.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Many are calling for Greece to default, also from the Governing Council…  We have decisions which were taken with the signature of 17 Heads of State or Government on 21 July, and the Governing Council considers that it is extremely important that all the decisions be implemented. Moreover, the key to everything are the decisions of the Greek government, which has to adjust in a decisive way, in the interests of the Greek people.  But some observers from outside have the impression that you are also losing patience with Greece.  Our message is crystal clear.  Are you satisfied with this first agreement of the Troika?  When we have a report, we shall see.  Will the role of the EFSF be enough to substitute for the ECB?  The decisions which have been taken by the European governments have to be fully implemented, and they explicitly include the possibility of intervening on the secondary bond market.  People say that we are at a crossroads for Monetary Union, where the euro may break apart, remain only 10–12 countries, or have a more integrated governance.  Since 9 August 2007 we have been experiencing the worst crisis since the Second World War. This global crisis is challenging the strategies of all the big advanced economies, Japan, the United States and Europe. So it is not surprising that we are all in very demanding times. As regards Europe, it is absolutely crucial to make a distinction between the currency itself and the tensions that we have observed in some countries. The euro has kept its value remarkably over 13 years, has preserved price stability, is backed by strong fundamentals and is considered by markets to be solid and stable for the next ten years, when we look at inflation expectations. On a consolidated basis, public finances in the euro area are sounder than in the United States or in Japan, with a public finance deficit of 4.5% of GDP, whereas it is around 10% in the other two countries. That being said, we have a number of countries that undoubtedly have to correct their policies. And that calls for a strong enforcement of their national policies in the domain of public finances and structural reforms. We must have a “quantum leap” in the governance of the 17 members of the euro area.  Mr President, did the role of the ECB change during the crisis, and if so, how?  The ECB is an anchor of stability and confidence in Europe. Its track record in terms of price stability is remarkable and better than what any of the euro area countries experienced over the last 50 years. The crisis did not change anything in this respect. On the contrary, in times of difficulty, turbulence and crisis, the role of the ECB as an anchor is even more important. Is there still a vision for a united Europe?  I profoundly believe that the people of Europe feel that, in the present world, a united Europe is more important than ever. The rise of the big emerging economies, the structural changes at the global level, and the rapid advances of science and technology call for Europeans to unite, with a profoundly improved governance structure.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 How many hours do you work every day, how many days a week? Do you still have room for private interests and family?  I would say 10 to 11 hours a day and probably, as an average, 6 to 6½ days a week, depending on the European and international working weekends. It is demanding, particularly in times of turbulence. I thank profoundly my wife and family for their understanding. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Manuel Sánchez: Policy challenges in a decelerating world economy Remarks by Mr Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the Eighth China International Finance Forum, Pudong, Shanghai, 25 September 2011. *      *      * It is a privilege to be back in this beautiful country to participate in the Eighth China International Finance Forum, put together this year with the suggestive theme of green finance development. I would like to thank the organizers of this conference for their invitation to share the podium with distinguished speakers who will address important issues related to the financial opportunities that will continue to support China’s outstanding economic development. On this occasion, I would like to discuss some of the policy challenges posed by the global economic situation and outlook. In particular, I am interested in assessing the recent poor performance of the world economy in order to identify possible underlying problems, which may help to design appropriate economic policy measures. I would also like to examine the implications of the weak world economic evolution for developing countries. Obviously, my comments are entirely my own responsibility and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Bank of Mexico. The unusual recovery As you know, since the middle of 2009 the global economy has been in a process of recovery from the deep contraction stemming from the great financial crisis. The improvement has been different from other modern business cycles, because among other factors, this time it has been notably slow and has not followed the typical “V” shape that tends to be sharper the deeper output falls. The relatively weak world economic recovery has reflected an anemic turnaround of the advanced economies that were most affected by the financial debacle. Specifically, in the United States, the epicenter of the turbulence in 2007 and 2008, real GDP barely attained its pre-crisis level by the second quarter of 2011. Moreover, this indicator has remained well below the real value that would have prevailed if growth had kept up consistently with its secular trend of approximately three percent per year.1  The unsatisfactory behavior of industrialized economies was accentuated during 2011. GDP growth showed a declining path in the first half and several activity indicators suggest that this trend has worsened in the third quarter. Furthermore, consensus GDP forecasts for this and the following year have been successively revised downward, at least since last March. Although the world economy is still predicted to continue expanding, this is basically due to the higher expected growth momentum in emerging markets.  In particular, the United States and most advanced countries are expected to grow only modestly in the near future, and some analysts already estimate significant odds for an imminent or even ongoing recession in those economies. Although a global economic contraction is not the baseline scenario for most forecasters, the continuation of downward revisions to growth projections for advanced countries would definitively affect the economic prospects for the rest of the world.                                                  1  For an analysis of the current deviation of U.S. output from its secular trend and a comparison with that of the Great Depression, see Robert E. Lucas, Jr., “The U.S. Recession of 2007–201?”, Milliman Lecture, University of Washington, May 19, 2011. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Possible explanations What lies behind the disappointing upturn in industrialized economies? A striking feature of the weak and deteriorating nature of the recovery in these countries is that it has occurred in spite of unprecedented expansionary fiscal and monetary policy stances. Large public deficits have resulted from automatic stabilizer mechanisms as well as from special tax relief programs and higher government expenditures, including bailouts of troubled financial and non-financial institutions, aimed at stabilizing financial markets and promoting aggregate spending. In addition, monetary policy has remained extraordinarily accommodative during recent years. Central banks from the main industrialized countries have combined remarkably low policy interest rates with an increase and change in the composition of their balance sheets. The leader in expansionary monetary policy has been the U.S. Federal Reserve, which has maintained the federal funds rate close to zero since the end of 2008, and has also implemented large purchases of government bonds and private financial assets funded through higher voluntary bank deposits during the last four years.  Among other objectives, through the purchase of financial assets, the Fed sought to meet the extremely high liquidity demand shown by the public during the financial crisis and, more recently, to lower long-term interest rates in order to stimulate private financing and investment. Other monetary authorities have implemented similar practices. The European Central Bank has participated actively in the markets in an attempt to stabilize the sovereign bond prices of countries experiencing fiscal difficulties. While the extraordinary actions undertaken by the Fed as a lender of last resort during 2008 appear to have contributed effectively to the normalization of non-bank financial markets, the impact of accommodation by this and other central banks on aggregate demand has been less clear. Questions arise in light of the ambiguous effects of monetary policy on long-term interest rates, the still weak credit channels of monetary policy transmission, and poor output performance and expectations. Similarly, the net effect of fiscal policy on spending may have been weak given that policy measures were probably perceived as temporary, potentially inducing savings in view of higher taxes expected in the near future to finance them. In any case, regardless of their actual effectiveness, the presence of highly expansionary fiscal and monetary stances suggests that the unsatisfactory recovery in advanced economies does not reflect a lack of stimulus measures.2 On the other hand, recent negative supply shocks have affected the performance of the world economy and particularly that of the United States. These shocks included bad weather, high oil prices which have partly reversed course, and the tragic events in Japan during the first quarter of 2011. Yet, independently of their importance, these events have been transitory and, therefore, the extent to which they explain the sluggish rebound of advanced countries since 2009 is necessarily limited. The previous observations suggest the need to search for the existence of possible fundamental obstacles to a stronger economic recovery in industrialized countries. While in the current complex economic situation many factors certainly interact, some features stand out.  In particular, in the United States, there seem to be two important sources of growth-limiting factors. One is the sequel to the financial crisis summarized by the consumer debt overhang, slow debt restructuring and foreclosed home sales, and high risk aversion and contingent                                                  2  Questions about the effects of monetary policy on aggregate demand are found in Frederic S. Mishkin, “Monetary Policy Strategy: Lessons from the Crisis,” NBER Working Paper No. 16755, February 2011. For a discussion of the possible limitations of fiscal stimulus, see Robert J. Barro and Charles J. Redlick, “Macroeconomic Effects from Government Purchases and Taxes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1): 51–102, February 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 reserve provisioning by banks. The resolution of the problematic debt and credit legacy from the previous asset price bubble, as illustrated by the large number of households with negative home equity, is taking a long time, as seems to be the case in the aftermath of any big financial crisis. This impasse contributes to an explanation of the virtual stagnation of mortgage lending and residential construction in the United States.3 A second source of obstacles in the United States appears to be the unintended consequences from the corrective measures after the crisis, which might have resulted in heightened uncertainty. These actions include the discussions of eventual fiscal consolidation in terms of future higher taxes and expenditure cuts to confront the unsustainable path of projected public debt, and the implementation of new regulations to prevent financial crises. To some extent, this environment of uncertainty may have partly induced the recent reduction of producer and consumer confidence. Additionally, the European Monetary Union (EMU) is severely affected by the fiscal fragility of some of its member countries, which since the financial crisis have exhibited sharp rises in their public debt-to-GDP ratios, with projected paths that are judged to be unsustainable. Some states have already received substantial financial support from the European community and the International Monetary Fund, and are implementing strict fiscal and structural adjustment programs. However, the perception of credit risk of the corresponding governments, as summarized in the spreads paid for credit default swaps, has continued to portray the deteriorating trend observed since 2010 and has reached worrisome levels.  Several concerns apparently lie behind market skepticism surrounding remedial actions in the EMU. One is the difficulty of resolving the troubled governments’ debt burden through austerity programs and ever-increasing support funds. Another factor is the negative impact that the worsened public finances of any country can have on others within the Union, given the fact that their financial systems are interlinked and their institutions, notably banks, are significant holders of government bonds. Contagion fears have spread to other regions outside the EMU, where financial intermediaries may also have substantial exposures to European sovereign bonds, either directly or indirectly. In the past weeks the urgency of finding a solution to these problems has become even clearer. Uncertainty on future developments in the Monetary Union hinders growth prospects in this area and fuels sharp volatility and an investor rush to safety, factors that have recently deepened in international financial markets.  Policy challenges The existence of fundamental factors that, to a large extent, explain the meager growth of the world economy poses important challenges to policy makers. First, short-term economic policies are facing significant limits in advanced countries. The high and rising public-debt ratios in many economies call for substantial fiscal consolidation efforts in order to make public finances sustainable and, hence, supportive of financial stability and long-term growth.  Monetary policy is already extraordinarily accommodative, and authorities will need to continue monitor the anchoring of low inflation while at the same time remain ready to function as lenders of last resort to guarantee the integrity of their payment systems. As noted earlier, slow growth after the crisis seems not to reflect a lack of economic stimulus policies. Authorities should exercise caution in considering further accommodative policies, as negative side effects on expectations could offset their intended benefits.                                                  3  Based on international experience, Reinhart and Rogoff found that deleveraging after big financial crises is a lengthy process and the resulting negative deviation from pre-crisis per-capita income typically takes more than four years. See Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff, This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Second and, perhaps, more importantly, significant measures will have to be implemented in order to overcome the underlying difficulties that seem to explain low growth in industrialized countries. Obviously, the sooner these actions are taken the better, as the postponement of solutions may increase their cost. Given that public finances are at the root of problems in many advanced nations, fiscal reforms that reduce uncertainty and permanently enhance incentives toward productivity are necessary. Also, deregulation and better regulation that can make markets more efficient and amicable for innovation, investment, and hiring should take priority. In the aftermath of the financial crisis, a crucial challenge will potentially be the design of programs to help the resolution of the consumer debt overhang in the United States and other countries, possibly through more expeditious restructuring and further bank balance-sheet cleanups, which, in turn, may reinvigorate the mortgage and housing markets.4 By far, the most serious task is the definitive solution to the fiscal difficulties of the vulnerable EMU member states, which implies imaginative plans needed for both debtors and creditors. The choices faced are certainly hard. The solution must inevitably include adding capital to banks. However, these steps are a prerequisite for the stability of the financial system and the resumption of economic expansion.  Implications for emerging economies The expected lower dynamism in advanced economies will necessarily limit growth momentum for the rest of the world. In particular, as was clearly shown during the great contraction of 2009, emerging economies will not be immune to the pressures faced by industrialized nations. The possible negative effects on specific emerging economies will necessarily be higher the more integrated they are with slowing economies.  For example, the Mexican economy is highly interrelated with that of the United States, especially through manufacturing production and trade. Although Mexico has recently fared well in terms of external demand, in part because of gradual geographic diversification, dampened activity in the United States is already affecting Mexican growth performance and forecasts.5  Despite these constraints, emerging economies are in a better situation than those of advanced countries. Largely as a result of the lessons learned from previous crises, in general, most of these economies have maintained relatively strong public finances with reduced exposures to foreign currency liabilities. Additionally, regulation and supervision and the business models of financial intermediaries have improved substantially. As a consequence, financial systems showed a high degree of resilience during the great international turmoil and thus far have remained sound.  Hence, from the point of view of their fundamentals, developing countries should likely continue to be a positive factor for global economic growth. This is all the more important, as now the emerging economies account for almost half of world GDP. Within this contribution, China is expected to maintain its key role as an engine of global economic expansion.  The favorable contribution of developing nations to the world economy will require that these countries continue profiting from their own experience and that of advanced nations. In                                                  4  For an interesting proposal to facilitate mortgage debt renegotiation in the United States, see Eric A. Posner and Luigi Zingales, “A Loan Modification Approach to the Housing Crisis,” American Law and Economics Review, 11 (1): 575–607, 2009. 5 From February to September of 2011, Blue Chip growth forecasts for 2011 and 2012, respectively, fell from 4.4 and 4.1 to 3.8 and 3.0 percent in the case of U.S. industrial production, and from 3.9 and 3.8 to 3.9 and 3.5 percent for Mexico’s GDP.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 particular, exceptionally expansionary policies have been a response to serious drawbacks in developed countries and may involve unknown future costs. To the extent that such difficulties are absent in emerging economies, they do not need to take these risks. Although inflation remains relatively contained, in some developing countries there are signs of overheating. Thus, monetary authorities will have to continue monitoring inflationary pressures to act appropriately. In short, the maintenance of price stability, strong public finances, strict prudential oversight of financial systems and openness to international trade continues to be the safest road to growth in emerging market economies, especially during these volatile times. Concluding remarks The lackluster economic performance of advanced countries, which largely explains the weak upturn of the world economy from the great contraction, does not seem to reflect a lack of stimulus policies or just the influence of temporary events. The anemic growth has been a lasting phenomenon which reveals deep factors that fuel uncertainty and pessimistic expectations. The main contributing elements include the consumer debt overhang and unintended consequences from corrective measures after the financial crisis in the United States, and the worsening fiscal and financial troubles in the EMU. The root causes of the deceleration of advanced economies pose significant challenges for policy makers. Their response will certainly imply hard choices that need to be made in a timely way in order to avoid aggravation. In this context, while they will not be decoupled from the developed countries, emerging economies will continue to face relatively better conditions for growth, provided that solid economic fundamentals are maintained. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Narayana Kocherlakota: Central bank independence and sovereign default Speech by Mr Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, at the Sovereign Debt Seminar, CME Group-MSRI Prize in Innovative Quantitative Applications, Chicago, Illinois, 26 September 2011. *      *      * These remarks are highly similar to those I gave on April 1, 2011, in Philadelphia. I thank Marco Bassetto, V. V. Chari, Ron Feldman, Futoshi Narita and Juan-Pablo Nicolini for their comments. The views I express here today are my own, and not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Sargent and Wallace published their classic “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic” in the Minneapolis Fed’s Quarterly Review in 1981. Since that date, there has been a growing appreciation of the role of fiscal policy in the determination of the price level. The idea is a simple one. Consider a government that borrows only using non-indexed debt denominated in its own currency. There is an intertemporal government budget constraint that implies that the current real value of government liabilities – including the monetary base – must equal the present value of future real surpluses. Because the liabilities are nominal and non-indexed, the government budget constraint provides a linkage between the public’s assessment of future real tax collections and government spending and the current price level.  I like John Cochrane’s analogy here.1 He thinks of money and government bonds as being like stock in a company. Just like a firm’s stock, money and bonds implicitly represent claims to the ownership of the government’s stream of surpluses. And just like with financial assets, the variations in their prices are fundamentally linked to variations in the present discounted value of government profits – that is, surpluses.2 This simple insight has rather profound consequences for how we think about inflation. Inflation is no longer “always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon.” Instead, even apparently independent central banks may not have control of the price level. Thus, if the public begins to think that the fiscal authority is behaving irresponsibly, that belief will push upward on the price level.  However, in the existing literature, the analysis of fiscal effects on the price level is typically based on the presumption that a fiscal authority will never default on liabilities denominated in its own currency. In my remarks today, I will relax this assumption. Once I do so, it will become clear that a sufficiently tough central bank does have the ability to control the price level, regardless of the behavior of the fiscal authority.3 I will argue that its ability to do so hinges on the nature of its response to the possibility of default on the part of the fiscal authority. I will talk about some of the short-run versus long-run tensions involved in that response. Throughout, I will refer to the central bank as CB and the fiscal authority as FA. I will refer to the currency as being dollars, but that should not be viewed as suggesting that I am talking about the United States – or Australia.                                                   1 See Cochrane (2005). 2 The present-discounted-value formula for stock price evaluation is based on the assumption that the stock price does not have a bubble component. In the same way, the intertemporal government budget constraint relies on the assumption that the price of neither money nor bonds has a bubble component. This assumption is violated in a wide class of models of money. 3 See Bassetto (2008) for a related analysis. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Let me start by describing a simple CB policy: a commodity price peg. Suppose the central bank holds X ounces of gold. It commits to being willing to buy and sell p dollars for each ounce of gold and has a monetary base of $pX. This policy successfully ties the price level to variations in the price of gold, regardless of the behavior of the FA.  What impact does this policy have on the FA? Now, when the FA borrows in dollars, it is essentially borrowing in a real commodity: gold. All of the FA’s debt is essentially indexed to the price of gold, and it is certainly conceivable that various shocks could lead the FA to default on those obligations.4 Of course, as I have argued elsewhere, this simple policy is generally viewed as suboptimal by macroeconomists.5 In contrast, suppose that the CB follows an aggressive Taylor rule when determining the path of the short-term interest rate.6 That policy pins down an inflation path in the usual way, regardless of the FA’s fiscal plans.7 However, given that inflation path, the FA’s nominal debt is now actually real. This means that if the FA is faced with an unexpected decline in its current and expected future real surpluses, it will be forced to default. Thus, once we allow for the possibility of default by the FA, a sufficiently tough CB can have considerable control over the price level. Of course, I’ve been arguing through examples. It would be more interesting to deliver a fuller characterization of the term “sufficiently tough”  – but I’m not going to attempt to do so. Instead, in what follows, I’ll discuss some aspects of the CB’s response to a particularly critical situation. Suppose the FA owes $10 billion on a given Friday. It plans to repay that loan by auctioning new debt on the preceding Monday. However, when it auctions off the new debt, it finds that it can only raise $5 billion. The FA is now in danger of defaulting on its Friday obligation of $10 billion. It is at this stage that the level of commitment of the CB to its chosen inflation path will be severely tested. The FA will ask the CB to take some action that will allow the FA to raise an additional $5 billion on Wednesday. There are many possible actions. The FA might ask the CB to intervene by setting a floor on the price of debt in the Wednesday auction. But there are less overt approaches. For example, the CB can commit to a price peg for the FA’s debt in the secondary market for that debt.  In any event, if the CB does intervene in some way to ensure the FA’s solvency, the CB no longer can be said to have independent control over the price level. If the CB’s intervention was largely unanticipated by markets, expected inflation will rise after the CB’s intervention. Then, incipient fiscal insolvency has triggered inflationary pressures. Of course, markets may well have already assigned a positive probability to the possibility that the CB might intervene in this kind of scenario. If so, then past inflation was already influenced by the markets’ expectations of this fiscal policy scenario.                                                  4 As modeled, for example, by Eaton and Gersovitz (1987). 5 See Kocherlakota (2011). 6 Here, I’m assuming that the CB is exchanging reserves and FA securities so as to control the path of a short-term nominally risk-free interest rate. This nominally risk-free interest rate may not be the same as the interest rate on FA debt. 7 Atkeson, Chari and Kehoe (2010) and Cochrane (2011) argue (convincingly to my mind) that an aggressive Taylor rule is not sufficient to determine inflation. The former authors suggest how price level determination can be achieved using a hybrid rule that augments an activist Taylor rule with a commodity price peg. Note though that their implementations implicitly require the CB to have the ability to buy back money from the public. If the CB can only hold assets issued by the FA, then the FA’s actions will influence the value of the CB’s portfolio and thereby influence the CB’s ability to implement a given price level path. In this sense, the CB does not have independent control of the price level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Should the CB be required to never intervene in this sort of insolvency scenario? I’ve argued that a ban on these interventions will give the CB more independence in its control over the price level. For those who think of CB independence as being the foundational element of macroeconomic policy, that pretty much settles the question.  But I see a couple of reasons for caution here. It is certainly conceivable that FA insolvency can be triggered by shocks that are well outside the control of the FA itself. And, empirically, FA insolvency is associated with large short-term and even medium-term declines in output. Should the CB be prepared to drive the FA into insolvency given the possible adverse economic impact on the country? More subtly, regardless of the FA’s solvency, sovereign debt issues can fail simply through a coordination failure among investors. If I, as an investor, don’t anticipate that others will buy into the debt issue, I won’t either. In this sense, sovereign debt issues may be susceptible to suboptimal “runs.” The CB can eliminate this possibility by ensuring the nominal promises of the FA whenever the FA is threatened with default. Thus, I see trade-offs. On the one hand, if the CB is known to be willing to intervene to keep the FA solvent, then inflation is necessarily shaped by fiscal considerations and by the short-run incentives of elected officials. We know from many years of theoretical and empirical research that this effect is not a desirable one. On the other hand, if the CB is fully committed to allow the FA to default if necessary, then even optimal debt management by the FA may end up exposing the country to troubling risks, like sovereign debt runs.  Let me wrap up. I’ve argued that even if the fiscal authority borrows exclusively in its country’s own currency, the central bank can have a large amount of control over the price level. But the central bank can only achieve that control if it is willing to commit to letting the fiscal authority default. Such a commitment may expose the country to risks of short-term and medium-term output losses. How this trade-off should best be resolved awaits future research. But it may turn out to be optimal for central banks to guarantee fiscal authority debts in some situations. If so, we again have to think of price level determination as something that is done jointly by the fiscal authority and the central bank – just as Sargent and Wallace taught us 30 years ago. References Atkeson, Andrew, V. V. Chari and Patrick J. Kehoe. 2010. “Sophisticated Monetary Policies.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 47–89.  Bassetto, Marco. 2008. “Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,” in Lawrence Blume and Steven Durlauf (eds.), New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition. MacMillan: London.  Cochrane, John H. 2005. “Money as Stock.” Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 501–28.  Cochrane, John H. 2011. “Determinacy and Identification with Taylor Rules.” Working paper. University of Chicago, Booth School of Business. Eaton, Jonathan, and Mark Gersovitz. 1987. “Country Risk and the Organization of International Capital Transfer.” NBER Working Paper 2204, April. Kocherlakota, Narayana. 2011. “It’s a Wonderful Fed.” Speech, St. Paul, Minn. Sargent, Thomas, and Neil Wallace. 1981. “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Fall, 1–17. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Bojan Markovic: FX volatility and market stability Speech by Mr Bojan Markovic, Vice Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the Annual ACI Conference, Zlatibor, 17 September 2011. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen,  A year ago, I was standing here in front of the very much the same audience, expounding on the benefits of exchange rate flexibility. I argued that exchange rate flexibility is a necessary backbone of stable and low inflation, and as such it must stay with us in the foreseeable future. I reasoned that movements in the exchange rate absorb shocks that otherwise would have gone to inflation or output and applauded the role the flexible exchange rate played in sheltering our economy from the impacts of the crisis.  At the same time, however, I called for a greater use of hedging instruments and sheltering the financially less literate sectors of our society from unwarranted exchange rate exposure. The way forward, I argued, is not through limiting exchange rate volatility, but rather through expanding on the use of dinar based and hedging instruments. Accordingly, monetary policy based on a flexible exchange rate has become a cornerstone of our efforts to increase the use of dinars in the economy.  A year on, some of the effects of exchange rate volatility are already visible. The daily exchange rate has certainly become more volatile. According to some measures1, the daily volatility increased threefold in the past year, although it still remains lower compared to, for instance, volatility in similar countries with flexible exchange rate, such as Poland, Hungary or Romania. And we expect that to remain the case in the period ahead. Chart 1.  NBS interventions and short-term FX volatility -80-60-40-200204060801001200.0000.0010.0020.0030.0040.0050.0060.0070.008junjulavgsepoctnovdec2010janfebmaraprmayjunjul2011NBS interventions (rhs)30-days moving average (lhs)EGARCH (lhs)(EUR m)st. dev.                                                  1 Charts 1 and 2 report 30-days moving average and EGARCH measures of daily volatility. 
2   The increase in exchange rate volatility was taking place against a declining presence of the National Bank of Serbia (NBS)in the FX market. With more than 100meuros volume a day, continuous quoting and low spreads, the market has recently been able to absorb larger orders from both sides of the market than before, within only moderate exchange rate movements, and without an excessive central bank’s assistance. Indeed, the interbank market volumes and the central bank’s presence have been inversely correlated, and this behavior is in line with the experience some other countries, for example the Czech Republic, had at this stage of market development in transition.  In Serbia, the daily FX volatility increased at the beginning of the year, following the discontinuation of NBS interventions in the final months of 2010. After calming down during the first months of 2011, the volatility started rising once more in May this year – again after the NBS stopped intervening.  While the stronger NBS interventions would successfully calm the markets, they would also delay market development by stifling genuine market making of private banks. Some of our evidence points out that the short-term exchange rate volatility increases gross trading volumes in the interbank market and thus strengthens the arbitraging behavior of market participants.  Chart 2.  Short-term FX volatility and spot trading volumes in the interbank market 0501001502002503003504000.0000.0010.0020.0030.0040.0050.0060.0070.008junjulavgsepoctnovdec2010janfebmaraprmayjunjul2011Interbank market spot gross trading volume (rhs)30-days moving average (lhs)EGARCH (lhs)(EUR m)st. dev. Our recent experience thus gives a fairly straightforward answer to a notorious chicken-and-egg problem. Less central bank presence in the market increases short-term exchange rate volatility, which in turn strengthens market making and volumes, making the market more resilient to shocks and thus decreasing the need for NBS interventions.  In addition to supporting market making, higher short-term volatility should also help market development by discouraging short-term speculative behavior. Arguably, a 1% daily volatility in the exchange rate presents a problem for an investor seeking an immediate profit from its FX position, but is less of an issue for a longer-term investor in Treasury securities. In this manner, the higher short-term volatility may have also strengthened the stability of financial system in Serbia.  In the NBS, we are also looking into the effects higher exchange rate flexibility has on the degree of financial dinarisation. The NBS has started publishing a quarterly report on the progress in its dinarisation efforts. While there are some encouraging developments already, the process is a long-term phenomenon and overall trends are not yet clearly visible in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  data. Nevertheless, we can observe that the bank credit market is becoming increasingly dinarised. An increase in the level of dinarisation can partially be related to the increased monthly volatility of the exchange rate. Portfolio models of financial intermediation2 suggest that the combination of inflation targeting and increased exchange rate volatility should foster the use of the local currency and discourage the use of the foreign currency. Preliminary econometric analysis of the Serbian data for the past three-years suggests that indeed there exists a relatively fast link between higher exchange rate volatility and a higher degree of dinarisation. In particular, higher monthly exchange rate volatility appears to increase the loan dinarisation with a delay of around two months.  Also, increased exchange rate flexibility might be contributing to the somewhat weakening link between domestic prices and the exchange rate. A recent NBS analysis suggests that the pass-through of the exchange rate to prices has declined over the past several years, since the Lehman Brothers episode.  In summarizing my short speech: plain data, the experience of other countries, as well as more sophisticated analysis suggest that somewhat greater short-term FX volatility has been beneficial for market development. Indirectly, it has allowed for lower National Bank of Serbia presence in the market and contributed to making the market more resilient by attracting longer-term and discouraging short-term hot inflows. We have also observed that dinarisation might be reacting positively to somewhat higher exchange rate flexibility and so does an increased use of hedging instruments. That said, although in the long run our goal remains full flexibility of the exchange rate, until the FX market in Serbia becomes deep enough and fully efficient, the National Bank of Serbia stands ready to react with its large stock of FX reserves and ensure normal functioning of the market, should it be needed. But we shall carefully measure our actions so to avoid endangering the now dynamic process of structural market development in Serbia. On that note I thank you for your attention, and wish you a successful annual meeting.                                                  2 For example, A. Ize and E. Levy-Yeyati (2003), Financial Dollarization, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 59, pp. 323–347. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Sarah Bloom Raskin: Monetary policy and job creation Speech by Ms Sarah Bloom Raskin, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the University of Maryland Smith School of Business Distinguished Speaker Series, Washington DC, 26 September 2011. *   *   * I appreciate the assistance of Hess Chung, William English, Jean-Philippe Laforte, Andrew Levin, Susan Stawick, William Wascher, David Wilcox, and Joyce Zickler in the preparation of these remarks. Good morning. It’s a great pleasure to be with you, and I want to thank the Center for Financial Policy at the Robert H. Smith School of Business for inviting me to participate in this forum. Indeed, I am delighted to see that the Center for Financial Policy is already thriving. Back in 2008, when I was the Commissioner of Financial Regulation for the State of Maryland, two of the founders of the center talked with me about its inception and asked for my ideas about what it might accomplish. And I am so glad to see that – despite the formidable challenges facing all such new projects – the center is now fully engaged in addressing financial policy issues that are critically important to our nation.  Today I want to discuss how monetary policy can promote the objective of maximum employment in a context of price stability. I will set the stage by reviewing current labor market conditions, and then I will talk about the tools that the Federal Reserve has been deploying to foster job creation and promote a stronger economic recovery. I will do my best to make these points in plain English rather than economic jargon, but feel free to correct me if I lapse back into it – my children certainly do. Of course, it goes without saying that these remarks are intended to express my views only and not necessarily the opinions of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).  Current labor market conditions The global economy began slowing in late 2007 and early 2008 and turned downward sharply in the autumn of 2008 when the financial crisis intensified, resulting in the worst recession in many decades. By the end of 2009, the unemployment rate reached a horrifying 10 percent, corresponding to more than 15 million Americans being out of work, with all of the attendant social consequences, including lost income and wealth, mortgage foreclosures, family strains, health problems, and so on.  Officially, the recovery from the recession began in the third quarter of 2009, but the pace of recovery has been modest. We have learned from recent comprehensive revisions of government economic data that the recession was deeper and the recovery weaker than had previously been thought. Indeed, the most recent reading on real gross domestic product (GDP) in the United States – the one for the second quarter of this year – still has not returned to the level that it had attained before the crisis, and the increases in economic activity over the past two years have been at a rate insufficient to achieve any sustained reduction in the unemployment rate.  The latest employment report issued by the Bureau of Labor Statistics was bleak. Private-sector employers added only 17,000 nonfarm jobs in August, far fewer than the already weak average monthly gain of about 110,000 recorded over the previous three months. The headline unemployment rate was 9.1 percent, representing about 14 million Americans who were out of work in August.  Nonetheless, as many families know, the headline unemployment numbers don’t fully capture the weakness in labor market conditions. Beyond the headline number, an additional 8.8 million workers were classified as “part time for economic reasons” in August because their hours had been cut back or they were unable to find a full-time job. In addition, about 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 2-1/2 million Americans were classified as “marginally attached” to the labor force because even though they wanted to get a job, they had not searched for one in the past four weeks. And almost half of that group – nearly 1 million individuals – have given up searching for employment altogether, because they do not believe any jobs are available for them.  So it is not just those who are currently classified as unemployed who are excluded from work. The underemployed, the marginally attached, and the discouraged – all of whom are concerned about the security of their livelihood, their housing, and the rising cost of living – can speak powerfully to the weaknesses of the recovery.  The economic data in this regard correspond to what I have seen firsthand over the past several years. I have traveled to once-robust manufacturing cities in the Midwest and have observed vacant lots, burnt-out factories, metal scrap heaps, and foreclosed homes. I have visited unemployment insurance offices and job training centers, and I have met lots of people who have been out of work for more than a year or two – out of work for so long that some of them are embarrassed to show their resumes to potential employers.  These circumstances have called for forceful policy measures. I will now talk about the conventional and unconventional actions that the Federal Reserve, for its part, has taken to foster economic recovery and job creation.  Conventional monetary policy actions The conventional tool of monetary policy is to modify the near-term path of interest rates. To be more specific, a reduction in current short-term rates and a corresponding downward shift in private-sector expectations about the future path of such rates will tend to reduce borrowing rates for households and businesses, including auto loan rates, mortgage rates, and other longer-term interest rates. This policy accommodation also tends to raise household wealth by boosting the stock market and prices of other financial assets.  With greater household wealth and cheaper borrowing rates, consumers tend to increase their purchases of houses, cars, and various other goods and services. In response, businesses ramp up their production to meet the increased level of sales. Moreover, with lower costs of financing new equipment and structures, businesses may be inclined to increase their own spending on investment projects that they might previously have seen as only marginally profitable. In the near term, firms can meet increased demand by resorting to temporary and part-time workers, but over time they have strong incentives to increase the number of regular full-time employees. Consequently, the monetary accommodation leads to greater job creation, though sometimes with substantial time lags.  The Federal Reserve has used this policy tool aggressively since the onset of the financial crisis. In particular, the federal funds rate target, which stood at 5-1/4 percent in mid-2007, was subsequently reduced to a range of 0 to 1/4 percentage point by the end of 2008, and that target range has been maintained since then. Indeed, because currency has an implicit interest rate of exactly zero, economists generally agree that a zero interest rate is the effective lower bound for the federal funds rate because investors could simply choose to hold cash if a central bank tried to drive short-term interest rates significantly below zero. In effect, therefore, the FOMC has been deploying its conventional policy tool to the maximum extent possible since late 2008.  Rather than reviewing the vast academic literature regarding the effect of conventional monetary policy, I will simply pose the counterfactual question: What would have happened to U.S. employment if monetary policy had failed to respond forcefully to the financial crisis and economic downturn? Economic models – the Fed’s and others – suggest that if the federal funds rate target had been held at a fixed level of 5 percent from the fourth quarter of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 2007 until now, rather than being reduced to its actual target range of 0 to 1/4 percent,1 then the unemployment rate would be several percentage points higher than it is today. In other words, by following our actual policy of keeping the target funds rate at its effective lower bound since late 2008, the Federal Reserve saved millions of jobs that would otherwise have been lost. Of course, substantial uncertainty surrounds various specific estimates, but there should be no doubt that the FOMC’s forceful actions helped mitigate the consequences of the crisis and thereby spared American families and businesses from even greater pain.  Unconventional monetary policy actions Given the magnitude of the global financial crisis and its aftermath, the Federal Reserve clearly needed to provide additional monetary accommodation beyond simply keeping short-term interest rates close to zero. Consequently, like a number of other major central banks around the world, the FOMC has been deploying unconventional policy tools to promote the economic recovery.  In particular, we have provided conditional forward guidance about the likely future path of the federal funds rate, and we have engaged in balance sheet operations that involve changes in the size and composition of our securities holdings. Broadly speaking, these policy tools affect the economy through channels that are similar – though not identical – to those of conventional monetary policy. I’ll now spend a few minutes describing how each form of unconventional policy can be helpful in promoting a stronger economic recovery.  Monetary policy communication An essential element of good monetary policy is effective communication. In a democratic society, central banks have the responsibility to clearly and fully explain their policy decisions. Good communication is also essential for strengthening the effectiveness of monetary policy. Expectations about the future play a key role in the decision-making of households and firms: how much to spend, save, work, invest, or hire. Moreover, when financial market participants understand how the central bank is likely to react to incoming information, asset prices can adjust in ways that reinforce the central bank’s expected policy actions and thereby support the central bank’s objectives. Finally, clear communication can help anchor the public’s long-term inflation expectations and hence improve the extent to which the central bank can take forceful actions to promote job creation in a context of price stability.  With the federal funds rate constrained by its effective lower bound, effective communications with the public have become more important than ever. Since 2009, the Federal Reserve has published the Committee participants’ longer-run projections of the inflation rate, the unemployment rate, and economic growth four times a year in conjunction with the minutes of FOMC meetings. Based on their longer-run projections for inflation, Committee participants judge that an inflation rate of 2 percent or a bit less, as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent with our statutory mandate of maximum employment and price stability.2 The Committee currently strives for as low an unemployment rate as possible, consistent with price stability. In our most recent projections, Committee participants estimated that the longer-run sustainable rate of                                                  1  The simulation described here assumes, as is common in the literature, that the policy follows its historically typical behavior once the assumed counterfactual path for the federal funds rate ends. 2  As indicated in figure 2c of the June 2011 Summary of Economic Projections, 11 out of 17 Committee participants projected a longer-run inflation rate for personal consumption expenditures of 2 percent while the remaining participants’ projections were a bit below 2 percent; see  www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20110622epa.htm#figure2c. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches unemployment is around 5 to 6 percent – well below the current unemployment rate of 9.1 percent.  Since December 2008, the FOMC has been providing conditional forward guidance about the likely path of the target federal funds rate. From March 2009 through June 2011, the Committee’s forward guidance indicated that exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate were likely to be warranted “for an extended period.” In August, we decided to be more specific about the timing, and our two most recent meeting statements have indicated that “economic conditions – including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run – are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013.”3  Forward guidance can provide monetary accommodation by leading investors to expect a longer period of low interest rates. As I noted earlier, a downward shift in the expected path of the federal funds rate is associated with reduced longer-term interest rates and generates a significant boost to consumer and business spending. Simulations of the FRB/US model and other evidence suggest that forward guidance can be a potent tool of monetary policy.4  Balance sheet operations Since late 2008, the FOMC has engaged in two rounds of large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs). The first round of LSAPs involved purchases of about $1.4 trillion in agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and agency debt securities and about $300 billion in longer-term Treasury securities; those purchases were executed during 2009 and the first quarter of 2010. The second round of LSAPs – often referred to as QE2 – involved an additional $600 billion in purchases of longer-term Treasury securities and was completed at the end of June of this year.  By purchasing longer-term securities in the open market, the Federal Reserve can exert downward pressure on longer-term yields, thereby reducing private borrowing rates and raising household wealth. Consequently, just as with conventional monetary policy, LSAPs help boost consumer spending, business investment, and net exports. And the resulting increase in aggregate demand helps generate a stronger pace of job creation.5  At last week’s FOMC meeting, the Committee announced that we intend to extend the average maturity of our securities holdings over the coming months by selling $400 billion of short-term Treasury securities and purchasing an equivalent amount of long-term Treasury securities. This maturity extension program – referred to by some as Operation Twist – should exert downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and help make broader financial conditions more accommodative, thereby supporting a stronger economic recovery. Indeed, recent work by an economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco suggests that a similar policy put in place in 1961 had effects on longer-term interest rates that were roughly comparable to those of QE2.6                                                   3  The August and September FOMC meeting statements, as well as related FOMC information, are available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. 4  See Janet L. Yellen (2011), “Unconventional Monetary Policy and Central Bank Communications,” speech delivered at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 25,   www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20110225a.htm. 5  See Hess Chung, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John C. Williams (forthcoming), “Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking. 6  See Eric T. Swanson (2011), “Let’s Twist Again: A High-Frequency Event-Study Analysis of Operation Twist and Its Implications for QE2 (PDF),”  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2011–08 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February),  www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/papers/2011/wp11-08bk.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Another significant policy action taken at last week’s FOMC meeting is that the principal payments from our holdings of agency securities will now be reinvested in agency MBS rather than in Treasury securities. Our announcement appears to have been successful in narrowing the spread between rates on agency MBS and Treasury securities of comparable maturity. That spread had widened substantially since earlier this year, and the continuation of such a trend could have pushed up mortgage rates and adversely affected the housing sector.  Potential attenuating factors In my judgment, the Federal Reserve’s deployment of our policy tools has been completely appropriate in promoting maximum employment and price stability. Ideally, such policy decisions would be informed by precise quantitative information about the effects of each tool. In reality, however, the estimated effects of the FOMC’s policy actions are subject to considerable uncertainty. Such uncertainty is intrinsic to real-world monetary policymaking at any time but is particularly relevant under circumstances where the scope for conventional monetary policy is constrained by the zero lower bound on the federal funds rate, leaving unconventional tools as the only means of providing further monetary accommodation.  Although these monetary policy tools have been successful in pushing down interest rates across the maturity spectrum, the magnitude of the transmission to economic growth and employment has been somewhat more muted than I might have expected. Indeed, it seems plausible that the effectiveness of our policy tools is being attenuated by a number of unusual persisting factors, including an excess supply of housing and impaired access to credit for many households and small businesses.  Under normal circumstances, residential construction is an interest-sensitive sector of the economy that has played an important role in contributing to previous economic recoveries – especially the brisk recovery that followed the steep downturn in 1981 and 1982. In the wake of the bursting of the housing bubble, however, the housing sector has remained exceedingly weak. In effect, there is an excess supply of housing that seems likely to decline only gradually despite the record-low level of mortgage rates. Thus, in this crucial sector, one can argue that lower interest rates have not shown through to higher activity in the same way that would be expected under more usual recoveries.  Consumer spending is also being restrained by the excess supply of housing, which has put downward pressure on home equity values and household wealth. A substantial portion of homeowners now have negative home equity and are effectively unable to refinance at historically low mortgage rates. Many more have seen a drastic decline in the value of their homes, which would typically serve as collateral for home equity lines of credit or second mortgages.  The slow progress in repairing and restructuring households’ balance sheets may also be lowering the normal responsiveness of consumer spending to a decline in market interest rates. In particular, lenders continue to maintain relatively tight terms and standards on credit cards and, to a lesser extent, other consumer loans. Consequently, many households may be unable to take advantage of the lower borrowing rates that are available to those who have a high net worth and pristine credit records.  Many small businesses also appear to be facing unusual obstacles in obtaining credit. If times were more typical, we would expect a smooth transmission in which lower interest rates would fuel credit expansion that would be used to finance expanding payrolls, capital investment, inventories, and other short-term operating expenses. Nonetheless, the latest Federal Reserve Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, which was taken in July, indicated that although domestic banks continued to ease standards on their commercial and industrial loans, the net fraction reporting easing on such loans to smaller firms (those with annual sales of less than $50 billion) remained low and was well below that 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches of loans to large and middle-sized firms.7 In its August survey, the National Federation of Independent Businesses reported a noticeable increase in the proportion of small businesses reporting that credit has become more difficult to obtain.8 These businesses not only expect credit to become tighter in coming months but – like other businesses – have turned sharply more pessimistic about the broader economic outlook.  Finally, and perhaps most comprehensively, it is worth observing that the financial crisis has undermined the wealth of many Americans. Low- and moderate-income families entered the recession with little financial buffer against the adverse effects of wage cuts, job loss, and drops in home values. According to the 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), home equity accounted for about half of the total net worth for low- and moderate-income families, which made them extremely vulnerable to the eventual housing market collapse.9 Families at the lower end of the income distribution saw a substantial drop in their net worth between 2007 and 2009, and families in the middle of the income distribution fared even worse.10 Combined with widespread unemployment, housing and stock price declines, and increasing rates of mortgage defaults, foreclosures, and bankruptcies, the assets of many American families have been significantly eroded. The effect of these developments may be to attenuate the revival of normal consumption patterns that would otherwise be dictating increases in consumer demand and growth.  Diversity of views Even if the usual effectiveness of monetary policy is being attenuated by the factors that I have mentioned, that conclusion should not be taken as implying that additional monetary accommodation would be unhelpful. Indeed, the opposite conclusion might well be the  case – namely, that additional policy accommodation is warranted under present circumstances.  My FOMC colleagues and I have recently been faced with complex decisions about the use of unconventional policy tools under extraordinary economic and financial conditions. And while we may not all agree with every decision, I believe that the public can have a very high degree of confidence in the fundamental integrity and soundness of our decision-making process.  Indeed, some commentators assign a label of “hawk” or “dove” to the various FOMC participants in an attempt to characterize how we prioritize the goals of maximum employment and price stability. In my view, such labels are ill conceived and misleading because everyone on the Committee is fully committed to promoting both of these goals. Incidentally, since my kids now love describing everyone as a hawk or a dove or some other kind of bird, I have taken to reminding them of this conviction I have: When my colleagues and I are doing our job correctly, we are neither hawks nor doves but owls – that is, we are trying to be as wise as possible in deploying all the tools we have to fulfill our legal mandate.                                                   7  The Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices is available on the Federal Reserve Board’s website at www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/SnLoanSurvey. 8  See National Federation of Independent Businesses (2011), NFIB Small Business Economic Trends (PDF) (Nashville: NFIB, August), www.nfib.com/Portals/0/PDF/sbet/sbet201108.pdf. 9  See Brian K. Bucks, Arthur B. Kennickell, Traci L. Mach, and Kevin B. Moore (2009), “Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2004 to 2007: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF),” Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 95 (February), pp. A1–A55, www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2009/pdf/scf09.pdf. 10  See Jesse Bricker, Brian K. Bucks, Arthur B. Kennickell, Traci L Mach, and Kevin B. Moore (2011), “Surveying the Aftermath of the Storm: Changes in Family Finances from 2007 to 2009 (PDF),” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011–17 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March),  www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2011/201117/201117pap.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 Conclusion In summary, the economic recovery has fallen well short of restoring labor market conditions to historically typical levels. Given the elevated rate of unemployment and the large number of individuals who are experiencing long spells of unemployment, both fiscal and monetary policymakers should be considering a wide array of approaches for promoting job creation. In my view, the deployment of our monetary policy tools needs to be carefully gauged, appropriately timed, and clearly communicated to the public. Moreover, to the extent that some factors may attenuate the usual effectiveness of monetary policy, there is a compelling case to identify and implement policy measures to mitigate those factors and thereby strengthen the effect of the monetary accommodation that we have already put in place. Finally, in light of the economic hardships that are facing our nation, I want to underscore that the Federal Reserve is fully committed to doing everything we can to promote maximum employment in the context of price stability.  Thank you again for the opportunity to speak with you today, and I look forward to hearing your comments and questions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Inia Naiyaga: Exchange rate issues, monetary policy and inflation and more Response by Mr Inia Naiyaga, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the USP Fiji Update, Suva, 16 September 2011. *      *      * Professor Biman Prasad and his Team at USP The Diplomatic Corp Distinguished Speakers Ladies and Gentlemen A very good morning to you all. Thank you for the kind invitation to respond to the three papers that have just been presented today. I also take this opportunity to thank all the authors of the paper for their efforts in preparing their papers and also to Professor Biman’s Team for the excellent arrangements for this event.  My response will be on the issues relating to the exchange rate, monetary policy and inflation, Fiji’s economic performance and some exchange control issues.  1. Exchange rate issues a. There has been a growing tendency with empirical support towards more flexibility in the choice of exchange rate arrangement, globally. However, a more flexible exchange rate does not necessarily boost investor confidence as we have seen that most developing countries are currently trying to cope with the volatility of exchange rates. The pros and cons of moving to a more flexible exchange rate regime should be considered carefully.  b. The Reserve Bank reviews its exchange rate policy to ascertain its effectiveness and appropriateness in supporting its twin objectives of monetary policy – that is maintaining low inflation and maintaining an adequate level of foreign reserves. The Fiji dollar is pegged to a basket of five currencies (US dollar, Australian dollar, New Zealand dollar, Japanese yen and the Euro). The Reserve Bank assessed and evaluated the possibility of a flexible exchange rate regime with technical assistance from the International Monetary Fund last year. The move towards greater flexibility remains in consideration by the Reserve Bank. While the benefits of a more flexible exchange rate regime are clear, the timing needs to be carefully considered.  c. We note the finding in Dr Jayaraman’s paper on the impact of Fiji’s exchange rate pass through to inflation. We noted that the conclusion of the paper is in line with our internal assessment of the exchange rate pass through effect. The paper concludes that during the post coup period, a depreciation of Fiji’s domestic currency by 1 percent raises domestic prices by 0.37 percent, similar to our internal assessment of 0.4 percent.  2. Monetary policy and inflation a. Regarding Dr Patrick’s paper on RBF’s commitment to its monetary policy objectives given the current economic background – The RBF remains committed to its twin objectives – that is to maintain low inflation and an adequate level of foreign reserves. Inflation has been high at the moment and reached 10.4 percent last 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches month. As we all know, the inflation outcome has been influenced by external and policy related factors – most of which are beyond the control of monetary policy. Imported inflation alone accounts for more than 60 percent of our domestic inflation outcome. With the current demand side inflationary pressures weak at the moment, it is more appropriate that monetary policy remain accommodative to support some growth in the economy while at the same time vigilant on the potential second-round impact on inflation. Inflation is forecast to subside to 7 percent by the end of this year and further to 4.5 percent by the end of next year.  b. On to core inflation – in principle monetary policy should only respond to persistent price movements. The Reserve Bank has two core inflation measures which are the trimmed mean and excluding food and energy items inflation, both are widely accepted and used in many central banks to exclude temporary price pressures. Universally, it is hard to determine when that “temporary” impact will come to an end as there are a lot of factors that come into play at almost the same time. In Fiji, the big increase in food inflation from June 2010 to June 2011 to 11.3 percent was attributed to many factors. If we compare food inflation from June 2010 to December 2010, food prices only rose by around 2.0 percent which can be regarded as quite stable. As such most of the increase in food inflation only came about this year on account of the VAT rate change and the high food prices noted across the world during this period. By January 2012, we should see the impact of VAT fall from the core inflation measure. As to the impact of high world food prices, as soon as prices of these food commodities normalise abroad, core inflation should return to normal levels.  c. It was mentioned that Fiji had high rates of inflation by the middle of this year even after accounting for the impact of higher electricity tariffs and the increase in VAT which came into effect in November last year and January this year respectively. It was also mentioned that Seychelles which despite having a larger devaluation managed to bring down inflation to the same rate as Vanuatu. It is important to note that unlike Seychelles, Fiji’s major trading partners are Australia and New Zealand which are the major source markets for our imports of food, beverages and manufactured goods. The strong appreciation of the Australian and New Zealand dollar over the year has exacerbated the impact of already higher import prices feeding through to domestic inflation. These explain the large difference in the inflation rate in Fiji by mid 2011 even after accounting for the VAT and electricity price increases. On Vanuatu, we find their low inflation rate presented this morning very intriguing and we will talk to our counterpart about their experience.  3. Domestic economic performance a. The presentation by the IMF Regional Resident Representative – Dr. Yongzheng clearly highlights the performance of Pacific Island countries particularly Fiji since the global downturn in 2008 coupled with the renewed risks and policy challenges given current developments especially in the advanced economies.  b. We also agree that Fiji economy had a weaker recovery in 2010 from the contraction in 2009. While tourism and manufacturing picked up, in 2010, the sugar industry declined. However, other exports did pick up significantly in 2010 due to a rebound in global demand and also improvement in terms of trade for certain resource commodities such as gold, forestry and fish products.  c. We need to note that the significant migration of skilled labour force has affected Fiji’s growth potential, which may explain why the recovery in the Fiji economy  – despite its advantages – to some extent has been slower that most PICs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 d. The paper also raised some valuable points for Fiji and the Government has already taken steps to implement some of these. The establishment of the Land Bank is to encourage landowners to deposit land so that it can be leased out under long term tenure for commercial purpose use. The response from the land owners has been encouraging so far with the area of land deposited in the Land Bank surpassing the 2011 target in June. Sugar reforms are also underway with the Government taking the lead role in addition to allocating around $122 million in the 2011 Budget to support the sugar industry directly. Apart from the sugar industry, there is an urgent need to fast track other public sector reforms to ensure long-term macroeconomic stability.  e. The good news is that a stronger rebound in our domestic economy is envisaged for this year with growth expected across most sectors except for the construction sector. The current performance of most sectors to date have been mixed, with positive performances reflected in the tourism and related industries although other sectors remained weak. The economy is expected to grow by 2.7 percent in 2011, however, this figure is currently under review. The new figure is expected to be announced during the 2012 Budget Address.  f. As mentioned in the presentation, the growth in remittances is encouraging and should support consumer spending, particularly in a time of sluggish economic growth. Looking ahead, we agree that it would be prudent for such funds to also be directed towards investment spending. Ongoing financial literacy education by the RBF, financial institutions and others, could encourage families who are recipients of remittance funds, to invest these money in income and revenue generating activities.  g. The views expressed on the effects of devaluation are noted. It is important to recognise that the positive effects of the devaluation were partially overshadowed by the downturn in global demand and the Fijian economy would have been in a much worse position now without the adjustment. We continue to encourage our exports sector to take advantage of this competitive gain by producing more to then be able to export more to other countries.  4. Exchange controls and other clarifications a. A statement made earlier by Dr Patrick regarding exchange controls needs to be corrected. The Reserve Bank assures all foreign investors that all funds introduced into Fiji including all profits are free to be repatriated at any time. At times, the outflow is staggered for large amounts, like in the case of commercial banks. Over the last 6 years, a total of $1.05 billion was approved as outflows for profit remittances.  b. In responding to the concerns on the compulsory surrender of foreign exchange, the Exchange Control Act states that all foreign exchange are to be sold to a foreign exchange dealer. However, in order to cover for exchange rate risks, we have been allowing companies and businesses to hold foreign currency accounts to meet overseas payments – the total in these accounts currently stands at $100 million.  c. Regarding our foreign reserves cover, the Reserve Bank is now targeting  4–5 months of imports cover, higher than the standard benchmark of 3 months. The standard benchmark of foreign reserves is under study at the moment especially at the IMF given the growing complexity of our financial system and the associated increased vulnerability factors. We are doing well and at the moment, our foreign reserves level at $1.6 billion is sufficient to cover around 4.8 months of goods and non-factor services.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches d. Minor observation – It was noted in the first paper that we have six banks – we have four commercial banks and a development bank.  Conclusion With the current challenges in our economic environment both globally and domestically, the Reserve Bank has been proactive in its roles to support our economic recovery. We have eased our monetary policy stance and more recently we have been conducting moral suasion with the commercial banks in an effort to stimulate investment and credit especially to the priority sectors and support growth in domestic demand. We have and will continue to relax exchange controls in order to support overseas current payments which are conducive for business growth. This will also instil confidence to the investors and encourage investment as well. The Reserve Bank has rationalised and introduced the Import Substitution and Export Finance Facility which all exporters and businesses may access to boost exports and reduce imports. Energy renewable projects also qualify for this facility. $40 million is available under this scheme and the current usage is $20 million. The RBF lends funds to commercial banks, credit institutions and FDB at 2 percent and these lending institutions are allowed to charge interest rates up to a maximum of 6 percent.  The current Government’s concerted effort is vital and timely and we also support the call made by this panel for more variants on fiscal and incomes policies given the limitations faced by the monetary authorities. Nevertheless, a more positive outlook remains ahead with the reforms taking place and as the current mix of monetary and fiscal policies are aligned.  From the presentations that we have heard so far, investment is the key. We need to address all the obstacles to investment and address them accordingly. We need to ensure that the environment is conducive as well. It is also important that Fiji attracts the right type of investors.  We have heard a lot of issues and questions so far. What we need is solutions – practicable and relevant solutions that can be implemented.  Finally, I would like to add that this type of dialogue is healthy and provides an excellent platform for exchange of ideas so that we can all work together and move forward for a better Fiji. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Mark Carney: Some current issues in financial reform Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Institute of International Finance, Washington DC, 25 September 2011. *      *      * Thank you for the invitation to speak today. In the hope of addressing some of your concerns, I waded through the more than 1,000 pages of reports and notes that the Institute of International Finance (IIF) has produced over the past year. Your messages have been consistent, if not always concise, so I would like to focus on three particular concerns about the financial reform agenda you have recently expressed: 1. the consistency in implementation across jurisdictions; 2. the possibility of substantial regulatory arbitrage in the shadow banking system; and 3. the macroeconomic impact of the reforms. Before I do, allow me a general observation. The G-20 is undertaking a radical and comprehensive program to strengthen the regulation, supervision and infrastructure of the global financial system. Its ambition can hardly be a surprise. Four years ago, manifest deficiencies in capital adequacy, liquidity buffers and risk management led to the collapse of some of the most storied names in finance and triggered the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. The complete loss of confidence in private finance – your membership – could only be arrested by the provision of comprehensive backstops by the richest economies in the world. With about $4 trillion in output and almost 28 million jobs lost in the ensuing recession, the case for reform was clear then and remains so today. Let me now turn to your issues. Consistency in implementation Authorities are increasingly hearing concerns about the pitch of the playing field for Basel III implementation. Everyone is claiming to be a boy scout while accusing others of juvenile delinquency. However, neither merit badges nor detentions will be self-selected but, rather, determined by impartial peer review and mutual oversight. It is important to remember that the Basel rules have always been, and continue to be, international minimums, rather than a “one-size-fits-all” approach. There are legitimate reasons why implementation may differ across countries. Some countries will implement Basel III faster than others. The current transition period to 2019 for Basel III has been variously described as enlightened, leisurely and generous. It reflects a lowest-common-denominator compromise that gives the time needed to rebuild capital buffers in those crisis economies that are furthest from compliance. Some countries may decide it is not in their best interests to take full advantage of this flexibility. Indeed, how quickly the new rules are adopted is bound to be a function of both the current health of the financial system and the macrofinancial environment in each jurisdiction. In Canada, we expect banks to be fully compliant with Basel III (2019 definitions) by early in the transition period, which starts in January 2013. This reflects the strong starting positions of Canadian banks and the benefits of building capital in the face of currently buoyant credit expansion. Some will adopt tougher rules. Countries such as Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom, with very large banking sectors relative to their domestic economies, have 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches signalled their preference for higher loss-absorbency capacity. In these jurisdictions, since the failure of a major bank would have disproportionately large consequences, additional prudence is desirable. Finally, there will always be countries that opt for a tighter interpretation of the rules, even as they adhere to the international minimum standards. For example, national supervisors may take a more conservative approach to approving bank internal risk measurement systems under the advanced measurement approach of Basel II. I would stress that in order to foster a race to the top, Basel III permits better rules, but it is a minimum standard. As the IIF has emphasised, it is vital that we prevent regulatory fragmentation. In this regard, there are several new measures that will help to contain unwarranted differences in implementation across countries. For example, the new leverage ratio acts as a backstop that effectively limits differences in risk weights. Speaking from experience, we in Canada know that the leverage ratio protects banks from risks that people think are low but are, in fact, high. In addition, policy-makers are significantly enhancing the mutual-surveillance processes that each jurisdiction accepts as part of its membership on the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). In particular, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the standard-setting bodies, including the Basel Committee, are jointly developing an implementation-monitoring framework that will coordinate activities and include annual progress reports on a country-by-country basis to the FSB and G-20, as well as less frequent, but more in-depth, peer reviews. Ad hoc reviews of new legislation and regulations could also be conducted. In this regard, a review by the BCBS of new European and American rules would be welcome to build confidence today in the consistency of application in major jurisdictions. Coordinated FSB/BCBS monitoring mechanisms will be in addition to the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) annual Article IV surveillance and the IMF and World Bank’s periodic independent assessments across countries of compliance with international standards.1  All in all, while there will be legitimate reasons for some countries to adopt standards more quickly or to go beyond international minimums, there will be much less scope in the future for countries to give their banks a competitive advantage by not fully implementing the agreed global rules. If some jurisdictions do not comply, I am certain that you will let us know. The IIF’s commitment to fair application and peer review would complement official initiatives, and I urge you to develop a more formal approach. In the end, it is in your interests to comply. While there will be periods of exuberance during which aggressive banks and jurisdictions can sail close to the wind, financial history suggests that well-capitalised institutions and transparent systems will ultimately have premium ratings, valuations and outcomes. Regulatory arbitrage Let me turn to your second issue: regulatory arbitrage. There are valid concerns that the recent measures will push risk into shadow banking. Even as reforms make the core of the financial system more resilient, they increase incentives to move classic banking activities, such as maturity transformation and credit intermediation, to the unregulated periphery.                                                  1  The IMF and the World Bank jointly conduct both the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) and Reports of the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSCs). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 This tendency is of particular concern, given the role the shadow banking sector played in the run-up to the crisis. In the final years of the boom, when complacency about liquidity reached its zenith, the scale of shadow banking activity exploded. The value of structured investment vehicles, for example, tripled in the three years to 2007, and credit default swaps grew sixfold. The feedback to the regulated sector was pernicious. Financial institutions, including many banks, had come to rely on high levels of market and funding liquidity. For instance, short-term money markets, particularly repo markets, were the predominant source of financing for the one-third increase in the gross leverage of American investment banks, as well as British and European banks. The system’s exposure to market confidence was enormous. The crisis exposed how boom-bust liquidity cycles cascade through the shadow banking sector and reverberate on the regulated core. Market forces proved inadequate to manage these swings between confidence and despair. Today, despite the fact that shadow banking, or as we prefer to call it, market-based financing (MBF), is at least as large as the regulated sector in most jurisdictions, it is often unregulated and/or overseen by authorities without a systemic focus. This should change. As it does, regulation and supervision must strike a balance between mitigating systemic risks and realizing the benefits from financial deepening. Properly structured, shadow banking can increase efficiency, provide diversification, and spur competition and innovation. It has the potential to make the system more robust, provided it does not rely on the regulated sector for liquidity or pretend to provide it with liquidity in times of stress. However, experience also teaches that shadow banking activities mutate, usually through complex and highly leveraged instruments, into regulatory gaps created by the response to the last crisis. With all of this in mind, there are four broad categories of regulatory initiatives under consideration. The first, and most important, is indirect regulation through limits on the size and nature of banks’ exposure to shadow banking entities. Examples include tighter consolidation rules for bank-sponsored conduits and higher risk-based capital requirements for liquidity lines. These measures will help to reduce opportunities for regulatory arbitrage, in which banks seek to reduce capital or liquidity requirements by organising transactions wholly or in part through shadow banking entities while retaining much of the underlying tail risk. The second approach would try to address systemic risks in shadow banking directly. For example, macroprudential measures are being considered to address procyclical haircut and collateral rules for securities lending and repo transactions. These measures could do much to dampen liquidity cycles. Contagion could be further constrained by strengthening financial market infrastructure. In Canada, in the coming months, a central counterparty (CCP) for repo transactions will be launched. This repo CCP will strengthen counterparty credit risk management, reduce collateral and balance sheet requirements via netting, and reduce the impact if there were a failure of one of its participants. By helping to ensure that core funding markets are continuously open, the heart of the financial system will be more resilient to shocks. The third approach is to regulate shadow banking activities themselves, such as money markets and exchange-traded funds (ETFs), through disclosure obligations or restrictions on certain financial transactions and instruments. This will require dynamic monitoring of the financial system and coordination across authorities. Finally, the FSB is examining the possible regulation of shadow banking entities, such as hedge funds, that may pose systemic risks by limiting their maturity transformation and leverage. This last option should take into account the relative size of these institutions and the cumulative impact of other measures. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Whatever decisions are taken in the coming months, no one should be tempted to declare “mission accomplished.” In order to maintain systemic resilience, the monitoring, supervision and regulation of shadow banking will need to be dynamic.2  The recent loss incurred by UBS on its Delta One trading desk demonstrates the need for vigilant risk management of complex new products. Fortunately for the system, the loss was manageable, given the increased capital buffer at the bank, and a broader liquidity squeeze was avoided. The FSB has been prescient in highlighting the risks associated with synthetic ETFs.3 Synthetic ETFs are sometimes being used to fund illiquid collateral which, if financed on a bank’s balance sheet, would carry a higher risk weight. The potential for a procyclical liquidity cycle needs to be monitored carefully. Reform of the shadow banking sector offers an opportunity to ensure the consistency of the overall financial reform package. For example, capital rules will have to balance risks to institutions with the benefits of incentivizing direct and indirect settlement of standardized derivatives through CCPs. Liquidity standards and market infrastructure should reinforce the continuous availability of core funding markets. In this manner, both systemic resiliency and efficiency can increase. As authorities examine measures on a comprehensive, system-wide basis, adjustments may need to be made. Liquidity standards are one example. The Basel Committee and the Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS) are currently using the observation period to review contentious design issues concerning the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), such as uncertainty regarding how the liquid assets can be used in times of stress, and how the liquidity rules are supposed to operate in tandem with the new leverage ratio requirement. They are also examining potential unintended consequences on the commercial paper market and market-making for equities. The FSB’s work on shadow banking will shed more light on the intersection among these standards, key markets and economic performance. These issues need to be addressed before the new rules are fully implemented.4 There would appear to be little value in delaying decisions on potential amendments to the LCR beyond early in the new year. Work on the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NFSR) will take longer. Macroeconomic implications of financial reform Let me now turn to your third, most fundamental, concern. Based on the current challenging economic outlook, some argue that we should revisit the pace and breadth of financial reforms. This position is based on two questionable propositions. The first is that the prospect of financial reforms is contributing to current economic weakness. A corollary is that delayed implementation of the Basel III capital rules, for example, will somehow strengthen the recovery. Really?                                                  2  The FSB has developed a two-step approach to monitoring. The first step calls for a broad scanning of the shadow banking sector to understand the key developments and trends. The second involves detailed assessments of the activities and entities of the sector to identify systemic risks, paying particular attention to regulatory arbitrage, excessive maturity and liquidity transformation, imperfect credit risk transfer and undue leverage. Although the goal is to implement this approach by the end of 2012, obtaining sufficiently granular data will be a challenge. 3  “Potential Financial Stability Issues Arising from Recent Trends in Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs),” Financial Stability Board, 12 April 2011. 4  As part of this work on liquidity rules, banks have been asked to supply data every six months and to complete a detailed survey on their liquidity-management practices to help gather information about the impact of their practices on the financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Weak credit growth in the crisis economies is often cited as supporting evidence. However, the fact that household credit is flat to falling in the United States and the United Kingdom can hardly be a surprise. American and British households are overleveraged. With personal net worth substantially lower following the crisis, the need to rebuild balance sheets in an environment of economic uncertainty is quite naturally weighing on credit demand. In the vast array of countries that did not experience a home-grown financial crisis, the issue has been that household borrowing has been too robust, despite adherence to a common timetable for implementing Basel III. The issue in the crisis economies is primarily one of demand, not supply. More broadly, the G-20’s comprehensive reform program seeks to boost confidence in global financial institutions and markets by providing a path to a more resilient system and an end to government support. It is hard to see how backsliding would help. Indeed, at a time when the conviction of policymakers across a range of issues is being called into question, there appears to be little value in feeding this concern. Moreover, recall that the implementation timetable for Basel III begins in two years and ends in 2019. It is difficult to believe that prolonging this implementation phase even further would have a material impact on real economic outcomes. If some institutions feel pressure today, it is because they have done too little for too long, rather than because they are being asked to do too much, too soon. The second proposition is that, once implemented, the reforms will substantially reduce global growth. A recently released IIF report estimates output losses during the transition phase that are more than an order of magnitude greater than those produced by the Bank for International Settlements, the Bank of Canada, the IMF and other public institutions and academic bodies. Allow me to raise a few of the many problems with the IIF’s analysis. The IIF study assumes banks pay out most of their earnings and therefore must rely heavily on external sources to raise capital. Debt-fuelled consumption is a central driver of output growth in its econometric model, despite the obvious bias to reduce debt in most major economies. Monetary policy is assumed to be in suspended animation until 2020. While I would welcome the time off, this presumption is inconsistent both with the range of unconventional tools that central banks have and the medium-term prospects for the global economy. The estimated impact of the reforms on the cost of bank debt exceeds the increase experienced during the crisis! It is hard to see how more capital, better liquidity and stronger infrastructure would lead to such a result. Put differently, the IIF is suggesting that the current public subsidy of the financial sector is massive. Finally, the analysis assumes that all of these reform efforts are for naught as it includes none of the benefits. Given the recent experience, no one would argue that financial crises are without costs, and only the most jaded would argue that their probability and severity cannot be reduced. Countries like Canada and Australia, with well-capitalized and well-managed banks, did not experience any failures or bailouts. Partly as a consequence, their economies have substantially outperformed those of their advanced-economy peers. Our estimates indicate that even if Basel III were to reduce slightly the probability of such crises in the future, the potential gains would far exceed the cost of marginally slower growth. The Bank of Canada estimates a net present value of Basel III for G-20 economies is 30 per cent of GDP in present-value terms, or about $US13 trillion.5                                                   5  Assuming a 2-percentage-point increase in capital (plus liquidity changes). For Canada, estimates are approximately 13 per cent of GDP in present-value terms, which is equal to about Can$200 billion. See Bank of Canada, “Strengthening International Capital and Liquidity Standards: A Macroeconomic Impact 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches In short, while the worsening global economic outlook has implications for bank performance, it does not provide a rationale for delaying the implementation of Basel III. Conclusion To conclude, critics of reform generally succumb to three world-weary arguments:  any rule will be arbitraged;  any insurance will promote greater risk taking; and  there will always be financial crises. Such fatalism should be rejected. In no other aspect of human endeavour do men and women not strive to learn and to improve. The sad experience of the past few years shows that there is ample scope to improve the efficiency and resilience of the global financial system. By clarity of purpose and resolute implementation, we can do so. The current reform initiatives mark real progress. The fundamental objective of the G-20 measures is a resilient, global financial system that efficiently supports global growth. Our destination should be one where financial institutions and markets play critical – and complementary – roles to support long-term economic prosperity. This requires institutions that are adequately capitalized, with sufficient liquidity buffers to manage shocks. It also requires that market forces be allowed to determine the relative sizes and boundaries of the banking and shadow banking sectors; and that the market decides which firms prosper and which firms fail. The FSB has a clear role to oversee and coordinate the development of the G-20 reforms. It should provide a system-wide perspective and assess the total impact of reforms. It must strive to resolve any conflicts that may arise between regulations that are locally optimal but systemically inconsistent. It must balance the need to guard against regulatory arbitrage with the value of preserving diverse risk-taking strategies and productive innovation. Finally, it must ensure consistent implementation across jurisdictions to build an open and competitive system. It is also important not to lose sight of the limitations of regulation. New and better rules are necessary, but not sufficient. People will always try to find ways around them. Some may succeed, for a while. That is why good supervision is paramount. Rules are only as good as the supervisors who enforce them, and good supervisors look beyond the letter of the rules to their spirit. Of course, belief by the industry in the appropriateness of the measures will also aid their application. As you are well aware, you have the ultimate duty to ensure your institutions bear responsibly the risks you are taking. We have all learned from the events of the past few years, and so I look forward to a continued constructive dialogue with the IIF as we develop and implement this vital agenda. See also:  Financial System Reform Initiatives Mark Real Progress, Says Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada (Press Releases)                                                                                                                                                       Assessment for Canada,” August 2010, and M. Carney, “Bundesbank Lecture 2010: The Economic Consequences of the Reforms,” speech to Deutsche Bundesbank, Berlin, 14 September 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Duvvuri Subbarao: US recession anxiety and the eurozone sovereign debt crisis Intervention by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the International Monetary Fund Meeting, Washington DC, 23 September 2011. *      *      * 1. The messages that we heard are sharp, specific and candid. If I were asked to pick the headline message of the presentation, it is that we are rapidly running out of time, and may therefore be running out of solutions. 2.  The two big flashpoints are: renewed anxiety in the US about recession, and the deepening of the sovereign debt crisis in the Euro area. Each is by itself a big risk, but the bigger risk is that both could materialize simultaneously, and interact with each other with adverse feedback loops manifested through trade, finance and confidence channels. Political gridlock 3.  The problems are well known, and the solutions are on the table. The main impediment to an effective resolution common to both flashpoints appears to be political.  In the US, the central issue is managing the tension between fiscal stimulus in the immediate term, and credible fiscal consolidation over the medium to long term.  In the Euro area, there is a shared monetary framework, but without a shared fiscal framework. What is standing in the way of a credible and confidence inspiring resolution of the fiscal-financial imbroglio are political compulsions. Decoupling 4.  Let me look at the global situation from the perspective of the EMEs. Before 2008, it was intellectually fashionable to talk of “decoupling” – that EMDCs will continue to be resilient even if there is a downturn in advanced economies, because of improved macroeconomic policies, robust foreign exchange reserves and resilient financial flows. In an age of globalization, the decoupling theory was never persuasive. The 2008 crisis dented its credibility and the 2011 crisis has completely demolished it.  Channel of contagion to EMEs 5.  EMEs have been affected by both crises. Their macroeconomic stability, price stability and financial stability are jeopardized by the global crisis through several channels.  First, there is the trade channel. With growth stalled in the advanced economies, external demand is slowing and affecting the exports of EMEs.  The second channel of transmission is capital flows. The crisis is permeating to EMEs through risk aversion and deleveraging to produce volatility in capital flows and in financial markets. This is impacting financing conditions, with feedback to economic activity.  The third channel through which shocks are being transmitted is commodity prices. Spikes of volatility in the already elevated levels of commodity prices are stoking inflationary pressures in some of the EMEs and complicating macroeconomic management in the face of slowing growth. Among the drivers of commodity prices is accommodative monetary policy in advanced economies. Abundant liquidity is 
2   adding pressures to commodity prices. The negative outlook on growth should have driven down prices, but that has not been evident so far to any significant extent.  Fourth, macro-financial loops could come into play as another channel of transmission of shocks. Rising credit risks due to deterioration in asset quality could impair the capital of banks or even render it insufficient. This could trigger a cascade of deleveraging with attendant real economy consequences.  By far, the most important channel of transmission is the confidence channel which could hurt investment and growth prospects in EMEs – when confidence is hit, even strong fundamentals do not matter. 6.  The probability that all these channels become active and feed on each other is quite high. The impact on an EME depends on its objective conditions and on which channels become most active in its case. Thus, the crisis could affect different EMEs differently. But what is common across EMEs is that their growth momentum will be interrupted if the current global problems are not resolved quickly. Market signals 7.  In trying to reach a solution, it is important to recognize what the markets are signaling, even though, admittedly the basis of some of these market engendered fears may not be objective. Let me illustrate with a metaphor from physics. It is well known that Einstein could not reconcile to the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics all through his life. He famously said: “God does not play dice.” Less well known perhaps is the retort of his friend and mentor Niels Bohr who said: “Albert, stop telling God what he can or cannot do.” Similarly, it is possibly the case that all market signals are not objective. But as policy makers, we cannot presume to tell the market how to behave. We have to take market signals as given. The policy decisions that we take will be more effective if they are seen to be endorsed by markets. 2008 and 2011 8.  To understand the situation today, let us throw back to the global crisis of 2008. Then too, we faced similar extreme siege conditions of the global financial system, and the challenge of responding immediately and decisively to the crisis within the boundaries of democratic processes. We managed that challenge. The G-20’s leadership and the all-out efforts mounted by the IMF and other multilateral institutions to do what it takes to pull back the global economy from the brink of collapse and set it on a path of recovery were applauded across the world. 9.  There are important differences between the 2008 crisis and today’s situation. i. In 2008, when the world got into a crisis, there was a lot of policy force. In the years before the crisis, the world enjoyed the so called “Great Moderation” with steady growth in advanced economies and accelerated growth in the emerging economies, and low inflation all around. So we could attack the crisis with the full fire power of monetary and fiscal stimulus. Sadly, the policy space for stimulus is much less today.  ii. In 2008, the world responded to the crisis in coordination. Sure there were differences, but these differences were resolved, and governments and central banks acted firmly, decisively and where required creatively. A similar perception of coordination is lacking today. iii. In 2008, both advanced economies and EMDCs were at the same phase of the business cycle. Today, they are at different phases of the business cycle. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  iv. In 2008, the crisis originated in the financial sector and transmitted to the real sector, but the rescue was by the public sector. In 2011, it is the other way round. The crisis is originating in the public sector and hitting the financial sector, and undermining the confidence of the private sector.  10. Let me now conclude. There is a great deal of anxiety around the world about the outcome of this weekend’s Fund-Bank annual meetings and the G-20 meetings. There are strong expectations that we will converge on a plan of action that will reverse the crisis of confidence. We once again have to show the resolve that we did in 2008 to meet those expectations.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jürgen Stark: The global financial crisis and the role of monetary policy Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the 13th Annual Emerging Markets Conference 2011, Washington DC, 24 September 2011. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, I am very pleased to address this distinguished audience. Looking back over time, we see that the role and conduct of monetary policy has often changed in response to economic and financial crises. In fact, the international central banking community has always been eager to learn from past developments and experiences, also with respect to different experiences across countries. Of course, this does not imply that monetary policy in the past has always been the same everywhere. Certainly, differences exist in the way monetary policy is conducted across countries. But it is precisely because of the open-mindedness in discussing and the willingness to learn from each others’ experiences during the past century that monetary policy making went through an evolutionary process: an evolutionary process that improved the conduct of monetary policy over time and led to a great deal of convergence across countries.  Let me in my remarks briefly review this process. I will then discuss the specific lessons that we can learn from the recent episode of financial and economic turbulence, and conclude with the challenges ahead not only for monetary policy, but also for economic policies more generally.  It was in response to the major bank panics of the first half of the nineteenth century that the Bank of England adopted the “responsibility doctrine” proposed by Walter Bagehot.1 This required the Bank to lend freely on the basis of any sound collateral, but at a penalty rate to prevent moral hazard. Half a century later, the Federal Reserve System was established in the United States in response to frequent banking crises, in particular the crisis of 1907, to serve as a lender of last resort similar to the Bank of England.  Under the gold standard gold convertibility served as the economy’s nominal anchor and was used as a way to ensure trust in a currency. Before the establishment of central banks, private banks and governments issuing banknotes had often overextended their gold reserves. In a sense, early central banks were strongly committed to price stability. However, from the 1920s onwards many central banks fell under public control. The Great Depression led to a major reaction against central banks, which were accused of exacerbating the crisis. In virtually every country, monetary policy was placed under the control of the Treasury and fiscal policy became dominant. In many countries, central banks followed a low interest rate policy to both stimulate the economy and to help the Treasury in marketing its debt.  In the 1950s independent monetary policy making by central banks was restored, and this was accompanied by a brief period of price stability until the mid 1960s. The belief that unemployment could be permanently reduced at the expense of higher inflation resulted in very accommodative monetary policy in the 1970s, which led to an increase in inflation as inflation expectations started to rise. Only a few countries, such as Germany, were an exception to this rule, as the Bundesbank’s emphasis on monetary aggregates resulted in a much tighter monetary policy. By the end of the 1970s, central banks put renewed emphasis on credibility and started to tighten monetary policy so that inflation decreased significantly.                                                  1  See Bordo M. (2007), “A Brief History of Central Banks,” Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. 
2   In many countries central banks were granted independence and were given a mandate to keep inflation low. As a result, stable prices have become a fact of life for billions of people.  Today we are experiencing the worst economic and financial crisis of the post-war period. I am convinced that the knowledge gained as a result will again change and further sharpen the way we conduct monetary policy. So let me now share with you some thoughts on the direction in which I expect – and hope – monetary policy thinking to change in response to the current crisis.  The role of monetary policy and lessons from the financial crisis I think it is fair to say that there was a widespread consensus over some key elements of the pre-crisis monetary policy paradigm.2 In particular, against the background of the high inflation experience of the 1970s in many industrialised countries, the central bank consensus comprised three key elements: 1. Central bank independence as a corner stone for an effective monetary policy; 2. Price stability as the primary objective of central banks; and 3. Solidly anchored inflation expectations on the basis of transparent communication.  In addition, not least against the background of the “Great Moderation”, that is, the period of low inflation and macroeconomic stability in most industrialised countries which was observed during the 20 years before the crisis, the central bank consensus also emphasised three elements, to which the ECB has never subscribed. These are: 1. Monetary policy has a primary role in the management of aggregate demand in the short-run; 2. Money and credit indicators can be disregarded; 3. Monetary policy should react to asset price busts; not to asset price booms. Let me discuss how I see these elements from today’s perspective, particularly in the context of the recent experience of the global financial and economic crisis, and draw conclusions with regard to the usefulness of these elements for the future conduct of monetary policy.  Let me start with my general conclusion: In my view, the first three elements have proven to be very valuable assets during the crisis and I view them as absolutely essential to the success of monetary policy. The latter three elements of this consensus should be seriously reconsidered. I think the crisis has made a convincing case for a more medium term orientation of monetary policy, which takes into account information in money and credit indicators, and which tries to lean against the wind as financial imbalances start to develop and pose risks to price stability in the medium term.  Let me now elaborate on the above elements and draw some conclusions: Firstly, the crisis has – in my view – crucially underlined the importance of central bank independence as a corner stone of credible and effective monetary policy making. Of course, central bank independence is a precondition of effective monetary policy at all times. It is an important lesson which is not only evidenced by events in the history of central banking, but also by the academic literature, that any blurring of responsibilities can potentially lead to a                                                  2  See Goodfriend (2007), “How the World Achieved Consensus on Monetary Policy,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 47–68; Mishkin F. (2007), “Will Monetary Policy Become More of a Science?,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Federal Reserve Board, 2007–44; Woodford M. (2009), Convergence in Macroeconomics: Elements of the New Synthesis,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1,  267–279. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  loss of credibility for the central bank. Such a situation would ultimately undermine the effectiveness of monetary policy.3 The effectiveness of monetary policy on the basis of institutional and operational independence was, however, fundamental during the crisis. During the turbulent market conditions that we experienced central banks had to implement extraordinary measures, both in terms of reducing policy rates to levels that are unprecedented, and in terms of unconventional liquidity measures. If these measures  – untested as they are – are to be expected to exert any impact on economic decisions, they have to be seen by market participants as the result of an autonomous decision by the central bank. They have to be seen as consistent with its overall policy framework, rather than as the result of pressures from fiscal authorities. The reason is simple. If a central bank comes under pressure in times of crisis, and succumbs to that pressure, it is very unlikely to exit from such extraordinary measures in a timely manner. This may unanchor inflation expectations and thus undermine the effectiveness of the measures implemented during the crisis.  Secondly, regarding the objective of price stability and the anchoring of inflation expectations, the crisis taught us that well-anchored inflation expectations can act as an automatic stabiliser when uncertainty becomes destabilising. This is always true, in good times as well. In fact, well-anchored inflation expectations in the euro area were instrumental in avoiding large interest rate hikes before the crisis, when commodity prices rose sharply. At the height of the crisis, they became a policy instrument in their own right. Thanks to well-anchored inflation expectations we could avoid deflationary spirals and real interest rates could be reduced in tandem with nominal rates. It is noteworthy that if inflation expectations are well anchored, and are not affected by transient shocks to actual inflation, there is no need to manipulate monetary policy frameworks: there is no need to increase the inflation target as a means of resisting deflationary risks in times of macroeconomic distress.4 Opportunistic manipulations of the monetary policy framework of course damage the foundations on which that framework rests. So, being able to rely on the stabilising effect of inflation expectations is clearly a preferable option.  Let me now turn to the elements of the consensus that are, from the perspective of the ECB, somewhat more controversial.  Firstly, the crisis has demonstrated that a monetary policy aimed at fine-tuning short-term objectives carries serious risks. Before the crisis, there was a widely-held conviction that monetary policy could focus more on short term demand management because inflation was firmly under control. Proponents of this view found support in the phenomenon of the “Great Moderation” observed in the twenty years before the crisis, a time of widespread macroeconomic stability and low inflation in most industrialised countries. Nonetheless, there were clear signs – and also warnings – that this short-term orientation could have negative side effects in the medium to long term.5 As you know, these side effects manifested themselves in a spectacular build-up of monetary and financial imbalances. Although monetary policy frameworks oriented towards the medium term could probably not have completely prevented the current crisis, I am convinced that they would have helped to make it less disruptive.                                                   3  See Kydland F. and E. Prescott (1977), “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans”, Journal of Political Economy, 85, pp. 473–492; and Barro R. and D. Gordon (1983), “Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy”. Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, pp. 101–121. 4  See for instance Blanchard O., Dell’Ariccia G. and P. Mauro (2010), “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy”, IMF Staff Position Note, No 10/03. 5  See Rajan R. (2005), “The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future,” speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium on “Rethinking Stabilisation Policy,” Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
4   Typically, policies of short-term demand management rely heavily on inflation forecasts and output gap measures. Experience, especially prior to the crisis, has revealed the risks of constructing policy on indicators and variables which are not sufficiently robust. Let me take the output gap as an example. As the literature has clearly shown, the empirical proxies used to capture the output gap are subject to constant revisions.6 Policy-makers who base their decisions mainly on such assessments of the cyclical position can be led very much astray. For instance, The Great Inflation of the 1970s occurred, to a large extent, due to measurement errors in the real-time estimates of the output gap combined with an overreaction to output gap measures when assessing the state of the economy.7 Arguably, the same can be said of the low interest rates implemented for a prolonged period in the middle of the previous decade.8 Monetary policies aimed at fine-tuning short-term objectives also run a serious risk of inducing too much policy forbearance for too long. Exiting an extraordinary accommodative mode too late can sow the seeds of future imbalances. As the economy recovers from an exceptionally deep recession, real time output gap estimates and estimates of structural unemployment or the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU) are particularly uncertain. Potential output is likely to have fallen for a variety of reasons. This could be due to a mismatch between the skills of workers that lose their jobs and the skills required in new vacancies. Another phenomenon is that economic growth after a financial crisis tends to be much slower due to the debt overhang.9 While emphasis on measures of the output gap can give the impression that output could be increased by monetary means, it becomes an illusion if the problem is due to a mismatch of skills or a debt overhang. Only structural policies can address these problems. Second, with respect to the claim that money and credit do not matter for successful monetary policy making, the experiences of the past three years have proven that this conventional wisdom is simply wrong. By including an analysis of money and credit developments in their monetary policy strategy, central banks can ensure that important information stemming from money and credit, typically neglected in conventional cyclical forecasting models of the economy, is considered in the formulation of monetary policy decisions. There is compelling empirical evidence showing that, at low frequencies – that is over medium to longer-term horizons – inflation shows a robust positive association with money growth.10 Monitoring credit growth can also be useful in identifying other sources of unsustainable credit developments, even if some of them cannot necessarily be eliminated by monetary policy tools, and would instead require action of a macro-prudential nature. After years of oblivion, macroeconomic theory seems to have caught up with reality and shifted its attention                                                  6  See Orphanides A. and S. van Norden (2002), “The Unreliability of Output-Gap Estimates in Real Time,” Review of Economics and Statistics 84, pp. 569–583; and Orphanides A. and S. van Norden (2005), “The Reliability of Inflation Forecasts Based on Output Gap Estimates in Real Time,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 37, pp. 583–601. 7  See ECB (2010), “The “Great Inflation”: Lessons for monetary policy”, Monthly Bulletin, May 2010; and Orphanides A., (2002), “Monetary Policy Rules and the Great Inflation,” American Economic Review, 92, pp. 115–120. 8  See Taylor J. (2007), “Housing and Monetary Policy,” in Housing, Housing Finance, and Monetary Policy, Proceedings of Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 9  See Reinhart C. and V. Reinhart (2010), “After the Fall,” NBER working Paper Series, No 16334. 10  See Benati L. (2009), “Long-run evidence on money growth and inflation”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 1027. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  to credit and leverage as critical parameters that a central bank should consult regularly to measure the pulse of the economy.11 The ECB had consistently used these indicators even when they were derided as relics of a defunct monetary doctrine. They proved useful. They gave information about financing conditions and the financial structure, as well as about the condition and behaviour of banks, when these sources of information were critical to the assessment of the health of the transmission mechanism and, more broadly, the state of the business cycle. This dimension of monetary analysis has proven particularly valuable in shaping the ECB’s response to the financial crisis. There is indeed evidence in support of the fact that, without duly taking monetary analysis into account, inflation in the euro area would have been distinctly higher at times of financial exuberance and would have fallen deep into negative territory in the wake of the financial markets’ collapse, starting in the autumn of 2008. The economy as a whole would have been more volatile.12 And thirdly, with regard to the pre-crisis consensus on monetary policy not to act on asset price bubbles, the crisis has vividly demonstrated that bursting asset price bubbles can be extremely costly. The public policy response to the crisis has – even when being successful in attenuating the immediate impact of a financial crisis on the real economy – carried substantial fiscal costs and has led to significant output losses. To confine ourselves to “ex-post” policies is, therefore, not enough and calls for effective “ex-ante” policies. The main policy tools in this regard are, of course, appropriate regulatory and supervisory policies. Before the crisis, these preventive tools were insufficient to deal with the build up of asset price imbalances in the pre-crisis period. Lessons have been learned, and with the re-design of the supervisory architecture in many countries around the world, and the Basel III regulatory reforms, enhanced preventive tools are underway.  But also from a monetary policy perspective, greater emphasis on “ex-ante” prevention is warranted. To the extent that financial imbalances are accompanied by excessive monetary and credit growth with possible implications for the medium term outlook on inflation, central banks do indeed have an obligation to take appropriate action. With respect to the ECB, our focus on medium term definitions of price stability, as well as the use of money and credit in our monetary pillar, already provides some “leaning” against the build up of asset price imbalances. Therefore, in my view, a cautious leaning against excessive money and credit growth and building up of financial imbalances as part of our general monetary policy framework cannot only contribute to financial stability, but most importantly to achieve our primary objective of maintaining price stability. Let me now turn to the economic challenges lying ahead of us, and the role monetary policy should play in overcoming these challenges. The challenges ahead and the role for monetary policy The global financial crisis is far from over. By now the global financial crisis has gone through a number of different phases. Initially the crisis started in the sub-prime mortgage market during the summer of 2007, and became very intense in September 2008 with the default of                                                  11  See Adrian T. and H. S. Shin, (2010), “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No 398; and Brunnermeier M. and L. Pedersen (2010), “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,” The Review of Financial Studies, 22, pp. 2201–2238; and Geanakoplos J. (2010), “Solving the Present Crisis and Managing the Leverage Cycle,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, pp. 101–131. 12  See Fahr S., Motto R., Rostagno M., Smets F. and O. Tristani (2010), “Lessons for monetary policy strategy from the recent past,” paper presented at the 6th ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt am Main,  18–19 November 2010. 
6   Lehman Brothers. Subsequently, financial woes spilled over into the real economy, resulting in recessions in almost all industrialised countries. Monetary and fiscal policy countered this with unprecedented vigour. Monetary policy responded with very low interest rates and a wide range of non-standard measures. Fiscal policy allowed public deficits to widen and set up rescue packages for troubled financial institutions. To a large extent thanks to these measures, economic activity rebounded in 2010. But at the same time, countries that had entered the financial crisis with large public and private debt burdens started to have serious problems accessing sovereign debt markets. In 2011 the tensions in sovereign debt markets intensified further due to increasing concerns about long-term debt sustainability in various parts of the world. These developments have further threatened financial stability as financial institutions hold a significant share of troubled countries’ government bonds. Here, the onus is clearly on governments to engage in the necessary fiscal corrections. However, this does not only mean exiting from the fiscal stimulus and support measures taken in response to the crisis. Even with these measures reversed, fiscal policy still faces at least three important challenges. First, excluding crisis-related stimulus measures, most advanced economies are still left with historically high deficit-to-GDP ratios, which, in the context of today, are largely structural in nature. To put it another way, given the lower actual and potential post-crisis output and correspondingly lower post-crisis tax revenues, pre-crisis spending levels are no longer affordable. Secondly, government debt-to-GDP ratios are now much higher than before the crisis, and the guarantees provided to the financial sector have added to the potential liabilities. Thirdly, over the next two to three decades, governments face rising costs related to ageing populations. Due to the combination of these factors, questions are – unsurprisingly – being asked about the ability of some governments to bring their public finances onto a sustainable path over the medium term.  In this regard, let me point out that the state of public finances in the euro area differs significantly across countries. According to the IMF the debt-to-GDP ratio ranges from 6 percent in Estonia to 152 percent in Greece in 2011, while the aggregate debt-to-GDP ratio for the euro area stands at 87 percent. But let me also emphasise that restoring sound public finances is not only a challenge for the euro area. As I mentioned before, government deficits and debt levels in many advanced economies outside the euro area have also risen to historically high levels, at least in a time of peace. For the largest industrialised countries such as the US, UK and Japan, according to the IMF the debt-to-GDP ratio in 2011 ranges from 83 percent in the UK, to 100 percent in the US and 229 percent in Japan. The state of public finances clearly matters for central banks. At least from a theoretical point of view, one of the reasons is that monetary policy could in principle be used – or abused – to alleviate a government’s budgetary woes. The regime that has prevailed in advanced economies over the last three decades has been a regime of monetary dominance, under which central banks can pursue price stability-oriented policies without having to take into account the government’s budget constraints. Central banks have been given an explicit mandate to maintain price stability and have been protected by legal provisions guaranteeing their independence.  Credible, stability-oriented monetary policy frameworks are assets that have been difficult to acquire and must not be put at risk. As I have pointed out, monetary policy thinking went through a remarkable evolutionary process during the last century which resulted in price stability for billions of people. As serious questions have arisen about the medium term sustainability of public finances in a significant number of industrialised countries, we cannot but conclude that the same evolutionary process did not happen to fiscal policy making. Fiscal policy making has not managed to converge to a framework with clear principles and medium term objectives.13 Growing doubts about governments’ ability to deliver sustainable                                                  13  See Leeper E. (2010), “Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy,” NBER Working Paper Series, No 16510. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  public finances could at some point also cast doubt on the sustainability of the prevailing regime of monetary dominance. This would lead to an increase in inflation expectations or at least heightened uncertainty about the inflation outlook in the medium term. It is a fallacy to think that loose monetary policy can solve the large structural problems we are facing. Central banks must not become the victims of their own success and should not become overburdened. Historically, whenever policy makers tried to broaden the role of monetary policy beyond its original role as a guardian of the value of a currency, it had to compromise on its objective of price stability. For monetary policy to remain effective, its responsibilities must remain within clear limits. Instead, we need a growth model that is different from the one during the years before the financial crisis. We need economic growth that is based on a genuine increase in productivity, and not on low interest rates and the accumulation of debt. The unlimited accumulation of private and public debt before the financial crisis has now become a burden on economic growth and should be reduced progressively.14 To achieve this we need far-reaching structural reforms that increase competition in labour and goods markets, more financial supervision, and a stronger fiscal policy framework.  We must reform financial supervision and strengthen economic governance so that economic policy becomes less pro-cyclical. Basel III is a very important step in the right direction, as it should provide for higher minimum capital requirements and better risk provisions by financial institutions. Still, regulation of the banking system and financial markets has not yet progressed sufficiently. Fiscal policy should be more grounded in a rules-based framework with clear medium term objectives, similar to monetary policy. The adoption of fiscal rules by some countries is clearly an improvement. In the euro area, a number of steps have been undertaken to strengthen economic governance so that concerns about competitiveness and fiscal policy can be addressed pre-emptively. But for the ECB these steps do not go far enough. For rules and sanctions to be fully credible they should be stricter and automatic – not subject to the political process – so that countries have the right incentives to address their problems.                                                  14  See Cecchetti S., Mohanty M. and F. Zampolli (2011), “The real effects of debt,” paper presented at the 2011 Annual Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium, 25–27 August; Rother, P., L. Schuknecht and J. Stark, (2010) The Benefits of Fiscal Consolidation in Uncharted Waters, ECB Occasional Papers, No 121. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Vítor Constâncio: Laudatio for Professor Kenneth Rogoff, recipient of the 2011 Deutsche Bank Prize in Financial Economics Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Laudatio for Professor Kenneth Rogoff, recipient of the 2011 Deutsche Bank Prize in Financial Economics, Frankfurt am Main, 22 September 2011. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a great pleasure to address a few words to mark the awarding of the 2011 Deutsche Bank Prize in Financial Economics to Professor Kenneth Rogoff of Harvard University. I will recall some of Professor Rogoff’s outstanding contributions to economics and financial economics, and I will also comment on some of his research in the context of the responses to the current crisis. Let me first emphasise that research plays a crucial role for the Eurosystem – just as it does for other central banks. Indeed, research has provided an essential input to the definition of the ECB’s price-stability monetary policy strategy. I would thus like to express my appreciation to Professor Rogoff for the influential contributions he has made in many fields of special relevance to central bank policymakers, ranging from monetary policy to international finance and financial crises. He merits particular praise for helping us to improve our understanding of some of the main causes and mechanisms behind the links between financial crises and sovereign debt crises. Early in his career Professor Rogoff worked as a central banker in the International Finance Division at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. In this period, he wrote two of the most celebrated papers in monetary economics and international finance. One, which appeared in 1985 in the Quarterly Journal of Economics under the title “The optimal degree of commitment to an intermediate monetary target”, is especially cherished among central bankers (and still his most cited contribution according to Google Scholar with over 2,100 citations). It forcefully laid out the rationale for the delegation of monetary policy to an independent central bank with an explicit price stability objective, a fundamental principle obviously enshrined in the ECB mandate. The second contribution, co-authored with Richard Meese, appeared in 1983 in the Journal of International Economics under the title “Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies: Do they fit out of sample?” and is one of the most cited papers in international finance. It established key empirical regularities about major currencies exchange rates. The implication that nominal exchange rates are best modelled as unpredictable “random walks” is still the basis of the best practice followed by many institutions. This paper marked the beginning of Professor Rogoff’s long-standing prominence in the field of international finance and was followed by a steady flow of equally distinguished contributions, in some instances literally re-writing history. This was the case with “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A Reinterpretation” co-authored with Carmen Reinhart and published in the Quarterly Journal of Economics in 2004. Professor Rogoff has also been at the forefront of modelling efforts in the field of International macroeconomics, particularly with a view of replacing the Mundell-Fleming-Dornbusch open economy model, previously the workhorse of virtually all policy analysis in international economics both inside and outside central banks. This ground-breaking effort, reflected in the work written jointly with Maurice Obstfeld entitled “Foundations of International Macroeconomics”, gave birth to a new field in “new open economy macroeconomics” and spurred a vast and ever-growing literature. This new approach has allowed both researchers and policymakers to analyse substantive issues, such as current 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches account and fiscal imbalances, and to provide a welfare-theoretic perspective on global macroeconomic policy. As the IMF’s chief economist between 2001 and 2003, Professor Rogoff launched the development of a large-scale version of his model with Maurice Obstfeld, the Global Economy Model (GEM), one of the first fully-fledged Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models to be used for policy analysis. More recently, he has offered us invaluable insights into financial crises. His 2009 best-selling book with Carmen Reinhart, This Time Is Different, is a landmark work. This tour-de-force, drawing on data for 70 countries over 800 years, provides evidence that financial crises are far more universal, and that there are far more quantitative similarities in their aftermath, than previously believed. The “this-time-is-different-syndrome” is a powerful reminder of the dangers of complacency. One key observation is that financial crises are followed by unusually prolonged recessions in economic activity. Another valuable insight is that the fiscal and financial dimensions are closely interconnected. Fiscal imbalances can undermine the financial sector; financial sector imbalances can weigh down on the credibility of the sovereign; both can spillover into the real sector, and vice versa. The book foresaw that the massive implicit liabilities towards the financial sector accumulated by governments could result in unsustainable levels of sovereign debt. Despite the important theoretical and empirical advances to which Professor Rogoff has contributed substantially, there is still much to be learnt about the root causes, the triggers and the propagation mechanisms of crises. The major challenges for policymakers posed by the existing knowledge gaps are reflected in the very controversial debates about the optimal responses to mitigate and resolve the current crisis and to prevent future crises. In this context, since his time at the IMF, Professor Rogoff has featured prominently in global policy debates, producing analyses and making recommendations on how to contain the current crisis and restore overall macroeconomic stability in the euro area.  On that very subject, as we all know, conditions in financial markets have taken a turn for the worse since the second half of July and early August. In the euro area, the renewed intensification of financial market turbulence is leading to very high interest rates in some countries, to potentially damaging volatility, and to very low trading volumes in some government bond markets that at times cease to function appropriately. The tensions to some extent resemble those of May 2010, but in some respects they are more broad-based than what we saw at that time. It is clear that sovereign debt challenges in individual euro area countries – no matter their size – can undermine the stability of the euro area as a whole. In view of these developments, the authorities in the euro area have taken a multi-pronged approach to address the concerns about sovereign risk and its impact on the financial sector. Regarding fiscal support for crisis countries, euro area governments announced on 21 July a second support package for Greece and the introduction of additional flexibility for the European Financial Stability Facility and the future European Stability Mechanism. In this respect, the full and timely implementation of the 21 July agreement between heads of state or government is crucial. A renewed commitment by all euro area governments to the agreed fiscal targets is of course equally essential.  The ECB has also stepped up its responses, reflecting its full commitment to ensuring a continuing smooth functioning of the key euro area market segments, a necessary prerequisite to achieve price stability in the euro area. First, it decided to continue to support ample liquidity conditions by conducting its refinancing operations as fixed-rate tender procedures with full allotment, at least until mid-January 2012. Let me point out that the outstanding Eurosystem credit in our refinancing operations currently amounts to about €530 billion and has come down since last year. The total value of marketable securities already presented and approved for Eurosystem credit operations amounts to €1.7 trillion and our counterparties have at their disposal almost €4 trillion out of the overall total of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 existing eligible securities of about €14 trillion. Therefore, this confirms that there is no liquidity or collateral shortage for the euro area banking system. Second, the ECB resumed its government bond market interventions under its Securities Markets Programme (SMP) in August. Via these interventions, the ECB Governing Council aims to help restore a more appropriate transmission of its monetary policy stance in an environment in which key market segments, such as those for government paper, are dysfunctional. The interventions do not influence our monetary policy stance. In order to sterilise the impact of these interventions on the liquidity conditions in the banking system, we re-absorb the liquidity injected. Let me underline that the secondary market purchases are not, and cannot be used to circumvent the principle of budgetary discipline as a pillar of Economic and Monetary Union. Sustained buying of government paper by the central bank would only postpone problems and delay the necessary fiscal adjustments, ultimately resulting in a build-up of inflationary pressures. The ECB has never hesitated to reaffirm and remind all Member States, in very concrete terms, that compliance with the principles of budgetary discipline is absolutely fundamental.  Naturally, since member states do not control their currency alone, they are vulnerable to liquidity episodes and multiple equilibria. Creditors’ assessments can change, e.g. via contagion effects, even when the fundamentals would not justify it. The high degree of financial integration within EMU means that, if left unchecked, contagion in the banking sector can spread rapidly via cross-border holdings of sovereign debt. For the sovereigns themselves, sudden shifts in market re-pricing of risk can lead to unexpected liquidity challenges. These dynamics underscore the importance of strengthening the mechanisms that prevent such risks – the SGP, surveillance of broader macroeconomic imbalances and stronger financial supervision. However, the liquidity dry-ups and the contagion risks also call for stronger backstop mechanisms, to provide significant, albeit temporary, liquidity assistance.  The SMP aims to create a better functioning transmission mechanism of monetary policy to all parts of the monetary union and is therefore in full compliance with the prohibition of monetary financing. Also, we sterilise the impact of the SMP on our total liquidity provision. The relative size of the programme, representing just 1.6% of the euro area GDP against 13.7% of GDP that has been bought by the Bank of England or the 11.4% purchased by the Federal Reserve, makes it easier to implement. The ECB continues to comply strictly to its mandate to ensure price stability and does not allow inflation to increase as a way of easing the burden of the debt. On this point we disagree with from some of the suggestions made recently by Professor Rogoff. The inflation tax is a blunt tool whose accidental effects would reflect mainly ex-ante institutional features (such as the degree of indexation or the maturity structure of liabilities) rather than the actual necessity to adjust. More importantly, Professor Rogoff has said himself, inflating the debt away would unduly jeopardise the most precious capital of the ECB and of any independent central bank, namely its credibility. The ECB will never debase the currency, as our record shows: we have remarkably preserved both internal and external value of the euro by keeping inflation low and inflation expectations well-anchored. As we have learnt and repeatedly experienced, credibility and in particular the ability to anchor inflation expectations are crucial for the smooth functioning of monetary policy. Their key role has been highlighted again and again during the financial crisis, particularly in preventing the danger of an entrenchment of deflationary expectations.  The euro area is a highly integrated economic and financial area which needs to be managed through common decisions. However, aside from monetary policy, it lacks powerful decision-making institutions. This means that rules-based frameworks must act a substitute for centralised authority. For fiscal and economic issues, a unitary state would have a finance ministry which both defines and vetoes fiscal and broader economic policies. EMU must achieve the same effect through its economic governance framework. We know from 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches research, including some by Professor Rogoff, also corroborated by experience, that soft-rules will not achieve the desired outcome. Strengthening the rules governing fiscal and broader macroeconomic policies is thus essential.  The Stability and Growth Pact (SGP), which was created to discipline fiscal policy, has not worked well and is now being strengthened and complemented by a macroeconomic imbalances procedure. Greater automaticity in the implementation of the SGP is needed when unsustainable policies put the stability of the euro area as a whole at risk. Credible economic governance needs to be consistent and predictable. It also needs to be backed by timely, tough sanctions to encourage compliance. Fiscal surveillance should set ambitious benchmarks for excessive deficit and for setting the adjustment path towards a country’s medium-term budgetary objective. The liquidity dry-ups and contagion risks also call for stronger backstop mechanisms, to provide significant, albeit temporary, liquidity assistance. Stronger financial supervision at euro area level is also essential. Finally, national authorities need to take ownership of their European commitments. This means anchoring EU rules in their national legislation and making them mandatory and being held to account by domestic parliaments. Economic governance is not only about preventing crises, but also about creating the conditions for economic growth. At present, this is a major challenge requiring greater coordination across the euro area. Projections of the euro area’s long-term growth prospects remain weak, depressed by the fiscal burden of age-related expenditure, slow productivity growth, and on going debt sustainability challenges. I agree with recent comments by Professor Rogoff that Europe needs to do more to reverse this trend. It is essential to give renewed impetus to a comprehensive and ambitious programme of growth-enhancing structural reforms supported by intensive monitoring and follow-up. Let me conclude. It is precisely against the backdrop of the challenges stemming from the current crisis that we can fully appreciate the invaluable contributions of scholars like Kenneth Rogoff. I extend my sincerest congratulations to him as he receives the 2011 Deutsche Bank Prize in Financial Economics, a well-deserved recognition for his work. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Philip Lowe: Changing patterns in household saving and spending Speech by Mr Philip Lowe, Assistant Governor (Economic) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian Economic Forum 2011, Sydney, 22 September 2011. *      *      * I would like to thank Jarkko Jaaskela, Luis Uzeda and Callan Windsor for extensive assistance in the preparation of this talk. Good morning. I am very pleased to be able to be part of this year’s Australian Economic Forum.  Two weeks ago, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA), Glenn Stevens, gave a speech in Perth titled “Still Interesting Times”. One consequence of living in these interesting times is that there is no shortage of interesting things to talk about. There is the inexorable shift of global economic weight to Asia, the public-debt problems in the North Atlantic economies, the multi-speed nature of the Australian economy, the more conservative approach to spending and borrowing by Australian households, and the list goes on.  You will be relieved to hear that I don’t plan to talk about all these today. Rather, I would like to spend my time this morning exploring just one of these issues, and that is the changing patterns in household saving and spending in Australia. This issue is not only interesting in its own right, but understanding these changes also helps us understand some of the broader changes that are occurring within the Australian economy.  Household savings At the aggregate level, the story on household saving is, by now, well known.  Graph 1  From the mid 1980s to the mid 2000s, the aggregate household saving ratio declined significantly (Graph 1). Then, over the past half dozen years, this decline has been reversed, and the aggregate household saving ratio is now back to where it was in the mid 1980s. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Glenn Stevens has recently spoken at length about why these changes took place.1 In particular, he drew attention to the fact that as nominal interest rates declined and the availability of credit increased, household spending grew more quickly than income for around a decade or so. Although this adjustment was drawn out, it was, by nature, a one-off event. So even before the North Atlantic financial crisis, households were returning to more traditional norms of saving and borrowing, and, no doubt, the crisis accelerated this return.  This aggregate story is interesting, but it can only take us so far in understanding what has been going on. At the RBA, we spend considerable effort delving underneath these aggregate figures, so as to better understand the factors affecting individuals’ decisions about saving and spending. One way that we do this is to use the HILDA (Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia) survey which, each year, tracks the finances of individual households. Although the survey does not ask households how much they saved each year, saving ratios can be estimated from 2006 onwards using the income and spending numbers reported in the survey.2 Having done this, we can compare how the distribution of saving ratios across the population changed between 2006 and 2009, the latest year for which data are available. This period is especially interesting because of the large increase in the aggregate saving ratio that occurred, with 2009 marking a peak in the aggregate ratio.  Graph 2  Perhaps the easiest way to summarise the results is to show how the median of the distribution has changed over time (Graph 2). Between 2006 and 2007, the median saving ratio increased by 1 percentage point. It increased by a further 2 percentage points in 2008 and then jumped by 4 percentage points in 2009, for a cumulative increase of 7 percentage                                                    1 See Stevens G (2011), “The Cautious Consumer”, Address to the Anika Foundation Luncheon, Sydney 26 July. 2 Similar changes are evident across the entire distribution of saving ratios. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 points over these three years.3 This figure turns out to be quite close to the 8 percentage points increase in the aggregate saving ratio over this period calculated from the national accounts. The micro level data suggest that the increase in saving ratios was quite widespread across the population. It also confirms that an increase in saving ratios was occurring prior to the financial crisis, but that the crisis saw a marked acceleration of this trend.  When we drill down into the data in more detail, an increase in saving ratios is apparent across the entire income distribution, although not surprisingly, the increase is smallest for households with the lowest incomes (Graph 3).4 Many of these low-income households spend a significant share of their income on the basic necessities and they have limited scope to increase the share of their income that they save.  Graph 3  Another way of looking at the data is by housing tenure. Graph 4 shows that the saving ratio has increased for those that rent, for those with a mortgage and for those that own their dwelling outright. This again confirms that the increase in saving has been quite widespread, although, the increase in saving has been smallest for those households that own their dwelling outright.                                                   3 The actual levels of the saving ratios calculated from the HILDA data are substantially higher than those from the national accounts, as the HILDA survey does not capture all components of household expenditure. This difference should, however, have relatively little effect on estimates of the change in the saving ratio over time. 4 For the purposes of classifying households into income bands, income is measured as average household disposable over the period from 2005/06 to 2008/09 in an effort to capture income in “normal” times. It is also “age matched” to avoid the effect of life-cycle factors and an adjustment is made for the number of people in the household. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Graph 4  It is also possible to look at how saving rates have changed for different age groups (Graph 5). Doing this, it is clear that the increase has been largest for younger households and smallest for older households. This result holds for both households that are renting and those that are owner occupiers. The survey suggests that younger households have experienced income growth broadly in line with that of other groups. However, their spending has not grown as quickly as these other groups, hence the relatively large increase in their saving.  Graph 5  Taken together, this evidence is consistent with the idea that higher housing prices and debt levels have contributed to a reassessment of saving decisions, although, obviously, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 reasons for the increase in saving go well beyond what has happened in the housing market. Higher housing prices have required higher deposits and this requires more savings. This trend has probably been reinforced by developments on the lending side, with most lenders lowering their maximum loan-to-valuation ratio over recent years. Saving decisions today are also likely being influenced by the earlier rise in debt levels relative to incomes and by debt servicing burdens that are staying higher for longer. The adjustments seem to have been particularly pronounced among younger households who are hoping to enter the housing market or who have recently entered the market.  There are two other aspects of the individual level data that I would like to draw your attention to.  The first of these is the relationship between the change in saving and a household’s holdings of financial assets (excluding deposits).5 To explore this relationship, we have divided households in each income quintile into two groups – those with above-average holdings of financial assets and those with below-average holdings – and then calculated the median change in the saving ratio for each group between 2008 and 2009, the year of the financial crisis. The results of this exercise are shown in Graph 6, with the top line showing the median increase in the saving ratio for households with high financial assets and the bottom line showing the change for those with low financial assets. It is clear that for all five income quintiles, households that had relatively high levels of financial assets before the financial turmoil increased their saving by more than households with relatively low levels of financial assets.  Graph 6  This evidence is consistent with the idea that the fall in financial asset prices over recent years led households to increase their saving out of current income in order to rebuild their asset positions. When share prices fell, household wealth declined and, as a consequence,                                                  5 Financial assets include superannuation, cash investments (i.e. bonds), equity investments, trust funds and life insurance. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches increased saving was required to attain any desired level of wealth. This was particularly the case for those households that held a lot of financial assets. This experience is the flipside of what happened during the decade to the mid 2000s. During that period, household wealth increased substantially by way of increasing asset prices, despite households saving relatively little out of their current income.  The second aspect of the individual-level data that I would like to draw your attention to is the relationship between the change in the saving ratio and how much uncertainty a household feels about the future. This is a difficult issue to investigate, but it is an important one as the financial crisis of 2008/09 all too clearly illustrated. During that period, uncertainty around the world increased greatly, with the result that both households and businesses delayed discretionary spending and increased their savings, amplifying the downturn in the global economy.  In the HILDA survey, households that are in employment are asked each year how worried they are about the future of their job.6 Using the responses to this question, we classify households into four groups: those that have become less worried over time; those that have become a little more worried over time; those that have become a lot more worried; and those where there has been no change. As before, we calculate the change in the median saving ratio for each of these groups and the results are shown in Graph 7. It is clear from this graph that the largest increase in saving ratios is for those households that have become a lot more concerned over time about losing their job. And conversely, the smallest increases in saving have been for those who have become less concerned about losing their job.  Graph 7  Here, the evidence is consistent with the idea that when people become more uncertain they save more to build up larger buffers against the possibility that something goes wrong later                                                  6 Respondents are asked to rank their feeling about the statement “I worry about the future of my job” on a scale of one to seven (strongly disagree to strongly agree). Households were classified as: “less worried” if their perceived job insecurity response decreased between 2006 and 2009; “slightly more worried” if their response increased by one step; and “a lot more worried” if their response increased two or more steps. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 on. It is also consistent with earlier work at the Reserve Bank showing that households that are particularly uncertain about the future tend to spend less of any increase in income than do households that are more confident.7 In summary, this work on savings using household level data confirms many of the popular explanations for the recent increase in savings. Higher housing prices and debt levels have had an effect, as have falls in the prices of investment portfolios and a general increase in uncertainty. This work also confirms that the increase in saving has been widespread across the population.  Household spending I would now like to turn from saving to spending and look at the changes that have been taking place in household expenditure patterns. The two most comprehensive sources of data in this area are the quarterly national accounts and the Household Expenditure Survey, which is currently conducted every six years by the ABS. The latest survey took place in 2009/10 and was released just a couple of weeks ago. It covered almost 10,000 households and classifies expenditure into over 600 individual categories, ranging from “towels and face washers” to “road tolls” to “ten pin bowling charges”.  Looking at the longer-term trends from both these sources, two changes stand out.  Graph 8  The first is the significant rise over time in the share of total expenditure on housing. When the Household Expenditure Survey was conducted in the early 1980s, housing accounted for a little less than 13 per cent of total expenditure (Graph 8). By way of contrast, in the recent survey this share had increased to 18 per cent. This is the largest change in any single expenditure category. The bulk of this change took place over the past decade and largely reflects the rise in interest payments on mortgage debt due to higher levels of debt relative to income.                                                   7 See Berger-Thomson L, Chung E and R McKibbin (2009), “Estimating Marginal Propensities to Consume in Australia Using Micro Data”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No. 2009–07 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches The second longer-term change is a decline in the share of spending on goods and an increase in the share of spending on (non-housing) services. For example, in the early 1980s, spending on clothing, footwear, household equipment and furniture totalled around 14 per cent of total household expenditure. Today, the figure is just over 8 per cent. In contrast, there have been substantial rises in the shares of total expenditure accounted for by health, education and a range of household and personal services. While these increases are partly explained by a rise in the relative prices of many of these services, the volume of consumption of these services has also increased.  These broad trends can be seen across the entire income distribution, although there are some subtle differences across incomes. The decline in the share of spending on clothing and footwear, for example, is evident across all income groups. Conversely, households in all income quintiles are spending a higher share on services, with the largest increases evident in expenditure on recreation services, such as pay TV and the internet (Graph 9). In addition, for many middle and lower income households there has been a noticeable increase in the share of spending on holidays. It would appear that rising incomes, the appreciation of the exchange rate and the emergence of low-cost airlines have made travel more affordable for many people. There has also been a general increase in the share of expenditure devoted to education and, for higher-income households, a noticeable increase in spending on household and personal services. Looking forward, it is likely that these broad trends will continue.  Graph 9  Returning to the aggregate data, the different trends in spending on goods and services are also evident in the national accounts which measure changes in expenditure adjusted for movements in relative prices. The differences have been unusually pronounced over the past year, with consumption of goods increasing by around 1¾ per cent, compared with growth of around 4 per cent in the consumption of services (Graph 10).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 Graph 10  The recent relatively weak growth in the consumption of goods has led to very subdued trading conditions in many parts of the retail sector. In contrast, conditions have been better in a number of the service parts of the economy. Again, according to the national accounts, consumption of education services is up by 5 per cent over the year, recreation and culture is up by 7 per cent, hotels cafés and restaurants is up by over 6 per cent, and consumption of transportation services is up by well over ten per cent.  These outcomes suggest that although households are saving a higher share of their income than in the past couple of decades, they have also been prepared to increase their spending on services quite significantly.  Exactly why this is so is difficult to pin down. One can’t completely rule out the possibility that spending on some goods is being understated due to increased internet purchases from foreign retailers, although this is unlikely to be a particularly large part of the story. Another explanation is that there has been a gradual shift in household preferences away from goods and towards “experiences”. This would be consistent with the strong growth in spending on recreational activities that has occurred over recent times. A more important factor though is likely to have been the strong growth in household income. Over the past year, aggregate household disposable income is up by around 7½ per cent, and this has boosted spending on those services that are quite sensitive to income growth.  This increasing importance of consumption of services in Australia poses a challenge in tracking overall growth in consumption in real time. The main high-frequency data that we have is on the consumption of goods. Australia has long had a comprehensive retail trade survey that is published on a monthly basis by the ABS, with this survey reporting separate results for various types of retail establishments. But the spending measured in this survey currently accounts for only about one third of total consumption, and this is down from around 40 per cent in the early 1980s.  Unfortunately, for most services there are few timely and comprehensive measures of spending. There are, however, a number of high-frequency indicators that the Bank tracks that provide some insight into this part of the economy. To take just one example, there are a variety of monthly indicators of spending on transportation including: the number of litres of petrol sold; the number of domestic flights; the number of international flights; and the 
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches number of passengers on certain public transport networks (Graph 11). Over recent times, the data on international flights, in particular, have provided some timely insight into the relative strength of services consumption, with Australians travelling overseas in ever increasing numbers.  Graph 11  However, while these various partial indicators are useful, they fall well short of being a full substitute for comprehensive and timely measures of services consumption. The ABS forward work program includes efforts to improve the measurement of services consumption and the Bank strongly supports these efforts.  Conclusion So in conclusion, there are significant changes in saving and spending patterns taking place in Australia. The effects of these changes are probably most pronounced in the retail sector, with both increased saving and the switch towards services lessening growth in spending on goods. As a result, conditions are quite difficult for many retailers.  The increased household saving is, however, a positive development from a national risk-management perspective. Households are using some of their income growth to build up bigger financial buffers, and this should hold them in good stead in the uncertain world in which we live. These higher saving rates are likely to be quite persistent and they represent a return to more traditional patterns. While they partly reflect the ongoing adjustment to the earlier big run up in housing debt and housing prices, the evidence that I have talked about today suggests that there are also other factors at play. In particular, many households appear to have increased their saving in response to the decline in equity prices and an increase in uncertainty about the future. It is reasonable to expect that, at some point, the impact of these factors will begin to wane, although exactly when remains an open question.  The Reserve Bank continues to monitor these trends very carefully, both at the national level and the micro level. Over the period ahead, the way in which households respond to the global uncertainties and the continuing growth in their incomes will, no doubt, have an important bearing on developments in the Australian economy.  Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Denton Rarawa: Recent economic and financial developments in Solomon Islands Address by Mr Denton Rarawa, Governor of the Central Bank of Solomon Islands, at the opening of the new ANZ branch, Honiara, 16 August 2011. *      *      * Mr. Vishnu Mohan, CEO ANZ North West Pacific Mr. Barry Sowman, CEO ANZ Bank Solomon Islands Staff of ANZ Bank ANZ Clients Distinguished Guests Ladies and Gentlemen Good Evening Let me thank the ANZ Bank for the kind invitation to officiate at the opening of this new branch facility this evening. It is indeed an honor and privilege for me to be part of this occasion.  I am very encouraged when financial institutions in Solomon Islands expand their services through opening of new branch facilities and financial products in the country. This allows financial deepening in the economy and brings banking financial services closer to their clients and the people. This, in turn promotes financial inclusion in the country.  In this regard, I would like to congratulate and commend ANZ bank for the opening of this new branch. It is another example of your long term commitment to delivering banking services in Solomon Islands.  And the presence of Mr Vishnu Mohan, CEO ANZ North West Pacific makes this event extra special. Your presence with us this evening further reaffirms ANZ’s strong commitment and support to Solomon Islands.  ANZ BANK OPERATIONS IN SOLOMON ISLANDS ANZ’s history in Solomon Islands go back a long way. I am told that ANZ established its first branch in the country in October 1966.  Today ANZ is the biggest bank in the country with 6 branches and an extensive range of EFTPOS and ATM terminals. The development of electronic banking services continues to grow enabling more convenient and efficient ways of processing payments.  ANZ is also involved in providing rural banking services in Guadalcanal and Malaita provinces serving 10,000 clients. The bank is further looking to the development of mobile phone banking in the country early next year. This will further benefit rural communities in the country.  ANZ is a significant contributor to the banking system in the country and it is heartening to see that ANZ continues to invest in growing their presence in our country.  For this, I commend ANZ for its many years of service to the people of Solomon Islands. ANZ has indeed played a valuable role in advancing Solomon Island’s financial system and also its economic development.  I am sure that ANZ customers will appreciate this additional facility to conduct their banking business. This branch certainly has a modern look and feel about it. I feel as if I am in an 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches ANZ branch in Sydney or Brisbane. ANZ has certainly raised its standard in terms of its facilities. I know it is not cheap but this is what I mean when I say that Solomon Islands deserve the best or world class facilities and products and not the “fitim Solomon” facilities or products.  UPDATE ON SI ECONOMY Let me provide a brief update on our recent economic performance. At the beginning of this year we projected the Solomon Islands economy to grow by around 6 percent, slightly lower than last year. Based on available data for the last seven months, it appears that growth for 2011 would be the same or even higher than last year.  Economic performance in the first half of 2011 had been robust with key macroeconomic indicators showing positive outcomes.  In the Real Sector the production of all commodities were strong in the first half of 2011 with copra doubling, palm oil up 14%, cocoa up 26%, fish up 17% and logs up by 50%. Of great interest is log production, with total output up to July reaching 1,143,222 cubic meters. At this rate, total log production for 2011 would reach 1.9 – 2.0 million cubic meters.  Gold production has also come on stream and is contributing to the country’s exports and growth.  In the External Sector, strong commodity prices and production have led to:   Improvements in the trade account with the June quarter posting a trade surplus, the first since 2006.   Marked improvement in export receipts, lower import payments, donor and investment inflows contributed to the positive outcome in the external sector.  As a result, foreign reserves rose by 24% to SBD$2.6 billion by last week, or equivalent to over 10 months of import cover.  In the Monetary Sector, money supply (M3) grew by a moderate 3.0% as opposed to 0.8% growth in the same period last year. At the same time credit growth has been subdued resulting in:   A 22% increase in liquidity since December 2010 despite the Central Bank absorbing more than $200 million of this liquidity from the banking system.  In terms of government finances, the country’s fiscal position has improved markedly. With sound fiscal management, revenue collection has increased and expenditure contained within budget allocations. The Government had been able to build up its cash reserves. On the downside and a major concern is that of inflation. Inflationary pressures in the economy are being driven predominantly by external sources mainly food and fuel prices. Inflation in June 2011 was 7.3%, up from 1.3% in November 2010.  The good news is that there are indications that the drivers of inflationary pressures in the country are easing. For example, fuel prices at the pump stations have declined, and further reduction is expected in the months ahead.  The macro picture ladies and gentlemen, is that our economy is expected to record strong growth again this year. In fact, Solomon Islands is one of the few high growing economies in the region. I hope this will be an encouragement for all of us to continue to work hard for the betterment of our country.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 MONEYPACIFIC GOALS Ladies and gentlemen, I want to say a few words about financial literacy and the MoneyPacific goals. Many of you may not be familiar with the MoneyPacific goals. These goals have been endorsed by the Ministers of Finance and Ministers of Education of Pacific Islands Forum Countries. The Governors of the central banks in the region including RBNZ and RBA have also given their approval to these goals. The aim is to achieve these goals by 2020.  The four MoneyPacific goals are:   All school children to receive financial education through core curricula.   All adults to have access to financial education.   Simple and transparent consumer protection to be in place.   To halve the number of households without access to basic financial services. These four goals can be reduced to three: (1) financial education, (2) consumer protection and (3) access to basic financial services. Let me just elaborate further on these goals and briefly report on the activities of the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce established early this year to address these issues.  Financial education We all agree that a financially literate and informed person usually makes sound financial decisions. The same applies to a financially literate and informed population. So financial education is critical in any country because a lot of the decisions we (as individuals or as a country) make everyday involves finances.  And better still, if financial education is introduced in our national education curriculum and taught in our primary and secondary schools. In this regard I am pleased to inform the public that work has started to introduce financial education into our primary and secondary schools. Hopefully, in the not too distant future, we will produce a generation of Solomon Islanders that are financially literate and equipped with basic entrepreneurial skills when they leave school.  Consumer protection We always refer to the customer/consumer as the king. If our customers are kings then we should look after and treat them as kings. Therefore having simple and transparent consumer protection mechanisms in place is critical.  For example, in the financial system, consumers need to be aware of the fees and charges they have to pay. What do they do and where do they go if they have complaints about financial services and products?  To this end, the Central Bank will soon introduce a voluntary Banking and Financial Institutions Code for financial institutions in the country.  I hope our banks and other financial institutions will sign up to this code because it is very important that our customers/consumers are protected and well informed. Access to financial services To achieve this objective, there is increasing focus on the use of technology as a means of overcoming the physical barriers to extending financial services in rural areas. The use of the mobile phone as channel to extend coverage of financial services to a greater portion of our rural people is a good example. There is also special emphasis on ensuring greater access to financial services by our women.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches The three goals I have just highlighted form the key activities of the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce (NFIT) established early this year. And I am encouraged that ANZ and other banks in the country are proactive members on the taskforce. And on their own banks have also been very proactive in conducting financial inclusion activities for their clients and the wider public.  I am confident that with on-going support from all stakeholders, Solomon Islands would successfully achieve the MoneyPacific goals ahead of the other countries in the region.  OFFICIAL OPENING Ladies and gentlemen, without taking anymore of your time, I would like to thank Barry for inviting me to this important occasion. I wish Barry and his team on-going success in their activities in Solomon Islands.  With these few words, ladies and gentlemen, I now have the pleasure in declaring ANZ’s new Honiara Central branch here at the Hyundai Mall officially open.  Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Ric Battellino: Will Australia catch a US cold? Address by Mr Ric Battellino, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Euromoney Forum, New York, 21 September 2011. *      *      * It is a great pleasure to be taking part in this conference, and in particular to be here in New York again.  I have been visiting New York regularly for a large part of my career at the Reserve Bank. I have always very much enjoyed these visits, but that, of course, was not their purpose. The point of my visits was to find out what was going on in the US economy because, for a long time, this had a major bearing on the Australian economy.  Through the 1980s and into the 1990s, developments in the Australian economy showed a close correlation with those in the US economy. It was particularly striking that the recessions of the early 1970s, early 1980s and early 1990s were highly synchronised between the two countries and had many similarities in their nature and origins. As a result, it was common in the 1980s and 1990s to hear the phrase “when the US sneezes, Australia catches a cold”.  Australian economists, including those in the Reserve Bank, spent a lot of time researching the question of why growth in the Australian economy was so highly correlated with that in the US. We were intrigued by the closeness of the relationship because the trade flows between the two economies were not particularly large. The United States has always been only a moderately important export destination for Australia.  The research unearthed various channels that contributed to the close relationship, but two factors seemed particularly important:   First, the economic shocks faced by the two countries in the lead up to the recessions of the 1980s and 1990s were similar, as were the policy responses. It was understandable, therefore, that the economies would follow similar paths.   Second, the financial and cultural links between the two countries have always been very strong. The United States is a large investor in Australia and many Australian companies have operations in the US. US economic news receives very wide coverage in the Australian media. This, in turn, has often promoted very similar movements in financial prices, business sentiment, and even household behaviour.  Scrutiny of this close relation between the two economies reached its peak around the mid 1990s. Ironically, this was around the time when the relationship began to change.  Certainly, by the first decade of this century, the paths of the economies had clearly diverged. Whereas the United States experienced recessions in 2001 and 2008/9, the economic downturns in Australia around those times were relatively mild. It has been 20 years since the Australian economy experienced a year of negative growth. This represents the longest period of uninterrupted growth in Australia’s economic history, and one for which there are few precedents among the developed economies.  Why have the paths of the two economies diverged? I don’t think I can provide an exhaustive or conclusive answer to this question, but there are a couple of factors that have clearly played significant roles.  First, both the 2001 and 2008/9 recessions in the United States were to a large degree the consequence of financial misadventure. The former was heavily influenced by the collapse of the “tech” bubble, and the latter by the collapse of the sub-prime housing bubble.  Australia was not affected nearly as seriously by either of these events. The tech bubble largely missed Australia. In fact, in the late 1990s Australia was constantly being berated for 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches being an old-world economy in that it did not have a home-grown information technology industry. As it turns out, being a heavy user of technology, but not a manufacturer of it, was an advantage. The Australian economy was not distorted by the tech bubble that built in the late 1990s, and it did not weaken as much as the US economy when the price of tech stocks collapsed in 2001.  The mildness of the 2001 economic slowdown in Australia meant that the Reserve Bank was able to normalise interest rates relatively quickly thereafter. In the event, this helped Australia avoid the worst of the excesses in housing markets that subsequently built up in many other countries. The housing market was most “frothy” for Australia as a whole around 2002–2003, and it cooled noticeably in 2004 as interest rates rose. While there were subsequent price increases in particular cities, the speculative element in the market had subsided considerably in most states by the time the global financial crisis hit in 2008.  Aside from increasing interest rates, the Reserve Bank also warned repeatedly around that time about the danger of excessive increases in house prices and borrowing, which may have, at the margin, curtailed some speculative activity. It was also helpful that the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA), the prudential supervisor, pressed the banks to maintain relatively high lending standards. While there was some sub-prime lending activity in Australia, it was on a small scale, and mainly by non-bank lenders. As such, arrears rates on housing loans have remained at low levels, and Australian banks have remained profitable. Australia, therefore, did not have a home-grown financial crisis in 2008/09, and its financial institutions also had little direct exposure to the US housing market. As a consequence, just as had been the case in 2001, Australia experienced only a mild economic slowdown in 2008/09.  The fact that Australia avoided the direct impact of both the tech crash and the sub-prime crisis obviously helps to explain why the Australian economy has done better than the US in the past decade. But another factor that has contributed to its outperformance has been the growing role of China in the global economy. The expansion of China has had an overwhelmingly positive impact on the Australian economy over the past 10 to 15 years, whereas the implications of the Chinese expansion for the United States have been more mixed. The integration of China into the global economy has been an important factor shaping the performance of many economies over the past 10 to 15 years. Generally, economies that complement the Chinese economy have done relatively well. Obvious examples are commodity exporters such as Australia and some Latin American countries, exporters of capital equipment and luxury cars, such as Germany, and countries that are part of the China supply chain, such as many in Asia.  Arguably, Australia is one of the economies that most complements the Chinese economy. It is a large producer of food, energy, basic materials and education and tourism services  – products and services for which China has a very strong demand – while the limited size and specialised nature of Australia’s manufacturing sector mean that the economy as a whole is not facing wide-scale competitive pressures from China. As evidence of this, over the past decade Australia has experienced a much larger rise in its terms of trade than all other major commodity exporters, apart from Chile.  While it is clear that China now has a large influence on the Australian economy, that is not to say that US developments no longer matter. Clearly, they do. They continue to play an important role in shaping financial market behaviour, and household and business sentiment. The point, however, is that over the past 10 to 15 years these channels have not been powerful enough to dominate overall economic outcomes, being outweighed by the other influences I have mentioned.  At this juncture, the US and Australian economies find themselves in very different cyclical positions. The United States is still struggling to recover from the deep recession caused by the sub-prime crisis, while Australia, having grown for 20 years, is operating with relatively 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 little spare capacity and is investing heavily to meet rapidly growing demand for resources from China, and elsewhere in Asia.  A topical question at present is whether the recent turmoil in global markets will eventually overwhelm the positive effects on the Australian economy from China.  That could occur either because the financial uncertainty undermines household and business confidence, and therefore consumer and investment spending, or because the turmoil also weakens the Chinese economy, leading to reduced demand for resources.  It is simply too early to be able to answer this question. For one thing, nobody yet knows when, or how, the issues that are causing the financial turmoil will be resolved. In some cases they go to the heart of institutional arrangements in Europe, and cannot be resolved quickly. It is impossible to know, therefore, how long the turmoil will last, or even if it will escalate further.  As yet there is little in the way of hard economic data available for the period since financial market volatility escalated, but let me briefly run through what we do know.  I will begin with some observations about China. A few years ago, a common question was whether the Chinese economy could continue to grow if the US economy slowed. The experience of the past three or four years has, I think, answered that question, and the answer is in the affirmative. China has maintained strong growth in the face of the US recession and the sluggish recovery. The latest batch of Chinese data, which relates to August, suggests that any slowing in the economy has, to date, been modest. This is confirmed by recent data on Australia’s shipments of coal and iron ore to China, which have also held firm. So too have the prices of iron ore and coal.  In relation to Australia, the most comprehensive data on the economy – the national accounts – are only available up to the June quarter, and so pre-date the recent financial volatility. They confirmed, at that point, a picture of very strong business investment; declining government investment, as earlier fiscal stimulus is unwound; relatively flat dwelling investment; and weak commercial construction. All this was broadly in line with expectations. The one area of the national accounts that surprised was the strength of household consumption. Retail sales had been subdued through much of this year, and this had generally been taken as a sign of weak consumption overall. But the national accounts showed that household spending on services has been strong. Households are spending more on entertainment, eating out and travel, particularly overseas travel.  At one level, this was surprising given the clear signs of caution among households, but it is less surprising when account is taken of the on-going fast pace of increase in household income. For a time, this increased income was used to rebuild saving, but with the household saving ratio having stabilised in recent quarters, income growth is now providing the wherewithal to fund consumption.  The national accounts also showed that Australia’s GDP continues to be affected by the severe effects on mining activity of the floods over the Australian summer. Taken literally, the weakest sector of the Australian economy over the past year has been the mining sector, where output has fallen by 9 per cent over the past year.  We know this is in the process of being reversed, so we need to look through it to judge the underlying strength of the economy. Our estimate of the underlying trend in mining-related activity over the next couple of years is for increases in the order of 10 to 15 per cent. The rest of the economy on the other hand, is growing at an annual rate of only about 2 per cent. This is below what would have been regarded as normal in the past.  This slow pace of growth in the non-mining sector is not simply a matter of a shortfall in demand. There are signs that the capacity of this part of the economy to supply goods and services has also slowed. For one thing, growth in the working-age population has slowed markedly over the past couple of years, due largely to a slowdown in immigration. Also, 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches productivity growth continues to be low. For growth in the non-mining economy to pick up, it is likely that these trends will need to reverse.  Labour market data are available up to August. They continue to point to soft outcomes for employment, after the surprisingly fast increase last year. The unemployment rate has also risen by 0.4 percentage points over the past few months, after having been steady at around 5 per cent for much of the year. These trends could be an indication of the economy having slowed recently to a pace that is below its potential.  On the other hand, there are some aspects of labour market numbers that have a stronger feel. Contrary to the slowing in the number of people employed, there has been solid growth in total hours worked recently. Also, the very recent rise in unemployment has been most pronounced in the resource-rich states, while an independent indicator – the number of people on unemployment benefits – does not point to any rise in unemployment. All this suggests more information is needed before we can draw any firm conclusions about whether or not the labour market is weakening.  Measures of consumer and business confidence declined sharply in August, following the increase in financial market volatility. This is not surprising. Consumer confidence has subsequently recovered somewhat in September. We will need to wait to see how these swings in confidence affect spending. So far, recent liaison information from retailers does not point to any further significant weakening.  Let me end with a few words on how the Reserve Bank has been seeing monetary policy.  The context for monetary policy over the past year or so has been that the overall economy is operating with relatively little spare capacity, and is facing a very large boom in investment and a large rise in national income. The Bank’s view has been that, if this is to be accommodated without generating undue inflationary pressures, other components of spending would need to grow less than might otherwise be the case. The implication of this is that monetary policy would need to provide an element of restraint. Accordingly, the Bank late last year lifted the cash rate to the point that resulted in most lending rates in the economy being a little above average.  From time to time over the past year, the Bank has considered whether further restraint was required, but on balance concluded that existing policy settings remained appropriate, particularly given the restraint also being applied by the high exchange rate. At its most recent monetary policy meeting, the Board judged that the recent financial volatility could weaken the outlook for demand, and hence may, in due course, act to dampen pressure on inflation. On this basis, the Board judged that it was prudent to maintain the current stance of monetary policy.  In the meantime, financial markets seem to have concluded that the risks are weighted towards the Australian economy weakening sharply and, taken literally, seem to be pricing in a reduction in official interest rates towards the unusually low levels reached after the global financial crisis. There are technical reasons why current market pricing may not be giving an accurate picture of interest rate expectations. Nonetheless, markets do seem to have reached a pessimistic assessment and this appears to be based mainly on the assumption that weakness in the US and Europe will flow through to Australia.  The present situation has some similarities to that in 2003. From late 2002 to the third quarter of 2003, financial markets were pricing in cuts in interest rates in Australia, largely on the back of concerns about the sluggishness of the US recovery at that time. In the event, however, that sluggishness in the United States did not flow through to the Australian economy and Australian interest rates did not fall.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Conclusion Let me conclude.  It is too early at this stage to judge with any degree of certainty whether Australia will catch cold from the US. However, given that over the past 10 to 15 years the Australian economy has been less vulnerable to severe US symptoms, there are reasonable grounds for optimism.  Until a clearer picture emerges, the Bank’s approach will be to keep an open mind, and base its assessments about appropriate policy on a careful analysis of the data that become available.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Ardian Fullani: Building our future through financial education Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the 9th Annual Conference of the Bank of Albania “Building our future through financial education”, Tirana, 15 September 2011. *      *      * Honourable Minister of Finance, Honourable deputy Minister of Education, Your excellencies Ambassadors, Honourable NBS Governor Šoškiæ, Honourable Mr. Passacantando, It is a special pleasure for me to open the 9th conference of the Bank of Albania which this time is dedicated to financial education. I take this opportunity to wish a warm welcome to all the participants in this room and in particular to our foreign guests.  If you asked me directly what I mean by financial education, I would summarise it as: the ability of consumers and investors to understand financial concepts and products; ability to understand how to protect oneself against unwanted developments; ability of people to make sound decisions about their money in accordance with their life’s circumstances.  Financial education should start with understanding the role of finance in a free market economy. Finance “lubricates” the economic growth process. It also provides opportunities for all those who do not have sufficient financial resources. In 1911, the renowned Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter said: “...that the structure of modern industry could not be erected without finance, that it makes the individual to a certain extent independent of inherited possessions, that talent in economic life ‘rides to success on its debts’ even the most conservative orthodoxy of the theorists cannot well deny.”  If you asked me why is financial education important, I would say it in these words: because it contributes to Albanians’ financial welfare.  The more literate we are financially, the more capable we are to make decisions that contribute to our improved welfare. This is true for everyone, regardless of who we are or where we come from. As Friedman, the Nobel prize winner, says: “Economic freedom is an essential condition for political freedom”. Our exercising rights that result from economic freedom would be unavailing in absence of financial literacy and equality in the marketplace. This implies not only the same information at the same time, but also the capacity to use this information.  Finances create an added value not only for the rich, but also for the entire society. It is necessary to create equal access for all citizens. Equal access to finances and equality before the law are the foundations of modern market economy. Finance and financial education walk side by side. While literacy may turn a poor man into a rich man, illiteracy, on the other hand, may conduct a rich man into misery. Finances are dangerous when you are not financially literate enough. That is why I consider this conference as highly important. The Bank of Albania has devoted constant attention to financial education. Our education agenda is integral and comprehensive both in terms of geography and age groups, full of interactive elements and modern communication methodology. Furthermore, I would like to refer to some of the elements that constitute the philosophical grounds of our educational work.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches First, I would like to recall that financial welfare is inextricably related with the country’s economic progress.  It has been already proven that individual’s welfare is proportionate to economic activity and prices of financial assets. The cause-effect relation is true on both directions. Our economy and financial institutions are strong when revenues and wealth grow. Financially healthy individuals are inclined to increase their consumption and, therefore, boost their spending, consequently pushing the economy forward. Moreover, financially successful people boost lending potential by channelling their savings into deposits.  Therefore, they are in a position to have access in crediting by the banking system, giving life to new businesses which, in turn, provide higher employment and welfare.  To most of the people, having a job and a salary or estate is essential to personal financial welfare. However, the fact that you may have a job, or a salary does not imply that you automatically have the capacity to make wise decisions on effective money utilisation.  This is the point where our relation with financial education is subjected to the test of the truth. Is this test passed? The sub-standard credit crisis in the US revealed that individuals in most cases did not manage to pass this test. Consequently, the debt load on individuals grew even heavier, while access to crediting became tighter, resulting in a big risk for their financial future. A similar analogy may be drawn for lending in foreign currency in some Eastern European countries.  Secondly, financial education should be seen as a public good that brings about positive externalities to the society. It not only increases individuals’ financial welfare, but also affects directly economic policy efficiency undertaken by relevant authorities.  The more-educated the public, the higher economic policy efficiency is. Maintaining inflation and economic activity under control is almost impossible in a society ailing from financial illiteracy. Macro-economic balances are achieved and maintained through monetary and fiscal policies instruments. The society needs to be aware of these instruments, understand them, evaluate stimuli and incentives, and properly respond to them.  The important role of consumer behaviour for the policies success is clearly evidenced in the “rational expectations” theory. A simple intuition behind this theory is that rational individuals shape their expectations using the available information optimally. They respond to new information by adopting their behaviour to maximise welfare. In this case, individuals “equipped” with financial literacy read and understand developments in economic policies and respond to them rationally. This mutual understanding would drive the economy towards the desired direction. The central bank adjusts its policies in response to the actual behaviour of agents, who would adjust their behaviour in line with the central banks policy. For this interaction to happen, both the public and the central bank need to speak the same language and understand each other unequivocally. Money management needs this two-way understanding and the active role of individuals. Consequently, the trust and confidence of the public is earned, monetary policy objectives are achieved and its reliability is enhanced. Thirdly, I would like to underline that financial education of individuals establishes a more stable society on one hand and a stronger and secure banking system on the other.  Efficient and ongoing financial education is a path trotted by millions of individuals and families in their endeavour to achieve financial goals and accumulate wealth.  The positive effect of this process is reflected in a stronger economic and financial stability for the entire society. The banking system has its role to play in this process, mainly through lending to businesses and households. As a regulator, the Bank of Albania gives its share of contribution ensuring that banks strictly abide by legal and regulatory obligations in relations with their customers. On the other hand, financially literate customers, contribute to the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 development of the banking system with their increasing demand for financial products and services. Therefore, the result is clear: higher efficiency, lower charges, better services and healthier and safer banking system.  Fourthly, I would like to highlight that financial education, over time, improves the living standard in the long run, including retirement age.  In a recent analysis, the essential reason why an individual needs to amplify his financial literacy is that this investment will help him to reach his money management objectives.  Although personal objectives may vary from an individual to another, on financial education point of view, improvement of society’s living standard is guaranteed and confidence for the future is boosted.  Financially literate individuals, are capable to make healthy financial plans, from an early stage of their career. Their knowledge enables them to plan their finances for retirement, children’s education and accumulation of financial assets. These individual behaviours, seemingly irrelevant, bring about great benefits in the national perspective.  Fifth, I would like to underline that financial education is a long-term process, extended over time, and that the presence of specialised institutions is indispensable.  Although in financial crisis individuals incur large damage, they continue to be involved in future crisis. The number of individuals, who are familiar with interest rates they either receive or pay in financial transactions, remains low.  The same may be said about investment strategies, financial risk identification and assessment, and other elementary money management concepts.  Many people do not think in financial terms and do not perceive accurately profits and costs resulting from bank loan use, or wealth-related effects originating from home ownership and other similar long-term assets.  Reasons behind this behaviour are understandable and related to the fact that the majority of the society acquires information circumstantially, hoping that the actual failure becomes a lesson for the future.  One way to eradicate circumstantial learning is the introduction of financial reading at an early stage of education. In this view, I would proudly say that, the Bank of Albania has provided an outstanding contribution. Allow me to briefly make an résumé of our work in this aspect.  The first strategic station of financial education provided by the Bank of Albania was needs assessment and identification of training priorities. From this point of view, we assessed that it was indispensable to open the Bank “de facto” to the public. More frequent communications with the market and its important participants, as well as periodic explanations of monetary policy decision-making and risks balance related to inflation and financial stability, are some initiatives that we consider as a very effective education process. I am proud to say that now we have:  A public opinion that builds up expectation as regards our decision-making;  A media sector, which has admirably enhanced understanding, interpretation and expectations related to our decision-making;  A banking sector, which reads accurately and responds with high flexibility to the direction oriented by us;  A qualified public critique, where Bank of Albania finds a mirror of alternative opinions on its adopted decisions and practices.  Another important aspect is the identification and division of the population according to their demographic, geographic and cultural characteristics. For us, financial education is a public 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches good intended for all. In compliance with the best international experiences, we identified financial education for young people as highly important, targeting not only students but also their educators. Its practical realisation has been a complex process requiring adequate human and financial resources.  For that purpose, the slogan adopted by us is very meaningful: “Education may be costly, but it is priceless”. The implementation methodology is widely known: meeting face-to-face, interactive games that intrigue children’s imagination, a series of publication with a flexible level of difficulties, training of teachers of economy, and a tour in various schools of the country.  In this regard, I would like to point out to the recent contribution of the Bank of Albania to high-school students for the book on: “Personal finance in your hands”, which is conceptualised as an elective subject for high schools. Honourable participants,  Education is a never-ending process. Learning is lifelong. It is deep, immense, and comprehensive. Therefore, I have to say that in spite of what we have done so far, we still have a long way to go. The Bank of Albania deems as imperative the drafting and implementation of a national strategy on contemporary financial education. The Bank of Albania stands ready to join any initiative at national level, which aims at promoting literacy across the country.  Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Mark Carney: Recent economic developments Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Saint John Board of Trade, Saint John, New Brunswick, 20 September 2011. *      *      * Introduction It is a pleasure to be here in Saint John. When I got up this morning, things had changed. For the first time, there was that sense of the turn in the seasons. It is fitting, of course, with the autumn equinox this week, but looking at the calendar doesn’t dispel that wistful feeling: where did summer go? Instead of looking forward to a string of lazy, hazy days, we face the touch of frost in the air ... and the smell of fear in financial markets. Canadians entered the summer brimming with confidence. Expecting strong sales, our businesses were full of plans to add jobs and invest in plant and equipment. Canadians themselves had a very positive view of their economic prospects. Now, in the face of alarming events abroad, some are less sure. What happened? And how should the public and private sectors respond? What happened? The fear currently dominating global financial markets has three causes: the deterioration in the global economic outlook, the intensification of the European sovereign debt crisis and growing questioning of the ability of policy-makers to respond. High government debt leaves the Euro area extremely vulnerable to changes in global growth prospects and investor sentiment. These challenges are compounded by the nature of European monetary union, which demands prolonged deflationary adjustments in countries that have lost competitiveness. The most immediate concern is growing funding pressures on European banks. Most have seen their costs of borrowing rise sharply, their access to important financial markets curtailed, and their equities trading at historic lows relative to the value of their assets. If not quickly reversed, this situation could create a damaging negative feedback loop among the banks, lending and the real economy. This would occur at a time when the European economy – the largest in the world – is already slowing dramatically. While the immediate concern is about banks, the broader issues are the fiscal and competitive positions of a number of countries. Most European governments have little choice but to reduce their budget deficits, despite weak private demand (Chart 1). Ultimately, Europe’s problems cannot be solved by fiscal austerity alone. Any durable solution must include a series of measures to rebuild competitiveness. For example, Spain runs a 4 per cent current account deficit despite its depressed economy, and Greek unit labour costs have risen by a third relative to Germany’s since the start of the European monetary union. In the short term, the problems in Europe are being compounded by slowing global growth. In particular, the U.S. economy has lost momentum. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Recent benchmark revisions show that the U.S. recession was deeper and its recovery has been shallower than previously reported. What we learned over the summer does not suggest that the dynamics currently affecting the U.S. economy have changed, just that the magnitudes are much larger. In short, the housing market remains a mess, the consumer is weak, and government actions can be expected to reduce growth after materially boosting it in recent years. American households have experienced a major shock to their net worth, which has fallen from a peak of 6.4 times income pre-crisis to 5.0 in the second quarter of this year (Chart 2). These losses can only be recovered through a combination of increased savings and rising prices for houses and financial assets. Each will clearly take time.  Overall, the United States is in the midst of the weakest recovery since the Great Depression, and the Bank does not expect that to change at any time soon (Chart 3). In fact, the U.S. economy is tracking exactly the dreary path of other advanced economies that have experienced major financial crises. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  The Bank expects the U.S. economy to continue to grow at or below its trend rate of around 2 per cent until the second quarter of 2012. This reflects a combination of modest growth in consumption, the beginnings of fiscal drag, solid business investment in equipment and software, and relatively strong export growth. These last two factors will of course be importantly influenced by global developments. At this stage, the Bank of Canada does not expect a recession in the United States, although the risk has clearly risen. The U.S. economy is close to stall speed, where a negative feedback loop between weak employment, consumer demand, and business hiring and investment could emerge. The possibility that markets themselves could tip the balance cannot be dismissed. Further declines in the value of financial assets could encourage higher savings and discourage corporate investment, and it remains possible that credit conditions for American firms could tighten materially. What does this mean for Canada? The direct impact of weaker European growth on Canada is relatively modest. However, the financial and confidence effects could be considerable. In response to uncertainties in Europe, global equity and commodity prices have fallen significantly, and financial market volatility has increased markedly. The spillovers to Canadian financial markets have been less pronounced but are still notable. Overall financial conditions have tightened in Canada, largely due to declines in equity values. Importantly, our financial system continues to work well. Our banks have virtually unmatched access to funding and capital; credit to Canadian households and businesses remains widely available at historically low rates. The direct impact of a renewed slowdown in the United States, our largest trading partner, is more material. Moreover, the U.S. slowdown has further hit activity in sectors, such as autos and housing, that matter for Canada. To put this into perspective, consider that if this had been an average U.S. recovery, U.S. GDP would be 2.5 per cent higher and Canadian exports would be 6.5 per cent greater, equivalent to $30 billion in additional sales (Chart 4). But this is not an average recovery and, now, the considerable external headwinds our economy has faced in recent years are blowing harder. Net exports are now expected to remain a major source of weakness, reflecting more modest global demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, in particular the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  It is worth remembering that reduced competitiveness typically means higher penetration of imports into Canada. The ratio of imports to GDP has risen 7 percentage points over the past decade. There is also some good news: over the same period, an increasing proportion of our imports is for investment purposes, rather than consumption. This indicates that an increasing share of Canada’s imports is adding to the capital stock, rather than simply being consumed (Chart 5). This will need to continue.  The Bank expects that growth will resume in the second half of this year, led by business investment and household expenditures, although lower wealth and incomes will likely moderate the pace of investment and consumption growth. Slower global economic momentum will dampen domestic resource utilization and inflationary pressures. The Bank expects total CPI inflation to continue to moderate as temporary factors, such as significantly higher food and energy prices, unwind. Core inflation is expected to remain well contained as the growth of labour compensation stays modest, productivity recovers, and inflation expectations remain well anchored. The risks to our economy remain largely external and are skewed to the downside. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 What then must be done? The debt-ceiling fiasco in the United States and the inability, to date, of European policy-makers to get ahead of their crisis have reduced investor confidence in the effectiveness of policy. The combination of high debt loads and unpredictable politics is toxic. Still, it is important to distinguish between the willingness to act and the ability to address the current challenges. There is much that policy can do. The European situation is fragile but fixable; manageable if it is managed. The European Central Bank stands ready to supply virtually unlimited liquidity to European banks. This should prevent the sort of dramatic liquidity events we saw in 2008, but it is not a cure. Banks in these situations become highly defensive. The lesson of Japan in the 1990s is that once such behaviour starts, it is hard to reverse. The point of central bank efforts is to create a bridge. The follow-up actions must be swift and sizeable. European authorities need to move decisively to contain the crisis. Measures taken must draw private capital back in, rather than merely fund its exit. Actually implementing announced measures will start to rebuild confidence. Enhancements to existing European funding facilities should be put in place. Financial reforms, including Basel III capital measures, should be implemented in a timely fashion. Paths for sustained fiscal consolidation should be established, consistent with the agreement reached at last year’s G-20 Summit in Toronto. But more is required. In the Bank of Canada’s opinion, what is needed now is a comprehensive capital plan for European banks, and crucially, a sizeable funding backstop for European sovereigns. The reality is that the best commitments and even the most binding legislation will not restore investor confidence overnight. As Canada learned in the mid-1990s, countries need to build a sustained track record of tangible results in order to rebuild trust. Similarly, structural policies to enhance growth have a long pay back. Thus, European authorities must create time to re-found their monetary union based on credible fiscal arrangements and more flexible economies that can adjust quickly to inevitable shifts in internal European competitiveness. In our opinion, the existing European resources, including the European Financial Stability Facility and the European Central Bank facilities, can be used much more efficiently to create a multi-year window for these adjustments. Just as demand must be rebalanced in Europe between countries with current account deficits, such as Spain, and those with surpluses, such as Germany, so too must it adjust globally. Under current policies, large current account imbalances can be expected to persist. Continued reliance on domestic demand in advanced economies promises disappointment. As we have seen in recent weeks, the hand-off from the public to the private sector in the United States and Europe is in danger of being fumbled. Fiscal consolidation has begun, without autonomous private demand picking up the slack because of unresolved fragilities and a barrage of negative shocks. Rebalancing demand across economies will require the implementation of comprehensive financial reforms; open trade and capital markets; and significant changes to fiscal, structural and exchange rate policies across a broad range of countries, including major emerging markets. When the G-20 meets later this week in Washington and next month in Paris, these issues must be at the centre of the agenda. In the face of this difficult external environment, the Bank will continue to support Canada’s economic expansion by keeping inflation low, stable and predictable. Since the crisis erupted four years ago, the Bank has demonstrated its nimbleness in the conduct of monetary policy. We reacted quickly and forcefully during the downturn. As the 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Canadian recovery has progressed, we have emphasised that we would be prudent with respect to the possible withdrawal of any degree of monetary stimulus. The Bank always takes a flexible approach. Our decisions are guided by considered analysis and informed judgment rather than mechanical rules. For example, as we have emphasised, given current material headwinds, the policy rate can return to its long-run level after inflation is projected to reach the 2 per cent target and output is projected to reach its potential. The Bank also exercises considerable flexibility with respect to the time horizon over which inflation should be expected to return to target. In general, both the size and nature of the shocks that hit our economy can have a bearing on the appropriate targeting horizon. Over the last 20 years, the persistence of the effects of the shocks on the economy has been such that it was typically desirable to return inflation to target over a period of six to eight quarters. However, there has been considerable variation in this horizon from as short as 2 quarters to as long as 11 quarters.1 On at least eight occasions, the Bank has extended the targeting horizon beyond eight quarters. It did so most recently in April 2009, when returning inflation to target over a longer period was warranted, given the unusually large shock confronting the Canadian economy at the time. Just as we do not have mechanical rules for the path of policy rates, we do not outsource our monetary policy to the U.S. Federal Reserve. What happens in the United States obviously matters for Canada, but this does not mean that our rates are tied to those of the Americans. Over the two decades of inflation targeting, the overnight rate in Canada has been more than 200 basis points above, and more than 200 basis points below, the Federal funds rate. These variations reflect differences in our respective economic outlooks. Canadian monetary policy will be appropriate to Canadian circumstances and consistent with achieving price stability in Canada. Canadians can also be assured that the Bank will take the necessary steps to ensure that core financial markets remain liquid and operating. In the event of a major systemic shock, the Bank has a wide range of tools to provide exceptional liquidity, consistent with a principles-based framework. This will help ensure that all Canadians benefit from the strength of our financial system, in bad times as well as good. While we experience the fallout of events in Europe and the United States, Canada should also draw the lessons from these experiences. The European sovereign crisis reinforces the importance of sustainable government debt and the value of a flexible exchange rate. American difficulties underscore the risks of excessive household debt. Should you wait out the storm? Financial markets appear paralysed. You shouldn’t be. These events are like the waves on the sea. The underlying currents – those forces that affect the long-term outlook for our businesses and economy – are much stronger. Today, the charts reveal three major currents: Canadian firms are underexposed to the fastest growing parts of the global economy; commodity prices can be expected to remain elevated relative to historic averages; and our firms are not as productive as they could or need to be. Regardless of what happens in the United States or Europe, these challenges and opportunities need to be seized through sustained efforts here in Canada. The world’s economic centre of gravity is shifting rapidly from advanced to emerging economies. The game in the United States will be more about taking market share (something we have not been doing recently) than participating in a growing market. To put it                                                  1 According to projections published since 1998 by the Bank in our Monetary Policy Report, this is the variance in the horizon over which inflation was projected to return to the 2 per cent target. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 bluntly, the U.S. economy can be expected to be relatively weak for some time as households repair balance sheets and governments wrestle with deficits. How weak depends on the choices Americans make but, given the pressures, there is limited upside. Canada will have to look elsewhere to grow our exports. Emerging markets already account for almost one-half of the growth in all imports over the past decade. In a process that can be expected to continue for decades, emerging Asia is rapidly urbanizing. China and India are housing the equivalent of the entire population of Canada every 18 months. In parallel, a massive new middle class is being formed, growing by 70 million people each year. Thus, even though commodity prices have eased in recent weeks, they can be expected to remain at elevated levels, supported by large, sustained demand increases from the emerging world, particularly Asia. We will need to take advantage of such opportunities because the limits of domestic debt and demography mean that the potential growth of our economy is slowing. As the boomer generation ages, labour force participation rates will decline and hours worked will fall. The direction is clear. The question is merely one of degree. If we do not develop new markets and if we do not improve productivity, the cumulative loss of income from slower potential growth could be almost $30,000 for every Canadian over the next decade.2 Conclusion It is often said that Canada is not an island. This is true and illustrates that we are not immune to global events. Perhaps a better analogy for us today here on the shores of the Bay of Fundy is that Canada is like a ship. We can be tossed by the waves or pulled by the current, but we are still able to chart our course in even the stormiest of seas. The challenges in the current global economic environment are significant but so, too, are the opportunities. Our corporations and governments have strong balance sheets, our financial institutions are among the most resilient in the world, and our economy can be geared to the future sources of global growth. To take advantage of these attributes, we will need continued, heavy investment to improve productivity and sustained, innovative efforts to develop new markets. For its part, the Bank of Canada has a wide range of tools and policy options that it will continue to deploy as appropriate in order to ensure that Canadians can seize these opportunities in an environment of domestic macroeconomic and financial stability. Fall may be around the corner, but we all know that Canadians are at their best during winter.                                                  2 See M. Carney, “The Virtue of Productivity in a Wicked World,” speech to the Ottawa Economics Association, Ottawa, Ontario, 24 March 2010, available at:   <http://www.bankofcanada.ca/2010/03/speeches/virtue-productivity-wicked-world/>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Bwalya K E Ng’andu: Improving the investment climate in Zambia Opening remarks by Dr Bwalya K E Ng’andu, Deputy Governor (Operations) of the Bank of Zambia, at the Foreign Private Investment & Investor Perception Survey 2011 Dissemination Workshop, Lusaka, 22 December 2011. *      *      * Permanent Secretaries;  Chief Executive Officers;  Distinguished Participants;  Ladies and Gentlemen.  I would like to welcome you all, on behalf of the Bank of Zambia, the Zambia Development Agency and the Central Statistical Office, to this Foreign Private Investment and Investor Perceptions 2011 Survey Dissemination Workshop.  I want also to take this opportunity to thank the companies that participated in the Survey which was conducted by the three institutions in the third quarter of 2011. The insights and the various valuable revelations on the investment climate in Zambia contained in the survey report were only made possible by their co-operation and support to the process. We want to thank them most sincerely.  This dissemination workshop is built around two objectives. The first one is to give representatives of respondent companies the chance to comment on the contents of the report. In this sense, this can be considered as a validation workshop from which inputs into the final version of the report will be received. The second objective is to give the three institutions that commissioned the survey the opportunity to receive feedback on what the community of investors considers to be the main issues in investment. Specifically, it should help the Government through Zambia Development Agency to understand the concerns of investors and formulate, if possible, better strategies for improving the investment climate.  As we discuss this report, it is important that we put into perspective some of the reasons why it was decided that a survey of investor perceptions should be carried out. The first reason has been to do with the fact that the perceptions of investors are a good proxy for measuring the investment climate. This arises from them being actively involved in implementation and are, if you like, at the receiving end of existing investment policy. More importantly, existing investors are a country’s most important promoters of investment. Their views on the investment climate are more likely to be trusted by prospective investors than even those of the official investment promotion agencies such as Zambia Development Agency. Some prospective investors may take the view that official investment promotion agencies paint a rosy picture of the investment climate. Existing investors, on the contrary, are presumed to present factual position based on their own experience. Investor perceptions, therefore, are important because where the perceptions are positive, it can reasonably be assumed that those investors will continue to do business in future or probably even expand. Secondly, their positive perceptions can serve as a source of encouragement or comfort to potential investors who might be contemplating investing in Zambia. On the contrary, negative perceptions have the opposite effect. They may dispose existing investors to disinvest. That action alone may serve as the most eloquent statement that all is not well with the investment climate in the country thus risking existing investment and keeping at bay prospective investment.  The general findings of the report fortunately are positive. Political stability and governance, economic and regulatory reforms some of which have led to improvements in the business environment, macroeconomic gains reflected in robust GDP growth, low inflation, reduction in budget deficits and relatively stable exchange rate are some of the elements making up the improved investment climate. In contrast to past perceptions which focused on the 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches volatility of the investment climate, high levels of poverty, absence of institutional governance coupled with corruption, the report paints a changed picture. Investors are seeing Zambia as offering a stable and predictable environment with an elected government and functional democracy.  It is this positive environment which is seen as explaining why Zambia remained resilient through the financial crisis of 2009 and enabled the country to rebound strongly in 2010. It is noted in the report that foreign private capital inflows into Zambia posted a strong recovery to over US $3.3 billion from a slump of below US $1 billion recorded in 2009. But as we review this report, it is important not to gloss over some of the challenges that must be addressed in order to consolidate this positive environment. These challenges include infrastructural deficiencies in transport, telecommunications and energy, the small market that Zambia presents, constraints to doing business, enduring perceptions of corruption, inadequate skills and talent management.  Although the country has seen increase in investment in many sectors such as construction, agriculture and the financial sector, copper remains the major focus of foreign investment. But over-dependence on natural resource wealth and the related commodity prices is not a very sustainable route to growth. This consideration brings into focus one aspect that this workshop should address, that is the need to encourage private investment across many sectors. The country must diversify in such a way that it reduces its present dependence on copper and draws strength from other sectors. We all know the effects of over-reliance on the copper exports on our economy. It remains a source of vulnerability due to price fluctuations in the international market, making the country’s incomes highly volatile.  Apart from private investment being a stimulus for job creation, development of local suppliers, skills transfer; it can be a critical source of long-term capital for driving economic diversification. I urge you to reflect on all these issues so that the final document that is produced from this effort will be comprehensive and point to viable strategies that will promote economic diversification through directed private investment.  The end result of this workshop will be posted on the website of the Bank of Zambia and Zambia Development Agency. The Zambia Development Agency will incorporate the recommendations submitted from this exercise into its policy recommendations on how to improve the investment climate in the country. With these few remarks, I wish you good deliberations.  I thank you… 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Darmin Nasution: Building efficient equilibrium towards sustainable growth Speech by Dr Darmin Nasution, Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the Bankers’ Dinner, Jakarta, 9 December 2011. *   *   * Respectable Members of Parliament,  Prominent Bankers, Businessmen and Dignitaries, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  Assalamu’alaikum Wr. Wb,  Good Evening and May God Bless Us All, To open my speech here today held in such salubrious settings, I would like to invite you all to join me in expressing thanks and praise to God Almighty who has blessed us again with the opportunity to congregate here for the Bankers’ Dinner at the end of 2011. In distinction from the previous Bankers’ Dinner’s tradition usually held in the opening of a new year, this 2011, we have decided to organize this annual event at the closing of the year. By doing so, it is sincerely hoped that we have ample time to reflect on the success and failure over the past year as well as to discuss our expectations, risks and challenges to draw commitments ahead of time. Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen, It has come to our common understanding that changes in the constellation of the global economy since the global financial crisis of 2008 and its aftermath had left a profound and widespread fright. Against the backdrop of lingering effects from the global financial crisis, significant challenges in managing an increasingly complex macroeconomic stability has risen considerably. External shock and uncertainty seem becoming a constant dimension that incessantly shadows us along with the prevailing shifts and changes.  In this current era of globalization, every formulation and implementation would be surrounded by some degree of uncertainty. However, it is believed that every open economy such as Indonesia will be constantly challenged by different external shocks over time. The problem is we do not know when, how big and through which channel the shock will happen. Nevertheless, we should be grateful. Despite the uncertainties, our economy has shown stronger performance this year compared to last year. Solid collaboration and close coordination, based on common understanding, have become fundamental elements in achieving and maintaining the successful management of our economy.  Therefore, prior to delivering the main substance of my annual address this evening, please allow me to express my sincere appreciation and thanks to the banking community, all elements of the Central and Local Government, the Parliament, business community, academics, observers, the media and all other parties that I am, unfortunately, unable to acknowledge individually, who have been so incredibly supportive of Bank Indonesia in fulfilling its duties. For me personally, my journey in leading Bank Indonesia, a state institution with legal mandate to maintain national macroeconomic stability, is extremely precious and cherished experience. The experience in this arduous journey through labyrinths of trials and tribulations, has bestowed upon me a deeper understanding of our economic dynamics. Hence, as citizen of this great nation myself, the mandate has also provided great honor and opportunity for me to pay homage to our nation and all Indonesians by always giving my best.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches This evening, the time has come for me to reflect on what Bank Indonesia has achieved during the years of my leadership and communicate the plans and strategies beforehand by presenting my views regarding the economic prospects and challenges to be faced in the years to come and their implications on Bank Indonesia. I genuinely hope that the future perspective I plan to present here this evening can serve as a contribution for us all in determining some common measures to achieve a better national economic future. For that reason, the theme of my speech this evening is “Building Efficient Equilibrium towards Sustainable Growth.” Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen, By the theme, I would like to bring your thoughts and views to meditate over the question on how we suppose to place the function and role of banking industries in achieving economic development goals. In particular, I am asking all of us here to contemplate on how to heal from inefficiency disease that has hindered our economy from growing higher and more sustainable. Only by such sustaining growth, then the problem of poverty and unemployment can be solved altogether. It is technically believed that high and sustainable growth often refers to potential economic growth. Based on our estimate, the potential growth of Indonesian economy is around 7%, provided that investment could grow by 12% per year.  However, to achieve sustainable economic growth, two conditions have to be satisfied. First, there should be a continuous condusive macroeconomic environment. Second, capital accumulation and total factor productivity should grow so that economic capacity and competitiveness would steadily increase. Capital accumulation can be achieved through investment in the form of machinery, plants, research and development and human capital. The sustainability of investment is influenced by multiple factors, such as profit expectation, investment climate, and not less important, the availability of financing. For Indonesian economy, the scarcity of financing is among the most binding constraints of investment activity. This has been reflected in the latest surveys on sectoral mapping and on business condition. More specifically, the surveys pointed to financing constraint suffered by business players, particularly difficulties in accessing bank loan, resulting from too high lending rate, too demanding collateral obligation, and too complicated administrative requirement. Reflecting on the survey results, I would like to invite all of us to retrospect on the place and role of banking industry. There is no doubt that banking industry has its strategic role in our national economic chain. Looking back into its evolution through innumerable crises and elongated learning curve, it would not be excessive to say that our banking industry should have been transformed itself into better banking industry as expected by the public. The public craves for banking industry that is not only sound and robust, but also capable to effectively and efficiently participate in financing the economy. The establishment of sound and robust banking industry on the one hand, and its successful in performing their intermediation function effectively and efficiently on the other hand, are two things that cannot stand apart. It’s like two sides of a coin. It is possibly there is a trade-off between the two, but we can certainly find the optimum point between the two. We cannot remain silent, static and satisfied too soon, believing that our banking industry has reached a good equilibrium, while we know that banking industries in other Asian countries continue to pursue improvement and transform for the better to attain the real equilibrium of sound, robust, and efficient banking industries. If it is the bad equilibrium that prevails, then we will face difficulties and hardships in coping up with the imminent challenges laid bare before us in welcoming The ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) by 2015. When we do not have the capability to compete in the globalization era, we become less compatible with other nations. Consequently, we become less able to benefit from globalization and only accept-induced harm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen, Amidst the increasingly strong currents of globalization, I see 2011 as a fascinating and worthy of note year. Throughout 2011, we have booked numerous successful achievements which bring immense satisfaction. Yet, the year is also full of dynamics and mounting challenges that have transformed us to become a relatively more matured entity in managing our national economic stability. In managing our national economy during the year 2011, global fluctuations and uncertainty seem to be a constant threat looming incessantly over us. The uncertainty of European mechanism for sovereign debt crisis resolution and widespread fears of the lingering global recession have become two epicenters triggering turbulence and unrest in the global financial markets during 2011. In closely following up the European debt crisis, we experience an infinite uncertainty of walking into dark abyss. We do not know yet how profound and how much longer the European debt crisis will continue to last because the dimension of the crisis is significantly extensive and complex. At present, there are negative events producing more negative events in a reinforcing vicious cycle (adverse feedback loop) as reflected in the government debt crisis, worsening fragility of banking industries, and the simultaneous slowdown in economic activity which in turn escalates the crisis into precipitous and prolonged crisis.  Meanwhile, the U.S. economic recovery appears to remain stagnant due to the restricted maneuverability in fiscal policy to stimulate economic activity. The combination of a relatively constrained fiscal policy and economic slowdown has naturally compelled them to pin their hopes on their central bank as the savior of the economy. However, the diminishing room to cut interest rate has coerced central banks like The Federal Reserve to invent creative policies to stimulate economy through “quantitative easing”. As an emerging market country, we, too, suffer the blows of such measure in the form of two-way cross border capital flows. Retrospect to these highlights, it is not my intention to discourage us into a pessimist in looking up to the future. Quite the opposite, these highlights are presented to make us continue to be vigilant and devise stretched policy frameworks to withstand large adverse shocks in anticipation of global imbalances and uncertainty in the coming year that is predicted to be no much better than the current condition. We are also required to make adjustments and re-alignment over the prevailing forecasts. Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen, We should be grateful, in the midst of unrelenting global turmoil; the resilience of financial sector and national economy has been increasingly demonstrated robustness. At least, during 2011 the Indonesian economy has managed to insulate itself from the spillover effects of European debt crisis through trade channel due to its robust basis of largely domestic demand-driven economy within our economic structure. Despite having successfully safe-guarded our financial system integrity, we believe that its spillover effects through financial markets channel had been felt ever since the start of the Greece’s fiscal crisis in mid 2010. In early 2011, a period in which optimism over the global economic recovery flourished, massive capital inflow flooded our market, thus rupiah was greatly appreciated. However, this optimism faded instantly in April and May 2011 following the credit rating downgrades for Portugal and Greece by Fitch. In early September 2011, the scale of the crisis pressure escalated to Italy and Spain, prompting investors to reassess (repricing) the investment risk profiling and reposition the portfolio in emerging market assets, including in Indonesia. We have witnessed how rupiah has been considerably under pressure in the last three months amidst foreign currency excess demand situation.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Amidst imbalances of foreign exchange supply and demand within these last three months, Bank Indonesia has maintained a steady pace of rupiah depreciation in a relatively measured scale against regional currencies. The obtained range of fluctuations in exchange rates aligns consistently with the internal and external macroeconomic balance that create conducive atmosphere in providing greater certainty for business players in the real and financial sectors regarding the average exchange rate in the long run. Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen, We have been closely monitoring that amidst massive pressures on global financial markets, our economy had bred strong resilient forces that make it more apt to mitigate external turbulences. This heartening situation has provided us some space to direct various macro-economic indicators into the right track (on-track). Domestic household consumption expenditure remains strong, while investment and exports continue to rise. In spite of this, the inconsequential realization of fiscal capital spending has led to situation in which multiplier effects of fiscal operations towards limited Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is still inadequate. With the ever-increasing investment, the investment ratio to GDP rose to 31.3% compared to 23.6% in 2005. The increased investment was also reflected in increased imports of capital goods mainly in the form of machinery, the high growth in investment lending, and the expansion of Foreign Direct Investment. The increasing role of investment and export has paved the way to the well-maintained of a balanced economic growth in 2011. For 2011, the Indonesian economics is projected to grow 6.5%, surpassing the achievements of 2010 at 6.1%. Corresponding to the increased investment, manufacturing industry is projected to grow by 6.1% (yoy), offsetting the growth in the extractive sectors such as mining. It is heartening to note that the expansion of manufacturing industry has boosted absorption of workforce in formal sector. Consequently, unemployment rate fell to 6.6% in August 2011 from 7.1% in August 2010. Portrayal of our success in maintaining exceptionally high economic growth even during the recent global downturn is deemed satisfactory with the Consumer Price Index (IHK) inflation remained under control. The IHK inflation is forecasted reached only 3.9% (yoy). Meanwhile, core inflation remains steady in these past three-years at around 4.0% which indicates that the economy is yet operating below its potential growth. This occurs because an increased production capacity is simultaneously correspond with increased investment.  I perceive this trend as a good start because it means capital accumulation process is on the lead to buttress the effectiveness of the productive capacity expansion of the economy. Our latest assessment on the phenomena of supply side constraint points to the fact that the sensitivity of price increase (core inflation) to growth increase has declined during the last 5 year, particularly compared to early 2000s.  Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen, In the midst of sluggish economic recovery in developed countries and commodity price correction within global market, Indonesia’s exports performance remains solid. Exports grew 28.2% during 2011. We can take advantage of the increased intra-regional trade in Asia; so that adverse effects of the economic slowdown in developed countries can be compensated by increased exports to Asian countries having high economic growth such as China and India. In the meantime, imports continued to grow rapidly (30.4%) as a consequence of accelerated economic activity. I conclude that the rising imports performance is still within a relatively safe and healthy outlook because it is likely associated with the imported raw materials and capital goods to spur increased production capacity.  Meanwhile, the quality of capital inflow structure is significantly improving with the increased foreign direct investment (FDI) exceeded portfolio investments. Overall, in 2011, the balance 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 of payments booked surplus of USD 12.6 billion and foreign reserves rose to USD 111.0 (December 7, 2011). Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen, The financial system stability preserved in the midst of global turbulence is also attributable to the resilience of our banking industry, which is increasingly able to absorb instability risks while maintaining its intermediation function. Improvement in capital and consistent implementation of bank prudential principles appear to be effective in avoiding drastic deterioration in the industry. This is reflected in the low gross non-performing loan (NPL) ratio, reaching only 2.7%, far below the indicative threshold of 5%, while capital adequacy ratio (CAR) was recorded at 17.2% at end of October 2011. Despite pressures on domestic foreign exchange market, the rupiah liquidity condition in the interbank money market (PUAB) remains unaffected, while banking liquidity also continues to be adequate. Third party fund (DPK) in 2011 (up the October) grew 19,0% yoy, while ratio of liquid assets to non-core deposits was kept above 100% (182.0%) as of October 2011. The banking intermediation function is managed to run as planned. In 2011 credit growth reached 25.7% (yoy), while loan to deposit ratio (LDR) rose to 81.4% as of October 2011 from 75.5% at end 2010. The quality of the credit growth escalates as credit to productive sectors increases reflected by growth of investment credit that reached 31% as of October 2011.  In addition to the enhanced ability to absorb risks, our banking industry is also able to gain large amount of profit, in fact the largest among ASEAN countries. In October 2011, return on assets (ROA) of the banking industry stood at 3.11%, far above ASEAN average of 1.14%. Meanwhile, for Islamic banking, based on a survey conducted by BMB Islamic Finance, Islamic business and management consultancy based in London, Indonesia Islamic financial industry occupied the 4th position in the world after Iran, Malaysia and Saudi Arabia. Indeed, this is a very satisfactory achievement. In September 2011, total assets of Islamic banking has reached Rp 126, 6 trillion or 3.8% of total national banking assets, grew by 47.8% (yoy) and the highest in the last 3 years. The average CAR of Islamic Banks (BUS) and Sharia Unit (UUS) grew at 16%, while the average Capital adequacy Ratio (CAR ) of Islamic Rural Bank (BPRS) 24.7% . In the rural banks group, in late October 2011 a year on year assets grew by 20.56%, credit 20.96%, third party fund (DPK) 21.31%, and the number of deposit accounts grew 9.72%, while Capital adequacy Ratio (CAR), in late October 2011 grew 28 , 58%. Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen, I view the positive achievement of the national economy in 2011 as a result of hard work and strong cooperation among stakeholders, which is supported actively by the banking community, business agents and the general public. In this opportunity, I would like to highlight several policy actions taken by Bank Indonesia in confronting the national economy dynamics during 2011. On the monetary side, Bank Indonesia’s policy in 2011 is basically a strengthening of previous year’s policy mix, but further calibrated to the dynamics and challenges of the economy during 2011. Interest rate policy throughout 2011 is directed to be consistent with the predetermined inflation target of 5%±1% and 4,5%±1% in 2011 and 2012, respectively. In February 2011 Bank Indonesia increased BI Rate by 25 bps to 6.75% as a response to intensifying inflation expectation, which is attributable to high volatile food inflation. Since September 2011, the monetary stance is turned to an easing phase, by decreasing the lower limit of interbank money market interest rate corridor. Further in October and November 2011, Bank Indonesia lowered BI rate by 25 bps and 50 bps, respectively to arrive 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches at the 6.0% level. The decision to lower BI Rate is indeed quite delicate since it has to be taken in the middle of ongoing turmoil in the global financial market and against the market mainstream. However, we have strong belief supported by highly fundamental consideration. Since mid 2011, we have been convinced that CPI inflation would move down, possibly even reaching below the 5±1% target. On the other hand, we need to lay stronger basis for domestic demand in anticipation of global economic slowdown. It can be noted that this year Bank Indonesia is ahead of the curve by being the first central bank in Asia to lower policy interest rate. We view that the national economy should also be ring-fenced from instability sources such as short term capital flows. In addition, the structure of capital flows needs to be amended by shifting it to longer instruments. Therefore, on 13 May 2011, the SBI’s holding period is extended to 6 months from previously 1 month. This policy proves to be effective in halting capital inflows into SBI and shift foreign capital investment to government securities market.  Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen, Experience demonstrates that crisis management often bears extremely high economic and social cost and involves long recovery. Against this background, Bank Indonesia also implemented Crisis Management Protocol (CMP). However, the CMP needs to be equipped with proper guidance and legal basis which regulate crisis prevention and resolution process in a systematic and integrated way on a national scale, through Financial Safety Net Law. Financial crisis generally starts with liquidity squeeze in the interbank market, market interest rate hike, and exchange rate pressure. For that reason, we intensify monitoring on financial market transactions, especially to scrutinize vulnerabilities that would lead to financial crisis. Through the developed monitoring system, we wish to ensure the adequacy of rupiah and foreign exchange liquidity in the financial market, as well as to maintain exchange rate stability. Therefore, we conduct a combination of intervention in the foreign exchange market and acquisition of government securities (SBN) in the secondary market. This policy is quite effective in stabilizing the exchange rate and SBN price, while also increase SBN accumulation in Bank Indonesia for monetary operation purpose (Reverse Repo).  In order to maintain the stability of the exchange rate, we also need to seek long-term policy breakthrough by ensuring sustainable supply of foreign exchange.  Against this background, at end September 2011, we took the initiative to issue a regulation to obligate export proceed and proceed from external debt to be deposited in domestic banking system. This policy can be considered soft compared to those in Thailand and Malaysia, who has regulated tightly foreign exchange flows related to exports and imports since decades ago. We have been taken hostage for too long by market mechanism, which in fact lead to market imperfection, and we need to correct it.  Considering the significant role of inflation from the supply side problem, Bank Indonesia has been in close coordination with the government to preserve price stability, particularly resulting from volatile nature of commodities prices and government’s decision on administered prices.  Bank Indonesia has taken steps to increase the role of Inflation Control Teams, both in national and regional levels. Additionally, Bank Indonesia regional representative offices have also routinely published Regional Economic Study which serves as outlets of various aspects of the regional economy.  Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen, On the banking area, within 2011 bank Indonesia has pursued several policies framed by four pillars, namely: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 a. Policy to boost banking intermediation role, to enable more efficient and transparent intermediation, as well as to open access of low-income community to financial services. Included in this policy is the policy on Transparency of Information on Primary Lending Rate and the continuation of financial inclusion program. I put strong attention this strengthening of banking transparency, which is expected to lead up to efficiency. First, a transparent banking industry would encourage healthy competition through better market discipline. Second, it would increase banks’ ability in identifying aspects that influence cost structure such that higher efficiency level can be achieved. b. Policy to enhance banking resilience, so that banks remain strong and sound in confronting competition, through more transparent management that refers to good governance principles. This policy includes improvement in the calculation of capital to suit better with risks, and obligate banks to implement anti fraud strategy, prudential principles in outsourcing and risk management in delivering services to prime customers.  c. Policy to strengthen supervisory function, aiming at increasing the effectiveness of bank supervision, especially in terms of the quality of early warning system. Consequently, we apply improvements to the regulation for bank reporting to Bank Indonesia.. Meanwhile, to enhance the effectiveness of resolution to banking problems, we impose deadline for every bank supervision status through the regulation of “Determination of Status and Follow-Up Supervision.” d. Strengthening of macroprudential policy. This policy is aimed to strengthen financial system stability through better implementation of macroprudential surveillance. Included in this policy is increase in foreign exchange reserve requirement and LDR-reserve requirement.  In the mean time, policy on syariah banking in 2011 continues to be pursued in terms harmonization of regulation with conventional banking, relaxation of regulation, and implementation of Law No.21 Year 2008 on Syariah Banking. Among the issued regulation is regulation on asset quality for syariah commercial bank, syariah business unit, and syariah rural banks, financing restructurization, and risk management for syariah commercial; bank and syariah business unit. We also support research, training and facilitation of SMEs though policy and strategy to “Enhance SME’s Access to Banks” and “Encourage Banks to finance SMEs”. This policy is aimed to enable SMEs to enhance its eligibility and capability so that they can meet banks requirements (bankable), while also boosting regional economy capacity. With intensifying payment transactions through means of payment such as credit card, ATM/debit card, and e-money, we pursue a number of policies to ensure the establishment of safe and efficient payment system.  This policy includes among others standardization of chip-based ATM/Debit Card, establishment of national payment gateway and standardization of electronic money. Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen, It is important for me to say that we cannot and may not assume that our macro stability will definitely continue in the future. This assumption can lead us to comfort zone that would reduce our ability to anticipate future challenges early on.  For that reason, allow me in this part to highlight views on the challenges confronted by our economy, which requires hard works from all of us to anticipate and address them in 2012. The increasingly difficult external challenge is related to vulnerability and recovery of the global economic recovery, which may be worse than predicted (downside risk). This is considering the complexity of European debt trap which definitely will affect global economy. IMF has just revised 2012 global growth from 4,0% to only 2,0%.  
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches On the one hand, with the dismal global picture, national economic machinery will depends on effectivity of domestic absorption and the ability to benefit from local markets. In connection to that, the capacity to preserve growth momentum will be limited should banking intermediary and fiscal expenditure absorption are sub-optimal. On the other hand, combination among global economic deterioration, low interest rate, dan global excess liquidity, tends to shift global portfolio allocation. Such situation is a source of instability which challenges emerging markets’ authorities in sustaining its financial stability. As a domestic challenge, we have a lot of homework to finish. Some of them are old issues we never solve and thus have created inefficiency in the economy. In financial sector, national banking industry after 1998 has been more vigilant. However, its contribution for economic development is still in the margin. If we look at the statistic, Indonesian banking asset to GDP ratio has reached 47,2% in September 2011. However, credit to GDP ratio is only 29,0%. As comparisons, credit to GDP ratios in the region vary, with Malaysia, Thailand and China recorded 111,4%, 117,0%, and 131.0%. Opinions of business players provided a similar picture. From Bank Indonesia recent survey on “how to finance your company”, the proportion of bank loan in total financing is very low, that is only 25% for working capital, and only 21% for investment. On the contrary, intental financing has been the main source of financing, 48% for working capital and 61% for investment. In other words, it seems that the large asset size in banking industry is not followed by high contribution to the economy. This is also because there is a substantial portion of banking assets that are not productive from macroeconomic point of view. Those are ones in the forms of monetary instruments (Fasbi, TD, SBI) and government debts (SBN). The size of banks placement in monetary instruments and government debt securities are Rp 415.48 trillion and Rp 245.97 trillion, respectively, as of end of October 2011. In total, they constitute 31.4% of the total credit of Rp 2,106.2 trillion. About 60% of Bank Indonesia monetary instruments are currently held by the 10 biggest banks. Moreover, it seems that to preserve high probability, banks charge high lending rates to customers, partly also to compensate for the generally lower rate from placement in monetary instruments and government securities.  The low efficiency of banking industry has also contributed to high lending rate. This is reflected by operational cost to operational revenue ratio (BOPO) of 86.44% as of October 2011. For comparison, the same ratios for ASEAN countries are 40%–60%. Although intermediation function somehow works, operational inefficiency generate high cost financing, resulting in low economic competitiveness. Such high financing cost can be illustrated by lending rate of working capital loan, investment loan dan consumption loan, which are 12.09%, 11.66%, and 13.40%, respectively, as of October 2011. This is despite BI rate having reached the lowest ever level of 6.0%. For comparison, with 3.0% policy rate in Malaysia and 4.5% in the Philippines, bank lending rates in Malaysia and the Philippines are only 6.5% and5.7%, respectively (October 2011). The current structural problems which give rise to false equilibrium in the banking industry can not be solved by market mechanism alone. There is a need to put a corrective policy in place to bring the system back towards its real equilibrium.  On the real sector side, inefficiency still dominates the conduct of the economy following the weakness of market microstructure, which eventually hindered market capacity to efficient allocation of resources. This feature has significant impact on inflation rate particularly on foodstuff category which tends to be volatile and uneasy to subdued. The fragile microstructure of staple food markets has significant bearing on two fronts, namely production and distribution process.  On the production front, the less effective development strategy in the agricultural sector, for instance, gives rise to imbalances between supply and consumption of rice which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 unfortunately has taken place for a long period of time. The recent increase of rice supply resulted from rice import, seen as a mere short cut solution to the problem.  On the distribution front, the weakness of the market microstructure revolves around (i) the availability of logistics services, transportation, and transportation infrastructure related to foodstuff, (ii) the availability of a symmetric market information for suppliers, wholesalers, and retailers, and (iii) the presence of policy that favors particular market players which eventually create oligopolistic behavior in the distribution market, as well as rent-seeking activities. The weakness of the microstructure in the distribution market has caused rising prices in the consumer level, but not in the producer level.  Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, The magnitude of challenges we face in the coming years should not discourage our optimism towards the prospect of the economy. In the future, we must strive to maintain a high sense of hope and optimism, macroeconomic stability and a strong economic growth momentum. Amidst the global economic slowdown, we expect the domestic economy to grow 6.3%–6.7% in 2012, or slightly lower than in 2011 due to sluggish growth of export. For that reason, we are able to maintain stronger economic momentum provided that the foundation of domestic economic growth is strengthened.  We are confident that the lowering of the BI rate since October 2011 will revive domestic financing, particularly from the banking sector. An economic growth rate of 6.3%–6.7% will require financing (including credit channelling) amounting to Rp 598 trillion, or equivalent to a credit growth rate of 26,9% (yoy). Investment growth rate which reached 7.7% in 2011 is expected to grow even higher in 2012 at 9.7%–10.1%. Vigorous investment will eventually buttressed purchasing power hence supporting household consumption growth in 2012 which is projected to reach 4.7%–5.1%.  Meanwhile, the role of fiscal stimulus is projected to be limited in line with the conservative fiscal deficit target (1,5% of GDP) along with the still significant budget allocation for subsidies.  CPI inflation in 2012 is projected to be consistent with the target of 4,5 percent ± 1 percent in 2012–2013 and is expected to be stable at around the level of 4,5%.  Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, Considering that the management of the macroeconomy is still prone to global risk as well as the complexity of the domestic predicament, Bank Indonesia policy direction in 2012 will stay focused towards the following: a. Optimizing the role of monetary policy in supporting economic capacity as well as in mitigating the risk of global crisis.  b. Increasing the efficiency of banks in optimizing their contribution to the economy, while strengthening banking resilience.  c. Increasing the efficiency and competitiveness of the payment systems in servicing national payments as well as international payments.  d. Strengthening the resilience of macroeconomic condition by enhancing coordination in the management of crisis prevention and resolution.  e. Supporting real sector empowerment including initiatives to broaden banking access to a wide-array of community (financial inclusion).  In 2012, policy mix of instruments will be strengthened and calibrated. Policy rate response will be anchored so as to be consistent with the CPI inflation target of 4,5 percent ± 1 percent in 2012 and 2013, while at the same time maintain the momentum toward economic 
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches strengthening and mitigate the risk of global economic slowdown. This interest rate policy will also be complemented with macro-prudential policy to mitigate the risk of vulnerabilities in the consumptive sectors which is seen unsustainable or potentially prone to asset bubble risk.  The monetary operation policy strategy will be directed to maintaining interest rate stability in the rupiah money market and to supporting exchange rate stability in the forex market. I am of the view that this kind of stability is needed to provide a broader leeway for domestic financial market deepening.  Therefore, monetary operation will be based on instruments which can directly stimulate transactions in the money market such as in the rupiah interbank money market (PUAB), Repurchase Agreement (Repo), and the swap market. This approach, I believe, will be able to encourage more efficient and sound liquidity management of banks, and lessen dependence on placement in monetary instrument. I also observe the need to continue the re-alignment process of interest rate structure in the financial market by refining mechanism of the open market operation. Bank Indonesia policies on exchange rate will be centered on maintaining exchange rate stability while preserving external and internal balance of the economy, and providing certainty for all economic agents. Since January 2012, policy on exchange rate stability will be supported by the implementation of the regulation on export proceeds and foreign debt withdrawal through domestic banks. Bank Indonesia is also reviewing some regulations to enrich forex market instruments in order to revitalize hedging transactions. To curb regional inflation, we will optimize the functions of Bank Indonesia Regional Offices (KBI) as facilitator and catalyst for the acceleration of development in the region, particularly in eastern Indonesia where growth is still having immense disparity. KBI will be encouraged to carry out its functions effectively by strengthening coordination and cooperation as well as synergizing with local government. In the future, Task Force for Regional Inflation Control Team (TPID) should be sustained by strategic consumer goods information systems primarily encompassing information on national production and stock. To achieve this target, strong commitment and support from a wide variety of parties, including from relevant ministries such as Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Commerce, as well as Local Government is significantly needed. Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, On the banking sector front, policy will be directed to maintain a proper balance between improving competitiveness and strengthening banks’ resilience, as well as encouraging banks’ intermediation function including broadening access to low cost banking services for the rural community.   In order to improve banks’ competitiveness, kebijakan Suku Bunga Dasar Kredit (SBDK) will be carried on to ensure a well-functioning market mechanism so as policy targets could be achieved. From banking supervision perspective, we will continue to enhance enforcement of policy by requiring banks to include an appropriate level of targets on efficiency improvement and credit rates lowering in their business plan. Bank Indonesia is also looking into the practice of interest rate setting for third party above the level set by the Indonesia Deposit Insurance, as well as limiting the conduct of prize or gift offering to banks’ customers.  Policy to strengthen banks’ resilience will be conducted through improving banks’ capital structure. It is hoped that such policy can reinforce bank in anticipating potential risk specifically amidst global economic uncertainty.  I see that policies on consumer protection and governance also need special attention. Following several act of banking frauds during the course of 2011, policy in these two aspects needs to be reviewed. For that reason, in 2012 we will continue to refine several aspects related to customers and potential customers protection.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 Furthermore, to improve banks’ governance, several regulations on financial report transparency would be reviewed particularly in relation to published financial report and regulation pertaining to appointment of public accountant by banks. We also will examine policy on banks’ ownership and multi-licensing following the increased complexity of banks’ activities.  Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, We view that the strengthening of central bank’s role as a systemic regulator following the enactment of the law on Otoritas Jasa Keuangan (OJK) is timely as the role of banking regulation and supervision will be handed over from Bank Indonesia to OJK at the end of 2013.   Going forward, Bank Indonesia will continue to escort banking industry in the context of financial stability system. For this purpose, Bank Indonesia will conduct surveillance both on banks and non banks, examine banks in the context of macro-prudential, and will coordinate closely in the context of crisis prevention and resolution. The function and the role of Bank Indonesia to achieve financial system stability is an important part of Bank Indonesia Law’s amendment which was scheduled under 2012 National Legislation Program. Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen Aside from bank competitiveness and resilience, we will encourage the process of banking intermediation through several measures:  a. By continuing the initiatives to broaden the community access to banks (financial inclusion), particularly low cost banking services for rural community, including improving “My Saving” program (Tabunganku), developing program on financial education, implementation of Financial Identity Number and conducting survey on financial literacy.   b. Working together with government agencies, facilitating intermediation to support financing in several potential economic sectors. We will also assess any potential barriers in the financing of those sectors with relatively low credit growth. With regards to financing needs of particular sectors which are commercially unviable for banks but possessing strategic roles for the economy, Bank Indonesia together with the Government, will develop a special financing scheme.   Initiative to increase competitiveness and governance is also center in the policy direction for sharia banking particularly sharia rural banks. In addition, we will also encourage the development of products and activities of sharia banking. Going forward, strategy to develop sharia rural banks will be directed in accordance with the characteristics of sharia rural banks as a community bank with a sound, robust, and productive feature with special focus on providing financial services for SMEs and rural community.  Similar to the banking sector, financial services sector will also be encouraged to lowering economic costs. This sector includes cash and non-cash payment systems as well as transaction settlements. Bank Indonesia determines to take a lead in setting policy orientation for payment services development in the future. In this context, policy coordination among institutions and authorities  is imperative, especially since the development of payment services will also involve many parties beyond the central bank. Going forward, the development of payment services industry will be performed by the following initiatives: a. First, improving security and reliability of payment services providers by implementing risk mitigation including leveraging on technology advancement, strengthening legal framework, strengthening supervision, and improving the role of national payment services providers; 
12 BIS central bankers’ speeches b. Second, improving efficiency of national payment services providers, including encouraging the setting-up of interoperability and interconnection among services providers. c. Third, improving consumers’ protection by enhancing transparency of services providers and strengthening regulation on consumers’ protection. Those abovementioned programs on payment services development are stipulated in an integrated blueprint which serves as a guideline to establish an efficient, secure, and reliable payment system. Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  This brings me to the end of my speech this evening. A thoughtful ponders on the challenges ahead lead us to an understanding that the years ahead will not be easier than previous years. Our commitment to carry out policies and measures as already presented will definitely call for support and cooperation from all of you.  As closing remarks, I would like to invite all of you “to release our nation from any traps of inefficiency, otherwise, we will be crushed by modernization and globalization”. May Allah Almighty always be with us, bless us and lighten our way towards a better future. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Abdulrahman A Al-Hamidy: Risk strategies for Basel III compliance and beyond – extracting business value from regulatory change  Speech by His Excellency Dr Abdulrahman A Al-Hamidy, Vice Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency (SAMA), at The Institute of Banking/Moody’s Analytics Symposium, Riyadh, 30 November 2011. *      *      * Distinguished Participants, I am pleased to be here today to share my thoughts on “Risk Strategies for Basel III Compliance and Beyond”. Given the lingering global financial crisis with ongoing impact on a number of economies and financial markets, this is a relevant and timely subject to deliberate upon. I appreciate the efforts of the Institute of Banking and the Moody’s Analytics to organize this Symposium for the benefit of the bankers and supervisors in the Kingdom. I have seen the list of topics to be covered today and the impressive list of speakers and I am confident that all of you would greatly benefit from the discussions. The world today has not yet recovered from the global financial crisis that started in 2007. While the governments, central banks, supervisory authorities and international organizations have been working hard to revive and revitalize financial markets and financial institutions in many advanced markets, the recovery has been slow. Following the financial crisis the lessons learned exercise had attributed the main causes to include a long period of easy monetary policy that fueled accelerated economic growth accompanied by lax and light supervision in a number of advanced markets. Consequently, one of the key response from the authorities was to develop the BASEL III Reforms Package that aims to strengthen global supervision of international banks and banking systems. While the global banking supervisors have been working hard to improve banking supervision, the financial crisis has mutated into a fiscal crisis in some markets in Europe, once again threatening the viability of some global banks and causing the risk of contagion to other financial institutions and markets. Consequently this drives home the lessons that strengthening banking supervision alone is not sufficient and that prudent fiscal and monetary policies are essential for a sound and resilient banking system. Before I talk about Basel III, I would like to revisit the evolution of the Basel II framework which was published by the Basel Committee in June 2004 with a tentative full implementation date of 1st January 2007. Consequently in 2007 a pertinent question was that why did Basel II fail to prevent the financial crisis. The response was that apart from its slow and uneven implementation in the advanced markets, Basel II was a flawed standard that had failed to address some of the major supervisory weaknesses. These included the lack of a common definition of quality of capital, no limits on leveraging, no common standards for liquidity and a failure to recognize the excessive market risks embedded in trading and derivative transactions that had risen very sharply among the major banks. Therefore, Basel II would have not done the job it was required to do. This brings me to the Basel III which not only addresses the shortcomings of Basel II but goes far beyond by introducing a variety of new concepts which have raised the bar in terms of global supervisory standards. Some of these concepts emerged from the various lessons learned exercises that were carried out following 2007, while others are a product of serious research and reflection by the global banking supervisors. Basel III has introduced some fundamental reforms such as elevating the status of Common Equity capital as the key component of Core capital. It also has introduced the concept of a conservation capital buffer and even more importantly an additional countercyclical buffer on top of the minimum capital 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches requirements. Also Basel III has recognized that liquidity is as important if not even more important than capital for safety and viability of banking institutions. It has recognized that there must be limits on leveraging by financial institutions so that bankers are restrained from excessive risk taking. Basel III also has taken a serious and perhaps a much needed closer look at risks in trading and investment activities and particularly for derivatives and off balance sheet transactions. In July 2009, as an interim measure, Basel Committee had issued a document addressing the market and trading book weaknesses in Basel II for immediate implementation. This document is known as Basel II.5. Basel III goes much further with refinements in areas such as counterparty credit risk, Credit Value adjustments, etc. These measures should enhance the risk management, governance and supervision of such activities as securitizations, re-securitizations and credit derivatives. Also at the conceptual level there is far greater emphasis on stress testing by banking institutions for various risks. Banks are required to develop stress scenarios and demonstrate their ability to cope and survive under stressful situations. Basel III also requires supervisors to use stress testing at the systemic level. One related area of major concern that has kept Basel Committee very busy is the enhanced supervisory regime for Global Systemically Important Financial Institutions(G-SIFIs). These institutions will be subject to a more stringent, sensitive and effective supervisory regime and will also face a higher capital charge in form of common equity capital. They are already subject to supervisory colleges and to the emerging requirements of stronger resolution regimes. There is already an informal consensus that these rules will be equally applied to Domestic SIFIs. I do not want to delve into many details on these measures which I am sure will be covered by various speakers today. I just want to make a fundamental point that the Global supervision is reverting back to fundamental values of prudence, conservatism and simplicity. These are the same values that SAMA has always espoused and maintained and therefore for us the transition to Basel III raises no major concerns nor poses major challenges. Let me now highlight some challenges to be globally faced by banks and supervisors in implementation of Basel III:  Firstly, Base III has substantially raised the quality, quantity and international consistency of capital and liquidity. The new rules are aimed at strengthening of capital and risk management in banks. This may require banks to inject high quality fresh capital, preserve existing capital by limiting the payout of dividends and bonuses, realize efficiency gains, and mobilize liquidity from new sources in certain jurisdictions to meet additional capital and liquidity requirements. This would be a major challenge for some internationally active banks, particularly under present market conditions;  Secondly, internationally active banks facing major capital shortfalls will have to revisit their business strategies on global presence and expansion plans. They might be required to take some tough decisions on exiting from certain locations or considering merger and consolidation of their affiliates and subsidiaries;  Thirdly, implementation of Basel III will require banks to assess their existing capacity on estimation of additional capital and liquidity requirements. This may also require some banks to make additional investment in systems and procedures to build-up their capacity;  Fourthly, new capital and liquidity rules are conceptually and technically very demanding. This will require banks and supervisors to undergo extensive trainings to learn these new concepts and techniques; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Fifthly, given the scarce availability of qualified human resources, banks and supervisors will face the challenge of attracting and retaining staff with appropriate skill sets;  Sixthly, meeting the additional regulatory requirements relating to Basel III implementation will require banks to reassess their existing regulatory reporting and compliance structure to ensure its adequacy. This is important given the extended transitional timeline for implementation, during which some banks are required to participate in quantitative impact studies while others will have to prepare for full implementation within specified timeline. We also have to keep in mind that new rules are still evolving in certain areas based on the results of quantitative impact studies and thus may require further adjustments in the current regulatory requirements;  Lastly, and the most important step to be taken by banks, is adopting the robust governance structure that best suits their business model and risk profile. The Board of Directors should have a clear understanding of their role in corporate governance and be able to exercise sound and objective judgment about the affairs of the bank. The senior management should ensure that the bank’s activities are consistent with the business strategy, risk tolerance/appetite and policies approved by the board. This is the cornerstone on which any effective risk management framework, sound incentive structure and robust governance arrangements must be built. In order to give you our perspective of implementing Basel III, I would point out that our Banking Control Law (BCL) already provides for a clear definition of capital and also provides for legal capital, liquidity and leverage ratios and limits on large exposures. The BCL also allows SAMA to introduce appropriate and relevant international standards such as those emanating from the Basel Committee or the Financial Stability Board. Over the years, SAMA has proactively introduced international standards and best practices in Saudi Arabia to ensure that the Saudi Banks are well managed, adequately capitalized and effectively governed. This is also reflected in the safety and soundness of individual banks and the resilience of the overall banking system. In line with its stance, SAMA was among the first group of non Basel Countries at that time to introduce Basel I framework in 1992 and the Basel II in January 2008. While Basel I was crucial for the introduction of the concepts of risk sensitivity of banks’ assets and tier-1 and tier 2 capital, Basel II introduced us to the concepts of internal risk rating systems and risk modeling. From SAMA perspective the greatest value in introducing Basel II was the significant progress that banks have made in four areas. Firstly, with the introduction of the Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Plan(ICAAP), they have improved their capital planning process. ICAAP requires banks to align their business plans with their risk appetite and risk profiles in projecting their capital over the medium term. The second area of improvement is on other Pillar 2 risks including interest rate, liquidity, FX, strategic, technology and reputation. All banks have developed methodologies to identify, quantify, manage and allocate capital to such risks. These were risks for which no capital was required earlier. A third area is stress testing where Saudi banks have made good progress. This allows them to know their risk tolerance and resilience in times of stress. Finally, the introduction of Pillar 3 has strengthened the disclosure of Saudi banks to high international standards. This brings me to an important natural question. What does Basel III mean for Saudi banking system? Well let me assure you that our preliminary analysis is that the transition to Basel III in the Basel agreed time frames should be smooth. Saudi banks already maintain a high level of core common equity capital. The average following the introduction of Basel III has been about 17%, of which around 85% is core common equity. Similarly Saudi Banks maintain a high level of liquidity which has averaged over 30% over the past two decades. SAMA already requires banks to keep conservation buffers above the minimum and has 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches introduced stringent stress testing requirements. Banks are making good progress in all areas.  SAMA has already started the Basel III implementation process by publishing its plans, introducing relevant prudential returns and providing guidance to banks. As a part of implementation plans, SAMA has conducted quantitative impact studies on selected banks, started capacity building within SAMA as well as the banking industry, and formed technical groups comprising of supervisors and bankers to deliberate on technical issues and seek industry feedback to facilitate smooth implementation. Our multi-pronged strategy to implement Basel III is focused on the following areas:  i. Setting the regulatory requirements for banks essentially based on the Basel Committee’s rules and international best practices on implementation of Basel III; ii. Conducting impact studies and collecting data from banks to assess the impact of new capital and liquidity rules on Saudi banks; iii. Providing guidance to banks on regulatory and technical issues to facilitate the implementation; iv. Reviewing the plans of banks for implementation and holding bilateral and industry-wide meetings at various levels to track progress on implementation; v. Arranging and/or coordinating training programs and other capacity building initiatives for supervisors as well as bankers to enhance their understanding of technical issues. We are also actively participating in various international meetings, conferences and forums to keep ourselves updated on international developments; vi. Implementation of various other standards of BCBS and FSB, besides Basel III. These includes, inter alia, the FSB Principles and Standards on Compensation, BCBS Principles on Stress testing, plans to introduce rules for D-SIFIs, etc. In many areas, the new rules are equally applicable to the branches of foreign banks operating in Saudi Arabia; vii. Review and updating of SAMA regulatory requirements in other related areas. SAMA’s regulatory initiatives are aimed at protecting the interest of depositors and consumers of banks, besides ensuring the safety and soundness of banks. In conclusion, I would say that in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the financial landscape has changed substantially and still continues to change at a rapid pace. In order to cope with the challenges ahead, the supervisors and central banks are required to have better management of systemic risks through coordination and cooperation in global standards and policies. We believe that Basel III when fully implemented will contribute significantly in managing the systemic risks and strengthening of global financial system. However, this will require substantial investment in systems and human resources as well as strengthening of governance and risk management frameworks. But this does not mean that we should excessively rely on advanced risk methodologies and models, and undermine the role of sound professional judgment and common sense. In practice, the use of quantitative risk models have proved much more effective when coupled with judgment and institutive thinking. We have been emphasizing upon our banks the value of strengthening risk management frameworks and methodologies along with requiring their boards to institute a strong corporate governance culture to manage the banks effectively. We at SAMA are also actively monitoring the new developments both globally and in domestic markets, and are fully geared to ensure stability of our financial system. I wish you a fruitful symposium! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Anselmo Teng: China and Macao – continued financial industry growth Address by Mr Anselmo Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at a banquet hosted by the Macao Financial Sector in Commemoration of the 62nd Anniversary of the People’s Republic of China and the 12th Anniversary of the Establishment of the Macao Special Administrative Region, Macao, 6 December 2011.  *      *      * The Honourable Mr. Chui Sai On, Chief Executive of the MSAR,  The Honourable Mr. Ho Hau Wah, Vice-Chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference,  The Honourable Ms. Gao Yan, Deputy Director, Liaison Office of the Central People’s Government,  The Honourable Mr. Hu Zhengue, Special Envoy, Office of the Commissioner of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,  The Honourable Mr. Ye Yixin, Chairman of the Macao Association of Banks,  Honourable Guests,  Dear Friends of the Financial Sector,  Good Evening!  First of all, I would like to thank the Standing Committee for the invitation. With great pleasure and excitement, I participate in this party in commemorating the 62nd Anniversary of the People’s Republic of China and the 12th Anniversary of the Establishment of the Macao Special Administrative Region.  The financial sector of Macao has weathered the tests arising from international financial market crises since the return of Macao to its Motherland. Although the challenges have been overcome thus far, upheavals are still prevailent in the international financial markets. There are uncertainties. It is worth our while to advise you, ladies and gentlemen that, according to relevant financial data, the Macao financial sector has been maintaining its stability and viability. This is in fact the result of the coherent spirit of our practitioners when they work shoulder to shoulder in the endeavour of self-enhancement.  As per the end of October, aggregate assets of the Macao banking sector amounted to MOP637.7 billion, total deposits were valued at MOP408.1 billion, loans stood at MOP313.5 billion, both registered remarkable growth year-on-year. Our practitioners have adopted a prudent attitude in business operation as usual; capital adequacy ratio reached at 14.3% in the 3rd quarter while non-performing loan ratio was only 0.34%. In positive pursuit of developing more financial services by our practitioners, the banking sector was able to score an aggregate profit of MOP4.17 billion for the first three quarters, which was again a positive year-on-year growth. At the moment, the banks operating in Macao have good quality assets, ample liquidity, adequate capital and fine profit-making capability.  In our insurance business, the total premium receipts for the first three quarters amounted to MOP3.2 billion, which was a 13.5% increase year-on-year. The overall operation of the insurance industry has been steady, the aggregate asset value, including value of assets guaranteeing technical reserves has registered marked increase. It reflects the stable financial status of the industry, which carries much weight in sustainable development.  In tandem with the perfection and enhancement of the financial industry, it carries more weight in the overall GDP, reaching 8.5%. The continued growth of our financial industry will further promote appropriate diversification of the economy.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches In mid-October, AMCM organized a delegation of the financial sector to visit Beijing and Shanghai. Making use of this opportunity, I am pleased to advise our financial practitioners that initial result has been achieved.  At the moment, this Authority is following up the matter closely and discusses with the relevant departments with a view to realizing the widening of the scope of RMB business and seeking more investment channels for the MSAR fiscal reserves. Simultaneously, in promoting Macao to be the RMB settlement platform for trade between the Mainland and Portuguese speaking countries, preparatory work has been rolled out with the policy support of the Central Government.  Under the auspices of the Central Government and relevant departments and the direction and support of the Liaison Office and the MSAR Government, we believe all policies and arrangements beneficial to the overall economic development of the MSAR will be realized. The financial sector will continue to serve its pivotal function in servicing the economy and promote overall economic growth. As the regulator, we shall not only continue to maintain the order and normal functioning of the market, and will also support, as usual, our practitioners in their development and uphold the lawful rights of our financial consumers.  In commemorating the anniversary of our Motherland and the MSAR, we gather together delightfully. Before I end the speech, let me express, on behalf of the Board of Directors of the Monetary Authority of Macao, our heartfelt wishes for the prosperity and strength of our Motherland and happiness of all her people, the prosperity and stability of the MSAR, the continued growth of our financial industry in a steady manner, your health and plain sailing at work.  Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Fostering price stability and a sound financial system in Uganda Speech by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the end of year thanksgiving party, held at the Bank of Uganda, Kampala, 9 December 2011. *      *      * Our Guest Speaker, Dr. Steve Ogan, Members of the Board, Senior Management of the Bank, Invited guests, Members of staff of the Bank, Ladies and Gentlemen. On behalf of the Board, Management and Staff of the Bank of Uganda, I am pleased to welcome you all to this end of year thanksgiving celebration. As children of God, thanksgiving ought to be integral part of our lives. Let us choose to Praise God with songs and magnify Him with thanksgiving as the Psalmist did in Psalm 69:30. We, at Bank of Uganda, have every reason to give thanks to the Almighty God. He has given us amazing victories throughout the year 2011, amidst challenges of vast magnitude at Global, regional, national, institutional and individual level. We can only be said to be alive in those moments when our hearts are conscious of our treasures. ~ (Thornton Wilder) Out of God’s unmerited grace and favor, He has kept us alive and well throughout the year to work tirelessly towards our mission of fostering price stability and a sound financial system. We thank God for everyone within and outside the Bank that has contributed to the pursuit of our vision and mission. We have witnessed outstanding victories which could never have been achieved without grace and favor from God. Through the year, there has been a smooth and gradual transition from the old currency notes to the new notes which registered significant reductions in counterfeit crimes. We wish to thank the Almighty God for enabling us win a Global Award, the first of its kind in Africa, for the 50,000/= Uganda Currency note as the best Bank Note of the year for 2010 by International Bank Note Society (IBNS). Bank of Uganda also received an award for the Best Bank Notes Series in 2010 from International Association of Currency Affairs (IACA). The twin awards were received by the Bank of Uganda Deputy Governor in Singapore in September 2011. This came shortly after the Bank of Uganda Governor was recognized as the best African Central Bank Governor by the African Banker Awards 2011. We continue to thank God for His wisdom and guidance in streamlining monetary policy to positively impact on price stability. For the first time ever in about 20 years, the Country’s inflation rate had grown above 30%, a situation which appeared to be growing out of control. We are grateful to God that as this year draws to a close, the inflation rate is dropping from 30.4% in the month of October to 29% in November and will certainly continue to drop. The Uganda Shilling has also appreciated to the dollar from a low adverse rate of almost  2,900/= in the month of October to a higher value of 2,500/= to date. We have registered several milestones towards achievement of set goals of customer satisfaction by aiming at zero tolerance for inefficiencies in the financial, monetary and payment systems which in turn have contributed tremendously towards regional harmonization. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Some of these milestones include,  Close and effective supervision of financial institutions to ensure financial soundness of the economy,  Launching of inflation targeting,  upgrade of the RTGS from a Uganda Shilling based System to one that supports East African Currencies,  creation of a platform for cross-border payments,  launching of Internet Banking,  and facelift of the BOU website. Since the Implementation of Bank of Uganda Banking System (BBS) in July 2010, the Bank has registered the following successes:  Considerable improvement in service delivery to our customers  Real time account balances and statements  Provision of daily government position  Holding 2 daily clearing sessions  And Improved financial reporting Amidst all the above milestones, there have been significant challenges. “To be tested is good. The challenged life may be the best therapist.” (Gail Sheehy). During this year, we (BOU) have featured in the media but we have seen the Almighty God vindicate us from various accusations. We continue to thank God for the registered victory, the trust that He will take us through any other challenges and that through all this we are coming out more resilient and a better BOU! This year, as part of our corporate social responsibility, we have committed to facilitate the running of a Mobile Dental Clinic for HIV positive children that will be held at Reach Out Mbuya Clinic in Kasaala on 17th December 2011. This clinic will be conducted by Dr. Brian Rushaju who is here today with his wife and I thank Dr. Rushaju for partnering with us in this cause. I want to thank each one of you very candidly for your individual and collective contributions towards making this year a great success. I would like to express my sincere gratitude to God for the opportunity to serve our nation with members of staff through the year. At the same time, my condolences go out to staff members who lost their loved ones in 2011. May the Almighty God comfort them with grace and mercy as they continue serve the Bank. I would like to encourage each one of us to celebrate life and strive to excel in our different roles here at the Bank knowing that God is indeed with us. As Dorothy Sayers put it, “Work is not primarily a thing one does to live, but the thing one lives to do. It is or it should be, the full expression of the worker’s faculties, the thing in which he finds spiritual, mental, and bodily satisfaction, and the medium in which he offers himself to God.” Finally, with a heart full of gratitude to the Almighty God, I wish to congratulate members of the Board, Senior Management and all members of staff for coming to the end of the year. I am eternally grateful for the contributions you have made to enable the Bank to carry out its responsibilities very effectively during the year. I also wish to thank the Bank of Uganda Christian Fellowship, for their continued prayers and intercession for the Bank. May the grace of God that enables you to take charge of this responsibility continue to abound in your lives. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 I thank God for all our customers including Government, Projects, Financial institutions, the public and all other stakeholders who enrich BOU’s purpose of existence. I wish you all a Merry Christmas and a prosperous New Year 2012. Last but not least, I take this opportunity to thank Dr. Steve Ogan for accepting our invitation to come and minister to us today. I now invite him (Dr Steve) to share with us the word of God. I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Managing the challenges of industry globalization Keynote address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of Bahrain, at the 18th World Islamic Banking Conference, Manama, 22 November 2011. *      *      * Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen: “Salaam Alaikum” It is a pleasure to welcome you once more to the World Islamic Banking Conference. Over the years the Conference has become firmly established as a landmark event not only in the calendar of Bahrain, but also in that of the global Islamic financial services industry. I would like to congratulate the organisers for once again having assembled such a strong list of speakers at this year’s event. A special word of thanks is due to the many distinguished speakers who will be appearing during the Conference. Their contributions are vital to its success. No less important are the contributions made by the sponsors, who have again been generous in their support. Collectively, your contributions are the reasons for the great success of the WIBC. The topic of this year’s Inaugural Session is that of Managing the Challenges of Industry Globalization: Strengthening Regulatory Frameworks to Accelerate the International Development of Islamic Finance. This is an immensely important topic. As I have pointed out in several speeches since the Global Financial Crisis began over three years ago, it is essential for the future development of the Islamic financial industry that it learns from the mistakes of interest based finance. This includes making sure that it is based on secure regulatory foundations. In the past 30 years we have seen the growth of a truly global financial system. Financial markets and institutions no longer stop at national borders. For example, the amount lent by banks cross-border in 1983 was $703 billion. By 2008, the year that the financial crisis became global, that figure had risen to $20 trillion. The trends in the banking market were followed by trends in other sectors of the financial industry. A globalised financial system delivered many benefits. Capital was free to flow where it could obtain the best investment returns. In many parts of the world, foreign capital was responsible for creating new businesses and factories that raised rates of economic growth and provided employment to millions of people. As a result, the process of capital allocation that the global financial system made possible was responsible for lifting countless millions of people out of poverty. It is important for critics of the global financial system to remember this achievement. It is far from insignificant. At the same time, however, as we now know, there were costs to this achievement. A globalised financial system also provided the perfect mechanism for the transmission of contagion from one part of the world to another. In the early 1980s, problems in Latin America brought the largest banks in the world to the brink of collapse. In the late 1990s, the Asian countries suffered financial crises as global capital flows reversed direction. In 2007, problems in the mortgage market in the United States almost caused the collapse of the global financial system and gave rise to the first global economic downturn since the Second World War. There have been many attempts to explain the reasons for the Global Financial Crisis. Most of them agree on the same basic conclusions. First, that excessive rates of saving in some countries were offset by excessive rates of consumption in others. This created the so-called “global imbalances” that resulted in a flood of capital pouring into the advanced economies, 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches setting off a search for yield. This in turn encouraged financial engineering and the creation of CDOs and other structured instruments. Secondly, these great flows of global capital passed through a financial system that was inadequately regulated. Financial markets and institutions might have become global, but regulation had not kept up. Despite the best efforts of international standard setting bodies like the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, nationally-based regulators struggled to ensure proper oversight of global banking groups. In many cases, these groups had grown larger than the economies of the countries that were responsible for licensing and regulating them. Thirdly, institutions that were inadequately regulated were also inadequately managed. Boards of Directors and senior management simply could not know enough about what was going on in large, diverse, and globally active financial groups to understand the full extent of the risks that they were running. Too often, a firm’s risk management and internal control systems were not up to the job of ensuring that these large diversified firms could be properly managed and controlled. Fixing the problems highlighted by the Global Financial Crisis will take time. There has been more progress on some of these issues than on others. Global imbalances, for example, are still large, and will remain so as long as the United States continues to run large deficits. There are some signs that the shareholders of large global banks, as well as their regulators, are putting pressure on them to downsize and simplify their operations. Some banks have reduced the scale of their overseas activities after the crisis. Law makers in Britain and the United States have been looking at ways of separating the deposit-taking and lending activities of banks from their other operations. And regulators are pressing banks to come up with so-called “living wills” – to plan for the possibility that the bank might fail. The greatest progress has, however, been made in writing new regulations. At the end of last year the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision published its new Capital Framework for internationally active banks, known as Basel III. Basel III tries to do several things, but its main aim is to ensure that banks have bigger capital and liquidity buffers, so that they will be less highly leveraged than in the past. When a bank could operate at a leverage ratio of $1 of equity to every $40 of assets, it was clearly too highly leveraged. It meant that losses of as little as two percent on the bank’s asset portfolio could wipe out its entire capital. The Basel Committee has, rightly in my view, set out to make sure that in future banks will not be able to operate with so little capital relative to their assets. How relevant are these developments to the Islamic financial industry? Islamic finance has been a relative-newcomer to the globalization trend. The industry itself is still comparatively young, having hardly existed 30 years ago. Since then it has recorded impressive rates of growth, but even today’s $1 trillion industry is still relatively small on a global scale. Even so, the Global Financial Crisis has given the Islamic financial industry a great opportunity. The obvious flaws in conventional finance have created great interest in the Islamic financial model. This should provide the basis for the industry to sustain a period of strong growth for the rest of this decade. The growth opportunities are especially strong as Islamic finance has its largest presence in rapidly growing economies that have been least affected by the Global Financial Crisis. They should continue to register high rates of growth in the years ahead. If Islamic finance is to make the most of these opportunities, it still needs to learn from the mistakes of interest-based finance. As Islamic financial institutions expand, they need to make sure that their management and control functions keep pace with their growth. As the Global Financial Crisis shows, there is a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 need for firms, especially those that become internationally active, to make sure that risk management, control systems, and IT are capable of providing an accurate picture of a financial institution’s overall risk profile. Boards of Directors and senior managers also need to ensure that they have the knowledge, expertise, and professional skills to manage businesses that are growing in complexity. Building high quality human capital is an essential building block for the expansion of the Islamic financial industry. Finally, the regulatory framework needs to keep pace with an expanding industry. The Islamic financial industry is fortunate in that it has several well-established standard setting bodies, including the Islamic Financial Services Board, the International Islamic Financial Market, and the Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions. Over the years, these standard setting bodies have demonstrated their ability to adapt international standards to the needs of the Islamic financial industry. These bodies now need to take the lead in adapting the new international standards, including Basel III, to the specific circumstances of Islamic finance. Ensuring that firms have strong capital and liquidity buffers should not be seen as an optional extra for the industry, but as an essential foundation for its next stage of growth. The industry will be stronger if it strengthens its foundations, just as the foundations of interest-based finance are now being strengthened. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Ipumbu Shiimi: Enhancing access to finance in Namibia through an improved land tenure system Annual address by Mr Ipumbu Shiimi, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, Windhoek, 27 October 2011.  *      *      * Director of Ceremonies  Honourable Dr Theo Ben Gurirab, Speaker of the National Assembly,  Honourable Ministers and Members of Parliament  Members of the Diplomatic Corps,  Members of the Bank of Namibia Board  Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,  Members of the Media Fraternity  Good Evening  Let me express my gratitude to you all for taking time to be with us this evening.  The Annual Address has not only become one of the key highlights on the Bank’s calendar, but has also proven to be an important forum to share views on issues of national importance to our economy with our key stakeholders.  At last year’s address, I spoke about financial inclusion as an imperative for inclusive economic development. As the Bank, we put forward a four points’ agenda, in the areas of regulatory intervention, consumer literacy and protection, access to financial and payment services and local ownership of commercial banks as our intervention strategy to ensure enhanced access to finance to those currently excluded.  Tonight, I would like to expound on the same issue, albeit from a different angle. That is, to share with you some thoughts on how an appropriate land tenure system in an economy like Namibia can be used as a conduit for improving access to finance. But before I do so, let me provide you with an update on what we promised to do at last year’s Annual Address.  I am pleased to report to you that we have made considerable progress in that regard. The Namibian Financial Sector Strategy 2011–2021, which was endorsed by Cabinet will be launched before the end of December. Under the leadership of the Minister of Finance, the Bank of Namibia and NAMFISA, in consultation with the relevant stakeholders, have drafted this document in a manner that is reflective of the four points’ agenda.  Furthermore, one chapter in the Financial Sector Strategy is dedicated to financial inclusion. In addition, a White Paper on local ownership of commercial banks has been drafted and the relevant stakeholders are being consulted to provide their comments.  However, we have realised that our present approach to improved access to finance and poverty reduction though meaningful, will only take us half way unless additional measures and reforms to improve access to finance in the communal areas are undertaken. It is for this reason that tonight, we chose this theme: “Enhancing Access to Finance in Namibia through an Improved Land Tenure System”.  We believe this reform would serve as a key conduit for the poor to be successfully integrated into the mainstream economy. The key question then is how should we enhance access to finance as a channel to eliminate the divide between the urban and rural areas, with the view to reduce poverty?  Director of Ceremonies, poverty in Namibia is more acute in the rural areas, and this is where land rights cannot be used to produce capital. The latest Household Income and Expenditure Survey of 2003/04 shows that a high number of Namibian households remain 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches poor and poverty largely depends on where you live. The incidence of poverty amongst rural households is about 38 per cent compared to 12 per cent for urban households.  In other words, our fellow Namibians in the rural areas are more than three times poor than their counterparts in the urban centres. Moreover, about 19 per cent of households in rural areas are severely poor compared to only 6 per cent in urban areas.  This, Ladies and Gentlemen, clearly demonstrates that the disparity and level of exclusion of the majority of the people from the formal sector of the economy, especially the rural poor, remain a serious concern. Moreover, most farmers in the communal areas remain poor and depend largely on old age Government pension and remittances from family members.  We strongly believe that in order to reduce poverty in the rural areas, we need to improve the productivity of the land in these areas and move away from subsistence farming towards commercial activities.  This can only happen if those who want to transform to commercial activities are able to attract finance to modernise their farming practices by being able to buy farming equipment, fertilisers, livestock and labour, but also to engage in other economic activities. In this regard, the need to ponder and reflect on what could be done to ensure that the divide and level of exclusion between the rural and urban areas are minimised and, eventually, eliminated becomes rather urgent.  Director of Ceremonies, Ladies and Gentlemen, the answer lies in what is already in the possession of the poor. The answer is LAND. History has demonstrated time and again, that Land remains one of the most important conduits for access to finance. And, this is what I want to present to you this evening.  By way of background, Namibia covers over 825 thousand square kilometres of land. About 38 per cent of this land falls under the communal land tenure, where approximately over 50 per cent of the population lives. Virtually all the land rights in the communal areas are customary rights, with their own registration system. This is unlike in the rest of the country where land rights are registered in a properly functioning Deeds Office.  This implies that over 50 per cent of the Namibian population does not have secure and tradable land rights. It further means that half of the Namibian people cannot use their land to raise capital. Consequently, it means that 38 per cent of Namibia’s land is what is termed as “dead capital”.  Director of Ceremonies, this is another example of a dual Namibia, that is, one country, with a less formal tenure system for the communal areas and an advanced one that allows for security and tradability for the rest of the country.  Ladies and Gentlemen, the land tenure system is an important factor in explaining development or lack thereof. In his book titled “The Mystery of Capital”, Hernando De Soto, termed by the Time magazine as one of the five leading Latin American innovators of the twentieth century, demonstrates with startling research findings from Asia, Africa, Latin America and the former socialist’ countries that a major problem in developing countries is their inability to use land rights to produce capital.  According to De Soto, the problem is in the fact that most developing countries’ residents hold resources in defective forms. A typical example of this, Ladies and Gentlemen, is, a house built on land whose ownership rights are not adequately recorded and not tradable. In such an environment, this asset cannot be turned into capital and cannot be used as collateral.  This situation is contrary to what is generally happening in advanced countries, where every building and every piece of land is legally documented, which essentially activates that asset as a resource to potentially participate in economic activities. By De Soto’s calculations, the total value of the real estates held in a defective form by the poor of the Third World and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 former socialist nations is estimated to be around USD9.3 trillion. In Namibia, these assets could amount to N$20 billion representing about 23 per cent of GDP.  Let’s imagine, Ladies and Gentleman, a situation where only 30 per cent of the communal land is turned into productive capital. This may potentially unlock a sizable investment equivalent to 7 per cent of GDP, almost equal to the current contribution of the mining sector to GDP. The question is; what will the impact be if it is not 30 per cent, but 80 per cent of the communal land? This will go a long way in creating the much needed employment, stimulating growth and reducing poverty in rural areas.  Director of Ceremonies, I believe the Ministry of Lands and Resettlements is making good progress in improving tenure security in communal areas and they must be applauded for these efforts. The Communal Land Reform Act was promulgated in 2002. This Act has provided clarity on the administration of customary and leasehold rights in the communal areas. Also, in accordance with this Act, regional Land Boards have been established to manage, together with traditional authorities, the registration of land rights  I understand more reforms are envisaged in this regard. But what is important, is to make land rights in communal areas fully tradable like other properties in the rest of the country. Here, I am talking about tenure security and tradability, because it does not matter whether it is a freehold, or leasehold land rights; what is important is security and tradability.  Ladies and Gentleman, I am mindful of the fact that reforming land rights is a costly exercise, because it involves surveying and mapping. I am also aware of the fact that in the rural areas it can, from a socio-political perspective, be a difficult undertaking and it may even have unintended consequences, such as people selling their properties for quick financial gains. While this is a legitimate fear, I think it is often somewhat overstated.  I do believe there are ways to mitigate these risks in a manner that the benefits from these reforms would outweigh the costs. Similar concerns were also present when today’s advanced economies were reforming their land tenure system at around the 16th century. But, they have managed to overcome these challenges.  The lessons from history are that those countries which have made their land rights tradable have made progress in reducing poverty. For instance, Vietnamese land tenure policy reforms were a central part of its wider economic reforms under the Doi Moi program in 1986. This has steered the country to transition well towards a market based economy.  The improved land tenure security is cited to have played a critical role in accelerating agricultural growth, increasing food security, and reducing poverty throughout the country. The most impressive gain was the falling of the poverty rate from over 70 per cent in the mid-80s to around 29 per cent of the population in 2002 and further down to 10 per cent in 2010. This is one of the sharpest declines in poverty to have ever been recorded.  Director of Ceremonies, we need to proceed with a greater urgency and momentum to make land rights in the communal areas fully tradable. Going forward, we are proposing that a multi-disciplinary team be set-up to map out the road ahead. This team should be tasked to coordinate all actions required. For instance, some of the current land laws need to be amended to be reflective of this ideal. The revised laws also need to strengthen the management of the land that is used by all in the communal areas, the so-called commonages.  This is one of the issues that need urgent attention. Further, there is need to educate the people in the communal areas of their rights and obligations that results from a secure and tradable land tenure. Education will ensure that the citizens fully benefit from the economic value of the land that has tradable land rights without falling prey to uninformed behaviour, which can lead to them loosing their most valuable possession. As Namibians, we should strive to make land in the communal areas tradable within a period of 10 years.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen, property ownership in Namibia, including land ownership is a fundamental human right, which is enshrined in our Supreme law, Article 16 of the Namibian Constitution. In addition, the National Land Policy of 1998 states that “all citizens have equal rights, opportunities and security across a range of tenures and management systems and several forms of land rights will be accorded equal status before the law”. We have not yet realised these aspirations, Director of Ceremonies.  Our people in the communal areas have no land rights that are equal in status to those of their fellow citizens in the rest of the country. As a result, they lack the opportunities to turn their land into productive capital. Let us, therefore, do what is required. Let us fulfil this human right, which will, in turn, enhance access to finance by the rural poor and unlock the concealed potential and destiny of our great country.  Ladies and gentlemen, the destiny of a people, a Nation is not necessarily shaped by one big event. It is shaped a by a series of events, a series of decisions – both major and minor. Let us therefore do what is required to move from a communal land system to a tradable and secure land tenure system. Let us to move towards the chosen destiny of this great Nation!  I thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Ardian Fullani: Educating and inspiring Albania’s young generation Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the 2011 end-year reception, Tirana, 21 December 2011. *      *      * Honourable Minister,  Your Excellencies Ambassadors,  Honourable Members of Parliament,  Dear representatives of the banking system and the media,  Dear participants,  I would like to welcome and thank you for your participation.  Your presence today is a special pleasure for me personally and the Bank of Albania.  My special thanks go to the former members of the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania, whose term in office has ended. I personally appreciate the seriousness and commitment they have dedicated to their work, a precious contribution to Bank of Albania’s institutional furtherance.  Thanking them once again for their professional work, allow me to welcome the newly appointed members of the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania, renowned public figures with an unquestionable professional career. They come from diverse fields of professional careers and will bring in added value to the Bank of Albania, contributing to a wider coverage of the institution’s functions.  I am confident that the Bank of Albania, in its activity, will continue to incorporate best international standards as regards decision-making, independence, accountability, transparency and governance.  I believe that a healthy economy that generates stable growth needs a developed financial sector in terms of its depth and width; a flexible banking system, which manages public’s deposits cautiously and channels them efficiently to fund the economy. Today, from this modest ceremony, I would like to assure you that we are fully responsible for this as useful as difficult mission. The Bank of Albania will be always attentive to ensure macroeconomic and financial stability for the country.  In the spirit of end-year celebrations, I cannot help focusing on the Albanian young generation, an inspiration to our work and a fruit of our investments for a better future.  Following its established tradition, the Bank of Albania has the pleasure to announce the Governor’s Award for the best diploma theses in 2011”. This year, we decided to announce this award in this important activity, in the presence of friends and colleagues. This is an expression of our appreciation for research by these today’s students – tomorrow’s colleagues.  The Bank of Albania pays particular attention to the young generation, especially to its education.  When I look back and see how we started financial education five years ago, I recall what may be a naive but a significant comparison; Neil Armstrong’s landing on the moon. In addition to his famous quote “...That’s one small step for (a) man, a giant leap for mankind” he said “...the surface is fine and powdery. I only go in a fraction of an inch, maybe 1/8 of an inch, but I can see the footprints of my foot from the trail”.  Looking back, we may spot our footprints. The reward of an excellent work in an unknown domain is the 6900 students who have chosen to attend as an elective subject “Personal finance in your hands” published by the Bank of Albania. In cooperation with the Ministry of 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Education and Science, we are endeavouring to make this book available in every school and to each student with the ultimate goal for them to be educated financially and empowered to manage personal finance. Only in this academic year, high-school students in 36 districts of Albania chose this book as an elective subject, making us optimistic and forward-looking.  We strongly believe that the today’s young generation will be the protagonists of tomorrow’s economic life. For this purpose, we need to make our utmost investment for their formation, in order to ensure not only their future, but also the country’s future.  The youth are eager and capable to assimilate, process and convey information, habits, or new products in any field of life. They are the transmitters of innovation, the most energetic and progressive segment of the society. It is our moral, professional and institutional responsibility to invest for a qualitative education of the young generation.  To us, enhancing financial literacy is crucial. A well-educated nation guarantees its country’s welfare and progress. Therefore, we have decided to choose the young generation as our strategic partner to realize this challenge. We believe in their idealism, positive energy and pure spirit.  I take this opportunity to extend my special thanks to the media and congratulate this community for its work. The media has transmitted the decision-making and activity of the Bank of Albania in a timely and reliable fashion to the public.  Year 2011 was a complex year for the entire global economy, especially the European one, to which the Albanian economy is more sensitive. From this perspective, the role of the media takes special significance. I am happy to affirm that in Albania, the media has expanded its broadcast time dedicated to economy and finance-related issues and especially to transmission of information from the Bank of Albania, whose decisions were covered professionally. The media has been active also in promoting reflection by stakeholders.  Media has supported Bank of Albania policies, forestalling dissemination of uncertainties amongst the public. The self-adjusting attitude has been another important element in media’s activity. The alarming effect has been cancelled successfully by thorough analysis of news items, providing nuances of the truth beyond excesses and speculations.  A fresh example of this responsible behaviour is the EUR/ALL exchange rate fluctuation at the beginning of December this year. Some “panic” was caused amongst the public by earlier media reports and analysis, which were later considered by the media itself as an unreal exchange rate volatility.  Dear participants,  At the conclusion of my address today, I would like to draw your attention on a consolidated annual publication of the Bank of Albania – our Calendar 2012, the jubilee year of the 100th anniversary of Albania’s Declaration of Independence.  Calendar 2012 features a cycle of contemporary works of art, which elegantly combine traditional and modern elements. This artistic ingenuity provides a varicoloured and loyal depiction of the long and toilsome journey of the Bank of Albania and the Lek through good and bad days, times of war and peace, subtle and radical changes. These fellow travellers have always succeeded in renewing and strengthening their shared foundation, which is your trust and confidence. This thread sews together in this calendar, art and the Bank of Albania, as two components that create, uphold and promote values.  The Calendar is an artful portraying of our central banks traits such as stability, independence, confidence, transparency and financial literacy, which nourish our dream of a common European future. This future rests in our hands like a golden globe of prosperity and happiness.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Thanking you for your attention, allow me to announce the winners of the Best Diploma awards for 2011:   The third prize is awarded to Ardit Azizaj, an MA student of the New York University in Prague, for his dissertation “What Albania’s possibilities are, in future, regarding the world division of labour?” His dissertation focuses on the impossibility of a country to transform its economy successfully from a poor and centralised to a developed economy.   The second prize is awarded to Ledia Sulejmani, a student of the University of Tirana for her dissertation “Economic developments in Western Balkans, future challenges.” Her dissertation describes distinctions and characteristics of Western Balkan countries as regards economic indicators, in light of a common area and its future challenges.   The first prize is awarded to Borana Angjeli, an MA student of Marin Barleti University in Tirana for her dissertation “Pension systems”. Drawing on results from a survey to employees close to their retirement, the thesis points out some of the shortcomings of the pension system in Albania and makes recommendations on changes to the actual pension scheme, in line with European principles, without being a heavy burden for the state budget.  Thank You! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Muhammad Al-Jasser: Saudi Arabia’s economic developments in 2010/11 Speech by His Excellency Dr Muhammad Al-Jasser, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency (SAMA), to the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, on the occasion of presenting the Forty-Seventh Annual Report of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, Riyadh, 12 December 2011. *      *      * Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques,  It is of great pleasure that the meeting with you is renewed while you enjoy, thanks to Allah, good health. Our country is continuing, under your wise leadership, the march of development and prosperity in an extraordinary solidarity between leadership and citizens. I am pleased to submit the forty-seventh annual report of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, which deals with economic developments in 2010 and the first quarter of 2011. Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, The global economy is still suffering from the weakness caused by the global financial crisis and the resulting problems of sovereign debts of a number of states in the industrialized world. However, our domestic economy, thanks to Allah, has avoided the pitfalls of public and private debt which had strained the economies of many industrialized countries. Therefore, our national economy in 2010 continued its growth for the eleventh year in a row, growing by 4.1 percent, and the non-oil sector by 4.9 percent. The Kingdom achieved a surplus in its budget amounting to 5.2 percent of GDP, and recorded a surplus in the balance of payments for the twelfth year in a row which stood at Rls 250.3 billion. The inflation rate rose slightly from 5.1 percent in 2009 to 5.3 percent in 2010, and stood at 5.2 percent in October 2011. It is noteworthy that the inflation in recent years resulted from a rise in food prices and rents. The pace of growth in the national economy is expected to accelerate during the current year. Several factors contributed to such growth in GDP, including increased government spending to unprecedented levels, a large part of which was devoted to various development projects, and an increase in domestic banks’ finance to both the public and private sectors. Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, In continuation of your care to fulfill the needs of the citizens and provide the requirements of a decent life, you issued a number of royal decrees, which will, Allah willing, contribute to enhancement of the citizens’ standard of living. You ordered the establishment of the Ministry of Housing and approved the building of 500,000 housing units in all regions of the Kingdom over the coming five years with allocations of Rls 250 billion. The limit of housing loans extended by the Real Estate Development Fund was increased from Rls 300,000 to Rls 500,000 which will hopefully provide more houses for citizens and constrain the inflationary pressures stemming from the increase in house rents. You also ordered setting a minimum wage of Rls 3,000 for all Saudi government employees, allocated a monthly amount of Rls 2,000 for job seekers, and raised capital of the Saudi Credit and Saving Bank by Rls 30 billion. The number of family members covered by the social security was increased from 8 to 15 with an allocation of Rls one billion for that purpose. The government subsidies for charity associations rose by 50 percent to Rls 450 million annually, and needy families’ sons and daughters were supported to join 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches universities through allotting them a portion of seats, facilitating their admission requirements, and exempting them from some tuition fees. This package of honorable royal decrees will enhance the standard of living of the least-income segment of population and promote its ability of saving and, thereby, raise its future productivity and income, and reduce poverty, to which you always attach considerable attention. In the health care arena, you ordered supporting the Ministry of Health with Rls 16 billion in order to carry out the expansion of a number of hospitals and health centers. You increased the maximum limit of the Ministry of Finance’s financing program of private hospitals from Rls 50 million to Rls 200 million. This would hopefully enhance health care services in the Kingdom. Under your wise leadership and continuous guidance, the Supreme Economic Council continued to accomplish a number of development steps aimed at restructuring and reorganizing the economy and streamlining regulations and legislation in order to promote the rise of the level and competitiveness of the economy, achieve the optimum operation of the production factors and provide an attractive environment for domestic and foreign investment. As a result, the investment environment has improved. According to the “Doing Business Report 2012” issued by the World Bank, the Kingdom ranked twelfth among 183 world countries in terms of ease of business performance. The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund noted that the Kingdom was well posed to encounter the global financial crisis. However, the sound supervisory and regulatory frameworks significantly contributed to strengthening the capacity of the financial sector to withstand the crisis. The Board stressed that the sound economic management of oil wealth provided the necessary financial resources to confront the global financial crisis in addition to reducing the public debt from 104 percent of GDP in 1999 to 7 percent in 2011 and strengthening the position of net foreign assets of SAMA. The IMF Executive Board also commended the strength of the Kingdom’s banking system, which is well-capitalized and has high liquidity levels. It has noted that the banking system has showed an ability to encounter a set of regional and global shocks. The Board has welcomed the results of stress tests made by the Financial Sector Assessment Program Mission which showed a rise in the levels of liquidity and capital held by the Saudi banking system, representing preventive reserves that impart more confidence to the banking system ability to withstand shocks. The Board members praised the monetary policy of the Kingdom which aims to enhance the strength of the banking system and price stability. Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, Despite the remarkable achievements fulfilled at all levels, there are still some challenges that you spare no effort to follow up and strive to overcome, such as: First: Creating more decent work opportunities for the sons and daughters of this country. Despite the good achievements in employment of citizens, estimates show that the unemployment rate among Saudis is still unsatisfactory. Taking into account the composition of the population in the Kingdom, which is mainly dominated by young people, it is imperative to face this issue, exert more efforts and overcome the difficulties encountering the process of creation and Saudization of jobs, including continued improvement of education and training outputs in line with the requirements of the labor market, determination of Saudization rates by activities and increasing them gradually. It is also important to achieve flexibility in the labor market to stimulate production and innovation and preserve the rights of workers and employers. Second: Diversification of income sources and reducing reliance on oil as a major source of income. Despite the increasing role of the non-oil sector in the national economy, particularly the role of the private sector, the oil sector is still the main driver of the national economy, where most of the country’s revenues and receipts of the balance of payments are coming 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 from. Therefore, it is necessary to continue to work hard in order to diversify sources of income to ensure the sustainability of economic development in the long run and reduce the risks associated with relying on a single source of income. Third: Reduction of high domestic consumption of oil and gas, as figures indicate an annual average increase in domestic consumption of 7.3 percent over the past five years, which is high by any measure and not commensurate with the rate of growth in population and GDP. There is no doubt that the increase in domestic consumption of oil, in addition to being a drainage of resources that God has bestowed upon us, it limits the quantities available for export in the future. Thus, it is necessary to consider the reasons of the increase in domestic consumption of oil and gas to rationalize their consumption. Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques: As we are on the threshold of a new gracious budget, I pray for the Almighty Allah to preserve you as the leader of the march of this blessed and generous country. May Almighty Allah lead your steps to success.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Strengthening our future Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the launch of the Financial Sector Blueprint at Sasana Kijang “Strengthening Our Future”, Kuala Lumpur, 21 December 2011. *      *      * It is my great honour to welcome you to Sasana Kijang for the launch of Bank Negara Malaysia’s Financial Sector Blueprint. On behalf of Bank Negara Malaysia and the financial services industry, Yang Amat Berhormat Dato’ Sri, I wish to express our appreciation to you for your presence here this afternoon to launch the Financial Sector Blueprint. This Blueprint marks a new phase in the development of the financial system. It focuses on new areas that will strengthen the competitiveness and efficiency of the financial sector and its potential role in facilitating our ongoing economic transformation and greater regional economic and financial integration and thus to enhance Malaysia’s long term economic growth potential.  The Blueprint themed “Strengthening Our Future” builds on and reinforces the solid foundations that has been achieved in this decade. Malaysia has benefited from a well developed, more competitive and well regulated financial system. The financial system emerged from the global financial crisis strong and resilient, and has continued to support our domestic economy even during these most challenging of times. The recommendations in the Blueprint has taken into account the expected changes in the international and domestic environment and its consequent demands on the financial system in this next decade. It also takes into account Malaysia’s aspirations to become a high value-added, high income economy.  Within the global economic landscape, emerging economies will assume a more significant role. While emerging economies will continue to be affected by global developments, most are able to demonstrate resilience and are expected to remain on a growth trajectory. By 2030, emerging economies are projected to account for 60% of total world output, from the current 40%.  At the same time, the economies and financial markets in the global economy and international financial system have become more interconnected as a result of greater cross-border trade and financial flows. The continued development and deepening of our financial markets and increased financial liberalisation in emerging economies will reinforce this trend towards greater interconnectivity.  More recently, the financial sector has been the target of a renewed focus and priority by the international community. Wide ranging financial reform measures have been introduced in the aftermath of the global financial crisis to address the weaknesses that have surfaced during the crisis.  Several changes are also transforming the domestic environment. New domestic sources of growth, the greater role of the private sector in the economy, demographic changes, rising incomes and a growing middle class, and the accelerated pace of urbanisation cumulatively will significantly change the demands on the financial sector. These trends will also be affected by initiatives taken by the Government to transform the economy in this next decade into a high value-added, high-income economy, the greater leverage on the advances of technology and the acceleration of the pace of regional financial integration in Asia. The Malaysian financial system enters this new environment from a position of strength. The successful implementation of the first Financial Sector Masterplan in this recent decade has produced a financial system that is well positioned to respond to the new imperatives of the decade before us. Our financial institutions are well capitalised with strong buffers and improved risk management and governance practices. Significant efficiency gains have also 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches reduced intermediation costs in an environment of greater competition. This is largely arising from the cumulative efforts to building strong institutions, the development of the financial infrastructure, and the strengthening of the regulatory and supervisory framework.  This decade has also seen the enactment of wide ranging legislation that has given greater certainty and predictability in the financial system. This includes the Central Bank of Malaysia Act 2009 and the Financial Services Act expected to be tabled in Parliament in 2012 has strengthened the legal framework for the financial sector. It will also enhance the Bank’s capacity to manage risks from financial intermediation activities that occur outside the banking system and provide enhanced powers for timely intervention actions. The enhanced intermediation during this decade has benefitted access to financing, particularly for small and medium enterprises, has also improved, both in volume and efficiency. By leveraging on the distribution networks of commercial banks, enhanced product and risk management capabilities, access to financing by this sector has increased at an annual rate of almost 20% since 2005.  The financial infrastructure in Malaysia has also been significantly strengthened. Malaysia has an effective financial safety net that includes a comprehensive deposit insurance system and institutional arrangements that provide avenues for advisory, redress and rehabilitation. Innovations in payment systems and instruments as well as infrastructure for the issuance, trading and settlement of debt securities and the access improved market information has contributed to greater efficiency and has also enhanced the overall price discovery process. To support our liberalisation measures our payment infrastructure has also been enhanced to support cross-border trade settlements in local currency and cross-border liquidity support arrangements for financial institutions. Today, Malaysia also has a deep and vibrant bond market which is the largest in South East Asia, and a comprehensive Islamic financial system that is recognised as among the most advanced in the world. The bond market comprising of the conventional and sukuk market has trebled in size, providing businesses with alternative access to financing solutions including in multicurrency to meet a diverse range of risk and maturity preferences. The strengthened Islamic financial institutions, the establishment of key financial infrastructure for Islamic finance including the regulatory and supervisory framework have positioned Malaysia at the frontier of Islamic finance.  The recommendations in the Blueprint aim to build on this progress towards resulting in the development of a financial sector that will meet the economic and financial realities of this new decade. The financial system envisaged  will be firmly anchored in the real economy in providing financial services that contribute positively to growth;   that offers a diverse range of products, services and institutions that cater to the financial needs of a broader spectrum of Malaysian households and businesses;   will be reinforced by deep, liquid and efficient foreign exchange and money markets to complement the bond market;   that is more engaged with the region and other parts of the world;   that can contribute meaningfully to Malaysia’s economic transformation; and finally,   a financial system that is inclusive in reaching Malaysians across all social, geographic and economic stratas.  It is envisaged that by 2020, the financial system is expected to expand from the current 4.3 times to six times of GDP. Correspondingly, the financial sector contribution to nominal GDP is projected to rise from 8.6% to between 10 to 12% in 2020. More than half of total financing in 2020 will be raised through financial markets, while Islamic finance will continue to increase in prominence, growing at a faster pace to account for 40% of total financing.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 The Blueprint has adopted an integrated approach that reflects a financial sector that has increasing linkages between the various sub-sectors in the financial system. The recommendations, in the Blueprint are thus centred on achieving nine major areas: (i) effective intermediation for a high value-added, high-income economy; (ii) the development of deep and dynamic financial markets; (iii) greater shared prosperity through financial inclusion; (iv) strengthening regional and international financial integration; (v) internationalisation of Islamic finance; (vi) safeguarding the stability of the financial system; (vii) achieving greater economic efficiency through electronic payments; (viii) empowered consumers; and (ix) talent development for the financial sector.  A strong focus in the Blueprint is on developing the financial ecosystem to enhance funding for innovation which represents a key transformative agenda in our new economic model. Ten initiatives in the Blueprint are devoted directly to nurturing sources of financing for innovative enterprises in all sectors and at various stages of development. Over the next ten years, steps will be taken to achieve a wider range of funding sources for new ideas, including new conduits for financing and investments in innovative industries.  With the foundations now in place for greater liberalisation, the Blueprint extends this path by assuming a more regional and international complexion. This will entail positioning our financial sector to participate more effectively in the mobilisation of regional surplus funds to productive investments in the region. The financial sector will also advance the country’s external orientation by serving Malaysian corporations in their regional and international operations, as well as facilitating greater participation of international and regional corporations in our economy. Malaysia will also continue to spearhead the internationalisation of Islamic finance to facilitate greater cross-border Islamic financial activities. The Blueprint will also pave the way for the integration of the existing national-level Shariah Councils into a single apex authority on Shariah matters to be established for all institutions offering Islamic financial services in Malaysia. In the Blueprint, financial liberalisation will be pursued in the best interests of Malaysia. The goals for financial liberalisation are twofold. Firstly, to improve allocative efficiency to productive economic activities, to increase the operational efficiency and lower further the intermediation costs, and to encourage greater financial innovation. Secondly, to strengthen further Malaysia’s economic and financial linkages with the region and other parts of the emerging world. Key recommendations in the Blueprint include more flexible limits on foreign participation in financial institutions, the issuance of new licenses to financial institutions with specialised expertise that are able to contribute to Malaysia’s economic aspirations and financial sector development. In implementing these strategies an assessment will be made on the factors contributing to the best interests of Malaysia. In addition to the prudential criteria that must be met, the presence of strong and well-managed domestic banking groups that will account for a significant share of resident deposits will remain important for the orderly growth and development of the financial sector and of the Malaysian economy. As our financial sector continues to advance over the next decade, priority will continue to be accorded to ensuring that the regulatory and supervisory regime remains current and continues to foster a sound and stable financial system within a more dynamic landscape. Given the more complex nature of risks stemming from greater convergence in the financial sector, the proposed new financial services legislation will be to promote consistent approaches to regulation and supervision across the financial sector, strengthen the Bank’s capacity to manage risks associated with financial intermediation including financial activities that currently outside the regulated system.  A national consumer credit law and improved arrangements for combating financial crime are also included in the recommendations. To ensure that cross-border financial linkages do not propagate risks across borders, the Central bank will intensify its coordination with other regional and international supervisory authorities, focusing in achieving more consistent 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches regulatory and supervisory standards, timely information exchange and effective supervisory colleges. An important agenda under the Blueprint will be to accelerate the migration from paper-based payments to electronic-payments to generate significant economic efficiencies from more expedient, secure and cost-effective means of moving funds. A range of measures will be introduced to accelerate the pace of migration towards e-payments, including driving the adoption of the mobile phone banking and payment transactions, increasing the number of point-of-sale terminals, and introducing a pricing structure that incentivises the use of e-payments.  Conclusion Let me conclude by expressing the Bank’s appreciation for all the valuable contributions received from the industry, Government agencies and other stakeholder groups with whom the Bank engaged over the course of this year to develop the recommendations in the Blueprint. In total, the Blueprint sets out 69 recommendations to achieve the vision for the financial sector in 2020. The Blueprint provides the vision and direction to secure a financial system that will firmly support and drive Malaysia’s long-term growth potential and aspirations. It will be our shared commitment that will result in its success. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Ignazio Visco: Closing of the cultural days of the European Central  Bank – Italy 2011 Address by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the closing of the cultural days of the European Central Bank – Italy 2011, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 17 November 2011.  *      *      * Mr. President, Caro Mario, Cher Christian, Colleagues of the Central Banks, Ladies and Gentlemen, I attended this evening’s closing concert of the European Central Bank’s Cultural Days dedicated to Italy with great pleasure and it is with great pleasure that I now take part in this ceremony in which the baton passes to Christian Noyer, Governor of Banque de France. Since October 19 the public in Frankfurt has had the chance to meet many representatives of contemporary Italian culture, artists known and admired the world over and emerging young talents. In this month a gust of Italy seems to have blown across Frankfurt (thanks, too, to the coincidence that the cultural events happened to be held at the same time as the installation of an Italian president in the Eurotower). After our many years of work together in Banca d’Italia, I again express my best wishes to Mario Draghi as he takes up the challenge of his new position.  Music has been the fil rouge of this month of Italian culture, inaugurated by the Orchestra Mozart of Bologna under the direction of Maestro Claudio Abbado and concluded this evening by the remarkable and fascinating performance of the Orchestra Verdi of Milan under Maestro Xian Zhang. In between, the master violinist Uto Ughi performed on the occasion of the Charity event. To be sure, there has been no lack of significant moments dedicated to the other expressions of Italian culture, with the participation of great contemporary Italian writers, such as Claudio Magris and Dacia Maraini, and the projection of a series of Italian movies in which six directors confronted the theme of the family between tradition and modernity. Contemporary music, too, has been showcased, with the virtuoso, high-energy performance of Stefano Bollani, one of Italy’s most celebrated young jazz musicians. Still, we wanted to open and close the programme in the grand tradition of classical music. The two orchestras – the Mozart of Bologna and the Verdi of Milan – have an important common denominator: both are examples of how superb results can be achieved when there is the active will to discover and promote young performers and the conviction that music is both a means of education and a vehicle of ethical principles in society and for the formation of the younger generations. It was precisely this will and this conviction that gave birth to the Orchestra Verdi in 1993 and the Orchestra Mozart in 2004. Both testify to the richness of cultural life in today’s Italy and to the presence in our country of a host of ambitious and successful initiatives for cultural development. My sincere thanks naturally go to the one of the great protagonists of this initiative – the public of Frankfurt. As in past editions, an extremely discerning public has given the Cultural Days the warmest welcome and responded enthusiastically to the events on the programme. It is a great pleasure to have this further confirmation of the interest that the German-speaking world has traditionally taken in Italy. From Goethe’s time, from Frankfurt indeed right down to the present, in fact, the Italienreise has remained a significant part of the formation of artists and thinkers north of the Alps. Aside from our reciprocal stereotypes, about which so much has been written in both a serious and a humorous vein, the German people – intellectuals, professionals, simple tourists – have always had a love for Italy. A special cultural bond between the two countries has been formed. [A journalist from Turin who lived for many years in Hamburg, referring to Germans’ appreciation of the Italian 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches lifestyle, gave his book on the relationship between the two cultures an efficaciously ironic title: “La Deutsche Vita”.] Banca d’Italia has always appreciated the role played by art and culture in nurturing the mind and creating a common national and European identity, so for our institution it has been a pleasure to take part in organizing the Cultural Days this year. Among other benefits, I believe that these events shorten the distance between citizens and central banks, enabling the public at large to become familiar with our institutions and showing our generally “austere” class of central bankers in a different light. This was one more reason why Banca d’Italia was glad to embark on this “adventure”. My thanks to the staff of the European Central Bank and of the Banca d’Italia for their dedication and hard work, and for the excellent results attained. The ECB’s Cultural Days undoubtedly help to reinforce “unity in diversity” as Mario Draghi just recalled. This motto of ours, coined by Jean-Claude Trichet, fully reflects the creative potential inherent in our heterogeneous Europe. In his remarks at the Literaturhaus on October 20th Claudio Magris, rightly considered the “most European” of contemporary Italian writers, described the European identity not as a set of roots delving down into the earth but as the branches of a tree reaching outward and intertwining with the branches of other trees. To me, this image is most evocative. Each of the individual national identities that contribute to our European identity is exactly like a tree, with its own deep roots in history and centuries’ worth of fruit, but above all horizontally outstretched towards transparent, vital enlacement with its equally fruit-laden neighbours. In closing, let me offer my best wishes to Governor Noyer – and to the European Central Bank – for the preparation of next year’s Cultural Days. I am curious to learn the programme of events devoted to French culture. I am certain that Frankfurt will be treated to the best of France’s immense cultural heritage, in its profoundly European dimension yet also bearing the signs and the fruits of its contact with the other great civilizations of the world. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Masaaki Shirakawa: Globalization and population aging – challenges facing Japan  Speech by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, to the Board of Councillors of Nippon Keidanren (Japan Business Federation), Tokyo, 22 December 2011. *      *      * Introduction I am honored to have this opportunity to address the representatives of Japan’s economy gathered here today. We have just over a week left in a year in which the most notable event for our nation was definitely the Great East Japan Earthquake of March 11. Speaking only about the economic impact of this terrible event, Japan’s economy suddenly faced enormous downward pressures arising from damage to production facilities, disruptions in supply chains, and shortages in electricity supply. Thanks to tremendous efforts by company managers and by employees in the field, these supply-side problems were resolved by the summer, which was faster than expected. However, just as the prospects gradually began to look good for Japan’s economy to overcome the problems caused by the disaster, the sovereign debt crisis in Europe triggered new problems – a slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen. As a result, after a sharp rebound, the pick-up in Japan’s economic activity has gradually slowed and is currently at a pause. According to the Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) released last week, business conditions deteriorated for large manufacturing enterprises, as has been extensively reported in the newspapers, but improved for large nonmanufacturing enterprises (Chart 1). As for SMEs, business conditions improved both for manufacturing and nonmanufacturing enterprises. As such, although overall business conditions have improved, the pace of improvement has slowed. As can be seen from the results of the Tankan, there are currently two opposing forces in operation: on one hand, exports and production remain more or less flat due to a slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen; on the other, in terms of domestic demand, private consumption remains firm and post-earthquake rebuilding and reconstruction demand is expected to materialize. The Bank of Japan judges that Japan’s economy will be more or less flat for the time being as the former force prevails. Beyond that phase, it is our judgment that the economy will gradually return to a moderate recovery path, reflecting a pick-up in growth of overseas economies, especially emerging economies. Having said that, we are fully aware that this outlook is attended by various uncertainties. The most significant risk is, of course, the impact of the European sovereign debt crisis on our economy through its effects on international financial markets and the global economy. Although the economic outlook is important, I have already discussed it on various occasions. Today, instead, I would like to give my thoughts on the challenges facing Japan’s economy and its central bank from a medium- to long-term perspective, as I believe the end of the year is good timing for doing so.  I. Japan’s economy during the past 15 years Progress in globalization In order to understand the medium- to long-term challenges that lie ahead for Japan’s economy, I will first compare how it is today to how it was back in 1995. I have chosen that particular year as a comparison point because of its similarities with this year, as in 1995 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Japan experienced the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake (or Kobe Earthquake as it is also known) and an appreciation of the yen, which peaked that year at under 80 yen against the U.S. dollar.  There have been many changes over the past 15 years. First, we saw further globalization of goods, capital, and people (Chart 2). For goods, global trade volume in real terms after excluding the effects of price fluctuations is expected to rise from an index level of 100 in 1995 to 253 by 2011. This implies that global trade volume continued to expand at an annualized rate of 6.0 percent, a pace much faster than the real GDP growth rate of 3.7 percent during the period. This increase was essentially caused by the end of the Cold War and subsequent transition of regions worldwide to market economies. This increased opportunities for an international division of labor, which led to more optimal production by combining the technology and capital of advanced economies with the ample labor forces of emerging economies. Emerging economies, particularly China, India, and Brazil, grew rapidly in this process (Chart 3). For capital, the average amount of daily transactions in foreign exchange markets worldwide was 1.5 trillion dollars as of 1998 – which is as far back as we can go in making such a comparison – and grew to 4 trillion dollars, corresponding to almost 20 times world GDP per day, in 2010 (Chart 2). For people, tourists traveling abroad have increased substantially from 530 million in 1995 to 940 million in 2011. The number of first-generation immigrants has also increased from 170 million in 1995 to 210 million in 2010 (Chart 2). Rapid population aging Second, Japan’s population has continued to age rapidly (Chart 4). The working-age population, or in other words the population aged from 15 to 64, has been declining after peaking in 1995. The working-age population in 2010 declined by 7 percent compared to 15 years previously in 1995, or by 0.5 percent on a yearly basis. Meanwhile, the percentage of people 65 or older accounted for about 15 percent of the total population in 1995, but rose to about 25 percent in 2010. This globally unprecedented rapid population aging has had far-reaching and various effects on Japan’s economy. The first of these effects is on the economy’s potential growth rate. The working-age population plays a central role in economic activity. Its decline has reduced labor supply and thus has pushed down economic growth. The second effect is on the fiscal balance. At a time when it has become difficult to increase tax revenues through labor income, pressure has been increasing to expand the fiscal deficit, given that social security expenses – including pension costs and medical and nursing care expenses – increase as the population ages as long as the current level of benefits are maintained. The third effect is the diversification of consumer needs and services. Given the diverse lives and lifestyles of the elderly population, individuals have a wide range of unique needs, not only in terms of medical and nursing care but also in wider contexts such as living fulfilling lives after retirement, which encompasses hobbies and continued learning. To put it another way, the continued population aging is, in a sense, a market expansion that cannot be considered in mass terms. Japan’s delayed response to change We can see that the environment has changed significantly over the past 15 years, with globalization and rapid population aging. Change at any point in time always provides a country with both difficulties and opportunities, and the capability of a society as a whole to adapt to this change largely affects its economic performance. On this point, both Japan’s government and its firms have responded in various ways. Unfortunately, however, the economic growth rate has continued to decline and prices have continued to fall moderately 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 as a result. Furthermore, government debt has increased substantially during this period. Faced with these facts, we cannot deny that Japan’s economic system has not managed to respond swiftly and sufficiently to the big changes in the environment. One reason for the decline in the growth rate is the aftereffects of the unprecedented economic bubble in the late 1980s. The effects of that bubble were considerable. Prior to the Lehman shock, an optimistic view prevailed among economists and policy authorities in the United States – that a significant economic downturn following a bubble period could be avoided through implementation of powerful monetary and fiscal policies once the bubble burst. That optimistic view is no longer prevalent today. Economic activity remains stagnant until excesses in production capacity and debt that have been built up during a bubble period are resolved (Chart 5). Such balance-sheet adjustments, however, no longer acted as constraints on Japan’s economy at least by sometime between 2003 and 2004. The more essential reason for the subsequent downturn in Japan’s economy was Japan’s delayed response to the significant changes in the environment, namely, globalization and population aging. Going back to my earlier reference to 1995, Japan around that time was desperately looking for ways to recover from the collapse of the bubble economy. At that stage, I recall that not many of us understood the significance of globalization and population aging for Japan’s economy as well as we later came to realize. In other words, it is better to attribute the delay in responding to an inability to fully recognize the seriousness of the problem itself than to difficulties implementing solutions despite knowing what they were. I believe the same could happen in the next 15 years (Chart 6). For instance, how will Japan’s rapid population aging alter the course of Japan’s future economic growth and fiscal conditions? Will Japan’s economy be able to maintain its longstanding current account surplus? II. Setting the agenda for Japan’s economy Serious consequences of leaving situation unchanged Regarding the first question, even if we focus on demographics, which are relatively easy to predict going forward, we can confirm that the conditions that the underlying factors affecting Japan’s growth are going to change dramatically. The average growth rate has declined from 4.3 percent in the 1980s to 1.5 percent in the 1990s and further to less than 1 percent in the 2000s (Chart 7). The economic growth rate consists of two components: the rate of growth in the number of workers and the rate of growth in labor productivity, which represents an increase in the value added by each worker. We can project future growth rates by forecasting these two components. Of the two, the rate of growth in the number of workers started to decline in the 2000s, and decreased at an annual rate of 0.3 percent on average during that decade. Based on long-term projections of demographic trends and assuming that current labor participation rates by gender and by age group will not change, the rate of decline in the number of workers will increase further to 0.6 percent in the 2010s, 0.7 percent in the 2020s and 1.3 percent in the 2030s. The impact of such population decline is serious, especially in regional economies (Chart 8). As for the other component, labor productivity, the average growth rate over the past 20 years has been around 1.0 percent. Excluding the 1990s, during which the economy was significantly affected by the legacy of the bursting of the bubble, and choosing a period characterized by relatively favorable economic conditions, the labor productivity growth rate was 1.5 percent from 2000 to 2008. Given that there are no significant differences in productivity growth rates among advanced economies, we may be able to assume that the average productivity growth rate in Japan will stay between 1.0 percent and 1.5 percent. Assuming this and that the rate of decline in the number of workers will be as just described, the annual rate of economic growth in the 2010s will remain somewhere between 0.5 percent and 1.0 percent and become around zero percent in the 2030s. Medium- to long-term growth rates will have a significant impact on the fiscal 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches situation. The sovereign debt crisis in Europe provides us with an important lesson – that fiscal credibility can change in a discontinuous manner (Chart 9). We must work seriously with strong determination to strengthen our growth potential. Need to work and create value added How can we strengthen our growth potential? I have just explained that the rate of growth in the number of workers and the rate of growth in labor productivity together constitute the economic growth rate. As for the number of workers, it is difficult to expect a dramatic improvement unless demographic trends change. However, it is still possible to slow the pace of the decline in the number of workers by making it easier for elderly people and women to participate in the workforce. As for the second variable, raising labor productivity growth means increasing the value added per worker. The key, therefore, is to continuously capture potential needs and to provide more goods and services that people will find worth purchasing. More specifically, there are three important aspects to be considered. First, it is important to make the best use of the major trend towards globalization. It goes without saying that it is important to aggressively capture demand overseas, especially in fast-growing emerging economies. At the same time, it is important to take active steps to open up markets and society. With more inflows and outflows of people, goods, and capital, there are more chances of coming up with new ideas and business opportunities. Second, efforts to cultivate new domestic demand are also critically important. Senses of values and lifestyles have been diversifying not only for the elderly, as explained earlier, but also for all generations. It is important that businesses expand domestic markets by working to capture such potential demand and measures such as deregulation are taken to prepare the environment for firms to take on these challenges. Third, in order to dynamically implement a dual strategy of expanding business globally and exploring domestic demand, it is necessary to shift labor and capital smoothly to businesses with high growth potential. This means more effective use of human resources and capital within firms and improvement in economic metabolism on a macroeconomic basis. To mobilize resources in such a way without causing social stresses, it will be necessary to strengthen outplacement support schemes, make it easier to start new businesses, and improve safety nets. More than anything, it will be important to share a sense of values within Japanese society, which should include acceptance of the need to improve the economic metabolism and support for people taking on new challenges. “Hollowing out of domestic industries”? I would like to briefly touch upon recent concerns about a hollowing out of domestic industries, which are also related to the economic metabolism. To start with, expansion of production overseas is not unique to the current phase but rather a trend that has played out over the past twenty years (Chart 10). Until the middle of the 1980s, Japan increased its global market share by expanding exports. Since the second half of the 1980s, Japanese firms have increased their overseas production partly as a response to intensifying trade friction. Thereafter, they have continuously reviewed their global production networks to optimize the division of work between home and abroad while taking into consideration changes in demand structure and cost structure as a consequence of globalization. As a result of such management decisions by firms, the pace of expanding production overseas increased and this trend continues today. This shift of production sites overseas has decreased domestic employment in the manufacturing sector. We need to create more employment opportunities in the economy as a whole by enhancing growth in domestic demand-related sectors, such as service sectors that create more employment than other sectors, by making use of the resultant idle labor 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 force (Chart 11). Within the manufacturing sector, given the significant gap in labor costs between home and abroad, it is necessary to promote a division of labor, with production and assembly sites for mass production expanded overseas and domestic operations focusing on more profitable businesses as well as cutting-edge technologies and business ideas. We must, of course, pay due attention to the risk that the expansion of production overseas will adversely affect the domestic economy. For example, the shift could suddenly accelerate for certain reasons, including the appreciation of the yen, such that its pace surpasses a rate consistent with a trend increase in overseas demand. Another risk is that core firms and factories abandon domestic production sites. It is true that the appreciation of the yen creates a need for serious adjustments to export industries. At the same time, there are also benefits from the yen’s appreciation. For example, the appreciation has clearly caused a reduction in the cost of imports, which have increased significantly due to increased imports of crude oil and LNG after Japan’s nuclear plants stopped operations. We have also seen more Japanese firms availing of the yen’s appreciation to make strategic moves to expand business globally, as evidenced by an increase in outbound M&A activity (Chart 12). Credits of foreign direct investment income currently total 3.4 trillion yen per year, 0.7 percent of nominal GDP. Although such income has somewhat increased compared to the past, the amount of overseas investment and the rate of return are still small compared to other countries (Chart 13). When domestic investment opportunities are limited, it is vitally important to improve returns from overseas investment, particularly foreign direct investment. In any case, the negative impact of the yen’s appreciation tends to be noticed more than positive effects in Japan because domestic-demand related firms, which are natural beneficiaries of the yen’s appreciation, have failed to develop successful business plans to reap such benefits. In other words, in order to overcome concerns about a hollowing out of domestic industries, ultimately we must work to strengthen our medium- to long-term growth potential. Making accommodative financial environment lead to growth As is clear from what I have said so far, strengthening of growth potential will be achieved by substantive efforts to work and increase value added. In this regard, some argue that “stopping deflation comes first and that can be achieved easily through monetary easing.” However, a rise in inflation without a pick-up in real growth rates will not improve living standards or fiscal balances. The real issue is how to raise the real growth rate. Past experiences show that prices rise later, after economic growth picks up in real terms. To use the analogy of the human body, prices are like its temperature, while growth potential is its fundamental strength. Raising the temperature without improving the fundamental strength is not possible. Even if it were successfully done temporarily, there would be side-effects. In fact, in Japan, a strong correlation has been observed between the potential growth rate and the expected rate of inflation (Chart 14).  In the past even some prominent academic economists in the United States have argued that “stagnant growth and deflation in Japan can be solved easily by implementing significant monetary easing.” After experiencing difficulty restoring U.S. economic growth after the Lehman shock, however, they revised their understanding on the issue considerably and even apologized and withdrew their past criticisms of Japan.  In any case, Japan’s financial conditions are extremely accommodative. Nominal interest rates and even actual funding rates of firms, such as real interest rates on corporate bonds adjusted using inflation expectations, are lower in Japan compared to those in the United States and Europe (Chart 15). In a related context, some argue that “insufficient provision of money by the Bank of Japan is the cause of deflation and the yen’s appreciation,” citing the size of the monetary base, which is the total amount of currency provided by a central bank. As Chairman Bernanke of the U.S. Federal Reserve has also pointed out, I, too, do not consider the monetary base to be an appropriate indicator for monetary easing. Still, even 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches the size of the monetary base as a proportion of nominal GDP is larger in Japan than in the United States and Europe (Chart 15). As all of you present today must sense through your business activities, we are not in a situation where business fixed-investment and purchases of foreign currency-denominated assets are constrained by the amount of cash and deposits or the level of interest rates. The bottom line when it comes to our problem is how to make use of the current extremely accommodative financial conditions in order to strengthen growth potential. III. The roles and challenges of central banks The Bank of Japan is not alone: other central banks of advanced economies are in a similar situation. Europe is dealing with the sovereign debt problem and the United States is in the process of balance sheet repair. In such circumstances, both Chairman Bernanke of the U.S. Federal Reserve and President Draghi of the European Central Bank have repeatedly pointed out that central bank measures are not a panacea. Having said that, I am not denying the importance of the role played by central banks. On the contrary, there are many things that only central banks can do. What is important is that the government, the private sector, and the central bank play their respective roles properly. What, then, are the roles of a central bank? Financial globalization and central banks In recent years, it is becoming increasingly important for a central bank to have a global perspective when seeking to conduct monetary policy appropriately to achieve price stability. Coming back to the basics of how monetary easing stimulates demand, one channel is to bring future demand forward by urging firms to make investments now while interest rates are low. Another channel, if lower interest rates result in the depreciation of the currency, is to capture overseas demand.  Once interest rates fall to almost zero, however, it becomes difficult to increase the benefit of making investments now. Moreover, when interest rates in other advanced economies are also close to zero as in the current situation, there is limited room left to make use of overseas demand, at least among the advanced economies. In sum, the two channels of monetary policy both become less effective. Given that emerging economies have high growth rates and interest rates, monetary easing in advanced economies is expected to have stimulative effects through an increase in exports to emerging economies if the currencies of advanced economies depreciate against those of emerging economies on the whole. At the present time, however, many emerging countries adopt fixed foreign exchange rates with currencies pegged to the U.S. dollar and the United States faces balance-sheet repair problems. What actually happened was that monetary easing in the United States, instead of stimulating domestic economic activity, contributed to overheating in emerging economies and a rise in international commodity prices, which resulted in more inflationary pressures and adverse effects on private consumption in the U.S. economy. In this way, in an increasingly globalizing world, there is a possibility that a central bank will find that unintended effects of its monetary policy eventually come back on itself through their effects on overseas economies and financial markets. In the end central banks should conduct monetary policy based on their assessment of economic and price developments in their respective countries and regions. At the same time, it is also becoming more important than ever to make decisions after considering the complex interdependence of the different parts of the global economy. Against a backdrop of increasing globalization, the task of maintaining financial system stability is equally important as monetary policy for a central bank. As can be seen in foreign exchange trading volumes, massive capital flows are moving around the globe beyond national borders. Even without actual movements of capital, derivatives transactions transfer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 risks across borders. Although some see such financial transactions negatively, given the progress in globalization in terms of the real economy and associated needs to hedge various risks associated with economic transactions, such as interest rate risk, foreign exchange risk and credit risk, simply dismissing financial transactions will not help to improve the situation. In addition, as evidenced by the sovereign debt crisis in Europe, the very credibility of sovereign states is being questioned this year. In such circumstances, maintaining stability in the global financial system is becoming the most important prerequisite for global economic growth. On the topic of global financial system stability, while strong commitment by national governments is necessary, central banks have also been doing their utmost in this regard. One example is the coordinated actions by six central banks, including the Bank of Japan, regarding U.S. dollar liquidity, which were announced at the end of November. As a contingency measure, the central banks also agreed to establish bilateral swap arrangements so that liquidity in non-domestic currencies other than the U.S. dollar could also be provided in each jurisdiction. I should also add that central banks are contributing to the ongoing efforts to revise financial regulation and supervision frameworks to prevent recurrence of financial crises like the one in 2008, by preventing the accumulation of financial imbalances. The bank’s policy conduct Finally, I will explain the Bank’s recent conduct of monetary policy (Chart 16). First, the Bank has been pursuing powerful monetary easing under the comprehensive monetary easing framework implemented in the fall of last year. The Bank has also repeatedly expanded the size of the Asset Purchase Program and intends to proceed with additional purchases of approximately 13 trillion yen over the next year. Second, the Bank has been doing its utmost to ensure financial market stability. Its provision of ample funds immediately following the earthquake as well as the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations I have just mentioned are good examples of such efforts.  Third, in an extraordinary measure for a central bank, the Bank is proceeding with fund provision to provide support for strengthening the foundations for economic growth. This is aimed at encouraging firms to make use of the accommodative financial environment, by providing financial institutions with long-term funds at a low interest rate and taking advantage of their expertise in identifying business opportunities. Concluding remarks – importance of adapting to changes and strengthening growth potential I have almost used up my time. My message today can be summarized into the following five points. First, we need to recognize that Japan currently faces major changes – globalization and rapid population aging – which have a significant impact on its economy. Second, in order to maintain existing living standards in Japan for the next generations, our economy must strengthen its capacity to adapt to these major changes and strengthen its growth potential. Third, deflation will be overcome by strengthening growth potential. Fourth, in order to strengthen growth potential, firms’ willingness to take on challenges is vital and there is a need to prepare the environment to encourage firms to do so. Fifth, the Bank of Japan will also continue to consistently make contributions from the monetary side with the aim of achieving sustainable growth with price stability. Incidentally, in October next year, Japan will host the Annual Meetings of the World Bank Group and International Monetary Fund. This is a big event with more than ten thousand participants from the existing 187 member countries. Japan hosted these meetings in 1964 when the country was still an emerging economy filled with the energy associated with high growth. In that year there were a series of historic events in Japan which enhanced people’s confidence: becoming a member of the OECD on April 28; hosting the Annual Meetings of 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches the World Bank Group and International Monetary Fund from September 7 to 11; launching the Tokaido Shinkansen on October 1; and holding the opening ceremony of the Tokyo Olympic Games on October 10. Almost half a century has passed since then and, in the fall of next year, Japan will again provide the venue for discussion among global leaders tackling various problems, this time as a mature advanced economy. Japan experienced the bursting of a bubble twenty years ago and currently faces rapid population aging ahead of other countries. In that sense, Japan is well positioned to present a new growth model to the rest of the world as a mature economy and the global frontrunner in terms of population aging. I sincerely hope that, in 2012, Japan will show the rest of the world its vision and determination to continue to shine as a mature economy and, more than anything else, the people of Japan will regain hope and courage. In this regard, the Bank of Japan will do its utmost in close cooperation with you. Thank you for your attention.     
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9    
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11     
12 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
BIS central bankers’ speeches 13    
14 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
BIS central bankers’ speeches 15     
16 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 V K Sharma: Short-term cooperative credit structure and financial inclusion Keynote address by Mr V K Sharma, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Central Zone Cooperative Conference on “Short-term cooperative credit structure and financial inclusion”, organized by the National Cooperative Union of India in collaboration with Chhattisgarh State Cooperative Union Ltd., Raipur, Chhattisgarh State, India, 11 December 2011. *      *      * The views expressed are those of the author and not of the Reserve Bank of India. Shri Charan Das Mahant, Hon’ble Minister of State for Agriculture & Food Processing, Government of India, Shri Gouri Shanker Bisen, Hon’ble Minister for Co-operation, Government of Madhya Pradesh, Shri Chandra Sekhar Sahu, Hon’ble Minister for Agriculture, Government of Chhattisgarh, Dr. Chandra Pal Singh Yadav, President, National Cooperative Union of India, distinguished invitees and guests, ladies and gentlemen. I indeed deem it an honour and a privilege to be addressing today this very august and distinguished audience on issues, concerns and challenges that the rural cooperative credit structure faces at its current stage of evolution. As you may perhaps be aware, the United Nations has declared the year 2012 as the International Year of Cooperatives and, to my mind, this is precisely what makes today’s Central Zone Cooperative Conference, both contextually and topically, very relevant and it will culminate, I am sure, in most desired outcomes going forward ! And it will be no exaggeration to say that India has been among the pioneering nations in the matter of genesis, and democratic evolution, of agricultural and rural co-operatives, truly informed, and inspired, by the tenets and principles of cooperation. Given the extensive and widespread financial exclusion in the country, both the Government of India and the Reserve Bank, decided to put financial inclusion on the top of their policy and strategy agenda. As part of this veritable watershed policy and strategy initiative, the Government and the Reserve Bank enjoined upon Scheduled Commercial Banks and Regional Rural Banks to roll out, in a time-bound manner, Board-approved, Top-Management-owned, business-plan-integrated, mission-mode-driven and Government & RBI-monitored, BC-ICT-CBS (Business Correspondent – Information & Communication Technology – Core Banking Solution)-leveraged Financial Inclusion Plans for door-step delivery of a bouquet of basic financial services in the hitherto financially-excluded rural areas. But I must hasten here to add that the idea is not to compete with, but complement, rural and agricultural cooperatives in their ever critical and central “niche” role in delivering on financial inclusion ! I hardly need to belabour, before this learned and distinguished audience, the point that, along its sojourn through time, the cooperative movement came to be bedevilled by some unfortunate developments undermining its vibrancy. To my mind, at the margin, this explains the imperative of a complementary role for commercial banks.  But having said that, as regards the national challenge of delivering, credibly and effectively, on financial inclusion agenda, it would be very instructive to put in perspective the relative potential of the rural cooperative credit structure. Specifically, considering that compared to Commercial Banks and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), which, between them, currently account for 33000 rural branches, 33 State Cooperative Banks with 953 branches, 371 District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCBs) with 12858 branches and 1,09,000 Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS), between them, account for a total of 1,22,590 service outlets, the penetrative outreach of the command area of the rural cooperative structure is simply formidable ! Indeed, it is precisely because of this formidable penetrative outreach of the rural cooperative structure that the Reserve Bank of India has not only allowed PACS to 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches act as Business Correspondents of commercial banks but also allowed treatment of loans by commercial banks to farmers through PACS, Farmers’ Service Societies (FSS) and Large-sized Adivasi Multipurpose Societies (LAMPS) as priority sector lending in the indirect finance category. Although under the Financial Inclusion Plan initiatives, Commercial Banks and RRBs will, through both brick and mortar branches and business correspondents, provide banking outlets in around 3,50,000 villages by 2013, it is because of the huge potential and promise that the rural co-operative credit structure represents for financial inclusion that the Government and the Reserve Bank of India thought it fit to revive the financially haemorrhaged Short Term Cooperative Credit Structure (STCCS) by setting up the Vaidyanathan Committee and accepting its comprehensive recommendations for implementation in a business like manner. Based on the recommendations of the Vaidyanathan Committee and after reaching consensus with Chief Ministers, Finance Ministers and Cooperation Ministers of States, Government of India decided to provide massive financial assistance (since revised to Rs.19,330 crores (Rs. 193 Billion) from the originally estimated Rs.13,596 crores Rs. 136 Billion) to the financially haemorrhaged Short Term Cooperative Credit Structure but also, only appropriately, made it conditional upon rigorous and stringent compliance with, and progress on, pre-specified critical parameters like facilitating regulatory powers of the RBI, limiting equity participation of State Governments in cooperative banks to 25%, limiting the powers of State Governments to supersede the boards, removing State Government intervention in all financial and internal administrative matters, special audits of PACS, District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCBs), and State Cooperative Banks (SCBs), conduct of Statutory Audit by Chartered Accountants (CAs), timely election of Board of Directors, appointment/co-option of professionally qualified Directors and appointment of Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) in accordance with the RBI-prescribed fit-and-proper criteria, training and Human Resources Development, computerization, Common Accounting System (CAS) and Management Information System (MIS), by amendment of State Co-operative Societies Acts and amendment of Rules and adoption of appropriate Bye-Laws. In this context, it is encouraging to note that 25 States have since signed the MoUs for implementation of the Revival Package. These are Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. Between them, they cover more than 96% of the STCCS units in the country. The financial assistance under the Package is released only on the implementation of legal and institutional reforms. NABARD has, as on 31 October, 2011, has already released an amount of Rs 9002.98 crore (Rs. 90 Billion) towards Government of India’s share for recapitalisation of PACS in seventeen States while State Governments have released Rs.855.53 (Rs. 8.5 Billion)crore as their share. It is also very encouraging to note that 21 States have amended their respective State Cooperative Societies Acts and these are Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Mizoram, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.  The corner-stone of this realignment exercise was to overhaul and re-engineer governance and management in the rural co-operative credit structure with a view to preventing recurrence of such financial haemorrhaging. And, significantly, to reinforce, and sustain, overhauled and re-engineered governance in such financially rejuvenated and renewed co-operative credit structure, effective and credible supervision and regulation is a sine qua non. As the distinguished audience is aware, while NABARD supervises the co-operative credit institutions, Reserve Bank regulates them. This supervisory and regulatory framework involves RBI framing and issuing regulatory instructions and guidelines and NABARD 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 examining their actual compliance during inspection. Currently, these regulatory instructions and guidelines are scattered across individual circulars containing them. The imperative of consolidating all the existing regulatory guidelines and instructions has long been felt both by NABARD and the supervised co-operative credit institutions. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank is in the process of consolidating all such instructions and guidelines in the form of a Master Circular and which, I assure this audience, will be in the public domain very soon. It will serve as a ready recokner for the rural co-operative institutions facilitating their compliance with the regulatory instructions and guidelines in force.  I would also take the present opportunity to share with you the recent decision to waive the signing of MoU as a pre-condition for opening of branches by State Co-operative Banks in the States which do not need the re-capitalisation assistance under the Revival Package, provided they comply with all other conditions. The committee on Financial Sector Assessment (Chairman: Dr. Rakesh Mohan and Co-Chairman: Shri Ashok Chawla) had recommended that rural co-operative banks, which fail to obtain licence by March 2012, should not be allowed to operate. Accordingly, it was proposed in the Annual Policy Statement of April 2009 to work out a roadmap for licensing of unlicensed state and central co-operative banks. For this purpose, in consultation with National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD), revised guidelines on licensing of these banks were issued. All Regional Offices of RBI were advised to issue licences to banks, which meet the prescribed criteria. It is expected that a large number of co-operative banks will be licensed by 2012. The Revival Package based on Vaidyanathan Committee is under implementation which would also help the StCBs/CCBs to improve their financials and be eligible for licensing. In this context, it is important to note that as on 30th November 2011, out of 31 State Co-operative Banks (SCBs) and 371 District Central Co-operative Banks (DCCBs) in the country, 6 SCBs and 117 DCCBs were unlicensed compared to 17 SCBs, and 296 DCCBs, as on 31st March 2009. I take the present opportunity to share with this distinguished audience the latest status of licensed and unlicensed StCBs and DCCBs in the four States of Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarkhand and Uttar Pradesh which is as under:  Thus, while in Uttarakhand, the SCB is yet to be licensed, in the states of Chhatisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh, out of 104 DCCBs, 42 DCCBs are yet to be licensed. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches As announced in the Annual Policy Statement of April, 2010, a study on well-run rural co-operatives including Primary Agricultural Credit Co-operative Societies (PACS), Large Adivasi Multipurpose Co-operative Societies (LAMPS), Farmers Service Societies (FSS) and Thrift and Credit Co-operatives was undertaken by the Reserve Bank in collaboration with NABARD and State Governments as part of its undivided policy focus on the “niche” role of rural credit co-operatives in financial inclusion. For the study, 208 well-run co-operatives operating in 21 States were selected. Of these, 71 were operating under Parallel Self-Reliant Co-operative Societies Acts with the rest under respective State Co-operative Societies Acts. The broad objectives of the study as set out by the Reserve Bank were: a) To study the functioning of well-run thrift and rural credit co-operatives, including PACS, LAMPS, FSS and other new financial co-operatives, set up under the Parallel Self-Reliant Co-operative Societies Acts to assess their potential to contribute to financial inclusion and the local economy; b) To study the member, borrower and depositor profiles, saving mobilization and credit extended to tenant farmers, oral lessees and agricultural labourers; c) To study the quality of actual management and governance and external impediments that come in the way of good governance/management; d) To study and analyse the impact of functioning of such co-operatives on the local economy/populace; e) To suggest measures necessary to effectively encourage the emergence of many more such institutions across the country, if the study indicated that they have a significant contribution to make to financial inclusion. The study was completed in November 2011 and after its due examination, the Reserve Bank will take the findings and recommendations forward. We are at the threshold of the Second Green Revolution which envisages, and will entail, shift in focus and attention to pulses, fruits, vegetable, live-stock, fisheries, poultry and horticulture and raising their production and productivity with a view to ensuring national food security and sustainable high levels of growth. With these words, I conclude my address and wish today’s Conference all success that it so very much deserves !  Thank you all so very much indeed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Anand Sinha: Legislative reforms – strengthening the banking sector Address by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Financial Planning Congress’11, organised by the Financial Planning Standards Board of India, Mumbai, 18 December 2011.  *      *      * Inputs provided by P R Ravi Mohan, G S Hegde, Subrat Das and Smt Sadhana Varma are gratefully acknowledged.  Justice (Retd.) Shri B.N. Srikrishna, Chairman, Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission (FSLRC), Shri Swarup and Shri Malegam (members of FSLRC), Shri Yogesh Agarwal, Chairman, Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA), Shri Mudholkar and Shri Chikermane, and other delegates. It is an honour and privilege for me to address you today, on some of the key issues with regard to “Reforms in the Banking Sector” and I thank Financial Planning Standards Board of India for this opportunity. This Financial Planning Congress comes at a very opportune time when the far reaching exercise of rewriting financial laws is being undertaken by the FSLRC and I commend the organisers for their efforts in putting together this Congress. I. Introduction Empirical research shows that better developed financial systems accelerate economic growth and shrink income inequality by disproportionately increasing the earnings of lower income families1 i.e. enabling growth with equity, which is so vital for our country. A well developed financial system will require sound legislative framework because, legislation is the foundation on which institutional frameworks stand. To be effective, legislation not only needs to be unambiguous and fair but also should be robust enough to address all the existing concerns while, at the same time, being flexible enough to accommodate the new needs on account of evolving environment. Role of legislation in the context of economic development in general and the financial sector in particular, is an interesting area of study. It has been argued that strong legal systems foster development of sophisticated financial markets and intermediaries2, which enhances the economy’s ability to manage risk and eventually lead to economic growth. Measures such as robust contract enforcement and disclosure discipline go a long way in strengthening the financial systems. Every legislation has a time dimension and its relevance has to be seen vis-à-vis this dimension. With the changing environment, practices and processes change, necessitating a review of extant legislations. This holds all the more true for an area like financial system where changes are rapid and frequent. The dynamic nature of legislation was well articulated when Aristotle said “Even when laws have been written down, they ought not always to remain unaltered”.  India is said to be one the most over-legislated countries. We have numerous Acts and regulations, some of which date back decades. As times have changed quite significantly since they were enacted, there is an emphatic need to update and fine tune them so as to enhance their relevance for the rapidly changing financial landscape. It is a welcome step                                                  1  Levine, Ross. 2  Levine, Ross; Law, Finance and Economic Growth; Journal of Financial Intermediation 8 (1999). 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches that FSLRC has been constituted to look into and revise the existing financial legislation. In this context, the role of this Congress is very important in facilitating deliberations. Financial sector policies comprise a set of policies, such as: – Prudential policies to ensure safety and soundness of the financial system (financial stability) – Regulatory and Supervisory policies – Depositor and Consumer protection policies – Financial Inclusion policies – Other policies for ensuring adequate supply of credit to economically important sectors i.e. SMEs, Infrastructure, etc. and – Market structure and Competition Prudential policies comprise macro prudential and micro prudential policies aimed at ensuring the safety and soundness of the financial system. Collectively, both macro and micro prudential policies ensure the stability of the financial system which would facilitate efficient allocation of resources to the real economy. While financial stability is a necessary condition to ensure other objectives of financial sector policies as well as for growth and macroeconomic stability, it is not a sufficient condition to attain these objectives. Other financial sector policies will have to be implemented for balancing numerous considerations such as growth imperatives, flow of credit to disadvantaged and preferred sectors, consumer protection, financial inclusion and equity, etc. At times, it becomes extremely challenging to balance these considerations and, if adequate care is not taken in designing and implementing the other financial sector policies, financial stability may be adversely affected. Therefore, it is important that a set of sound financial sector policies (including prudential policies) backed by sound legislation must be adopted to deliver the various objectives – growth with equity in the backdrop of financial stability. II. Recent amendments carried to various financial sector laws Before I delve into some of the key issues requiring legislative review, I list some of the enactments and amendments that have been made to the various Acts during the last decade to highlight the dynamic nature of legislation. i. Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 was amended in 2006 to provide legality to certain OTC derivative transactions and also to give explicit regulatory powers to Reserve Bank over derivatives and money market instruments. ii. The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 was amended in 2007 for removing the lower limit prescribed in maintenance of Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) by banks and conferring wide powers on RBI in stipulating the SLR requirements for banks and to control liquidity in the market.  iii. The State Bank of India Act, 1955 was amended in 2007 for enabling transfer of ownership from RBI to Government of India and again in 2010 to provide for enhancement of capital, issue of preference shares, raise capital by public issue or preferential allotment or private placement or rights issue; and to issue bonus shares to the existing shareholders, etc. iv. The State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 was amended in 2007 to facilitate enhancement of capital, raise resources from the market and raise capital through rights issue. v. The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Acts, 1970 and 1980 were amended in 2006 to enable nationalised banks to issue preference 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 shares in accordance with the guidelines framed by the Reserve Bank and to raise capital by preferential allotment or private placement or public issue, with the approval of the Reserve Bank. vi. The Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 was amended in 2002 to introduce the concepts of “electronic cheque” and “cheque truncation” by expanding the definition of “cheque”. vii. The Securities Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2007 was passed with a view to providing a legal framework for enabling listing and trading of securitised debt instruments, including mortgage backed debt. viii. The Government Securities Act, 2006 was enacted to consolidate and amend the laws relating to Government securities and its management by the RBI. The Act simplifies the procedure for settlement of claims of legal representatives, provides for admissibility of computerised information as evidence, contains provisions for effectively dealing with misuse of Statutory General Ledger (SGL) accounts and facilitates pledging and hypothecation of Government securities.  ix. The Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 was enacted empowering the Reserve Bank to regulate and supervise payment and settlement systems of the country and provides a legal basis for multilateral netting and settlement finality.  x. The Prevention of Money- Laundering Act, 2002 was enacted as a follow up to UN General Assembly resolution in 1998, calling for adoption of national anti-money laundering legislations and programmes by member states. The Act provides for preventing money laundering and connected activities, enables confiscation of proceeds of crime, setting up of agencies and mechanisms for co-ordinating measures for combating money laundering, etc.  xi. The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act (FCRA), 2010 was enacted by repealing the erstwhile Foreign Contribution Regulation Act, 1976 mainly to rectify several deficiencies found in the previous Act. The new Act covers the electronic media and organizations, other than political parties, apart from entities in the prohibited list in FCRA, 1976. xii. The Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 empowers the Reserve Bank to regulate the Credit Information Companies (CIC) and to facilitate efficient distribution of credit and matters concerned or incidental to it.  III. The road ahead: legislative reforms in the banking sector Multiple acts – need for consolidation Banks are regulated and supervised under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. Public Sector Banks viz., State Bank of India, State Bank of India subsidiary banks and Nationalized Banks which are constituted under different statutes are governed by their respective statutes and by some of the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act. The provisions relating to the ownership and management of banking companies as contained in the Banking Regulation Act are not applicable to the public sector banks. Co-operative Banks are constituted by the respective State Co-operative Societies Acts or by the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act and the provisions of Banking Regulation Act are made applicable to them with certain modifications. Since the origins of the banks have been historically different, they continue to be governed by the respective statutes as well as other general laws. Each of the statutes was crafted in a contemporaneous setting, reflecting the needs and concerns of the time. Therefore, almost 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches all the statutes were amended from time to time to reflect changes in circumstances and context prevailing at that time. There is a strong case for reviewing these legislations and recasting them for a number of reasons. First, prudential regulations are ownership neutral. However, the fact that different banks are governed by different laws has resulted in an uneven playing field which needs to be addressed. For example, while amendments were carried out to enable SBI, SBI subsidiary banks and nationalised banks to issue preference shares, though at different points of time, banks in private sector cannot issue preference shares as the amendments to the BR Act is still to be carried out. Similarly, while bilateral netting in the event of liquidation is admissible for private sector banks governed by the Companies Act and the normal bankruptcy laws, the position in this regard for public sector banks, SBI and its subsidiaries is not clear in law, as liquidation, if at all, of such banks would be as per the Notification to be issued by the Government in this regard. Second, a single, harmonized and uniform legislation applicable to all banks will provide transparency, comprehensiveness and clarity and provide ease of regulation and supervision to the Reserve Bank. Third, there is also a need to sort out the conflicts and overlaps between the primary laws governing the banking sector and other applicable laws. For example, the Competition Act, 2002 (as amended by the Competition (Amendment) Act, 2007) is in conflict with the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, SBI Act and other statutes dealing with the amalgamation of banks. Consolidation of banking sector laws and laying down of common regulatory framework for commercial banks are issues requiring serious consideration. Management of banks Management of banking institutions by fit and proper persons plays an important role in securing the safety of banks. While RBI has power, under certain circumstances, to remove the managerial and other persons from the banks and appoint additional directors, etc., these powers may not be effective in handling a situation where supersession of the Board is warranted. RBI, currently, does not have the power to supersede the Board of Directors of a banking company. In the Banking Laws Amendment Bill, 2011 amendments are being proposed for conferring such a power on RBI, for being used with appropriate safeguards. With respect to public sector banks, by way of amendments, similar powers have been vested in the Central Government, which has the majority shareholding in those banks. The shareholding pattern also plays a vital role with respect to the management of banks and, therefore, it is necessary that shareholders having sizeable holding should also be fit and proper. RBI has, by way of regulatory prescriptions, implemented an acknowledgement procedure. In the 2011 Bill, statutory provisions are being proposed for obtaining prior permission of RBI for acquiring 5% or more of the equity shares or voting rights in a banking company. At present, a deadlock situation arises if a group of persons acquires sizeable equity or voting rights in a bank without following the acknowledgement procedure. There is no statutory power for directing disgorgement of shares and as such, if any such acquisition takes place, it may result only in contravention in provisions of BR Act. The main object of preventing the management of a bank from being captured by persons who are not fit and proper for holding such sizeable interest will not be achieved. RBI should, therefore, have the power to direct, by order, at any time that persons who are not fit and proper to hold such equity or voting power in contravention of these provisions, shall not have voting power. The 2011 Bill proposes to confer such power on RBI. This will help prevent unscrupulous persons from exercising control over banks. Deposit collection activity Currently, collection of deposits from members/shareholders is not treated as acceptance of public deposits. This is a matter of serious concern, particularly, with respect to Co-operative Societies. Deposits are accepted by enrolling members on tap and by collecting nominal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 amounts from them, exposing such depositors to serious risks. Banking Regulation Act does not apply to such co-operative societies and they are outside the regulatory purview of the Reserve Bank. It is necessary to plug this important loophole. Unless deposits are received from members who have voting rights, the deposits have to be treated as public deposits and the exemption from the provisions of Banking Regulation Act should not be made applicable. Every entity that accepts deposits from persons having no voting rights has to be treated as deposit accepting entity and should be regulated as such by RBI. RBI should have the discretion to determine the level and intensity of regulation and supervision depending upon the risk to the system from such entities. Financial conglomerates In India, banks are entitled to carry on certain financial activities under the bank subsidiary model. Some banks have formed subsidiaries to carry on securities and insurance business. The performance of the subsidiaries affects the balance sheet of the bank. On account of varied activities carried on by the entities in the group which fall within the regulatory jurisdiction of multiple regulators, the risk to the system as a whole posed by such financial conglomerates is difficult to assess. These raise systemic issues and RBI as the regulator of banks needs to be empowered to obtain information, with respect to each of the entities functioning under the umbrella of a bank. The 2011 Bill proposes to confer such powers on RBI to get information with respect to such entities. This ought to be pursued in the new legislative framework also. Non-operative bank holding company The traditional theories of economies of scale and scope support bigger entities. In India, we need bigger banks to finance our very large infrastructure needs and also large industrial projects. Thus, while there are advantages in growing big and handling multiple activities, nobody knows where exactly the tipping point is, when the bigness of size starts becoming a disadvantage. The crisis has highlighted the downside of having “Too Big to Fail” entities. Very big and complex entities pose supervisory issues to the regulators and pose serious systemic risks. So we need to ensure that structures are not complex and that there are effective resolution mechanisms to ensure orderly winding up of these systemically important entities, in case of crisis. It has been suggested that a non-operative bank holding company structure may be useful to deal with financial conglomerates as this greatly mitigates the risks spilling over from other entities in the Group. While the functional regulator of each subsidiary of the non-operative holding company may regulate and supervise the business of the subsidiary concerned, the non-operative holding company needs to be regulated on the lines of a bank and needs to be placed under the regulatory and supervisory control of RBI. Appropriate legislative measures are necessary for operationalising this model. Apart from the regulatory issues in the above model, there are other challenges to be addressed. One of them is related to placing public sector banks under such holding companies. Another is the impact of taxation on the transfer of shares of the subsidiaries to the holding company. Unless adequate tax relief is granted, it will be difficult for existing banks to come under the holding company structure. Stamp duty issues In India, there are certain issues with respect to stamp duty on documents. One of the major hurdles facing the development of the securitisation market is the stamp duty structure. It can add up to a substantial cost as there are differentiated duty structures in different states. While some states have recognised the special nature of securitization transactions and 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches reduced the stamp duties, other states still operate at stamp duties as high as 5% to 12% for transfer of secured receivables.  Concerns about stamp duties have also been raised in the context of the proposed subsidiarisation of foreign banks. The broader objective of proposed subsidiarisation of foreign banks is to promote financial stability in India and this requires harmonisation and simplification of stamp duty structure across the country. Minimum capital requirements The minimum capital prescribed in the Banking Regulation Act for banks is too low and Reserve Bank is prescribing the minimum capital requirement in case of private sector banks from time to time (currently banks should have a minimum networth of Rs. 300 crores). Minimum capital requirements prescribed under the “Ownership and Governance” guidelines and that prescribed/ being prescribed for new banks in private sector are way above the current provisions of the Act. It would, therefore, be more appropriate to empower Reserve Bank to stipulate the capital requirements and other quantitative parameters from time to time, instead of prescribing quantitative limits in the respective Acts. Migration to IFRS As part of the efforts to ensure convergence of the Indian Accounting Standards (IAS) with the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), the formats of financial statements will undergo changes consequent to the introduction of IFRS. Further, whenever banks introduce new types of capital instruments, etc. these will have to be appropriately incorporated in the format. Therefore, Reserve Bank should be empowered to prescribe the format of the balance sheet, profit and loss account, etc. given in Third Schedule of the B. R. Act. Bilateral netting issues Various banks had requested RBI to allow bilateral netting of counterparty credit exposure, in respect of interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives, and gold. The legal position regarding bilateral netting is not unambiguously clear in case of banks established by special statutes [like SBI Act, Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, etc.]. Amendments to a large number of enactments particularly in a synchronised manner may be practically difficult. Enacting a single legislation which covers all aspects of banks’ functioning, while possibly providing differential legislative framework for corporate governance issues on account of ownership differences may make the legislative framework more efficient.  Bank resolution The significance of effective resolution mechanism for promoting financial stability as well as consumer protection cannot be underestimated. The legal framework should address the resolution mechanism from a practical point of view and must have at least the following characteristics:  Early intervention before insolvency   Speed of intervention/resolution   Ability to transfer or merge operations   Effective write-down of shareholders’ rights   Protection of on-going business  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 In addition to banks, the resolution mechanism should address resolution of other Systemically Important Financial Institutions (SIFIs) also. Post crisis, globally, there have been initiatives to strengthen the resolution framework of Financial Market Infrastructures (FMIs) and other entities in the financial sector. The resolution mechanism should also include a framework for resolution of NBFCs and entities operating payment systems. Swift and simple procedure for quick resolution, particularly, that of systemically important entities – global and domestic, is necessary. Under the evolving international framework it would be required of jurisdictions, to have adequate resolution framework as per international standards. The key attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes were adopted by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) Plenary and endorsed by G-20 leaders at the Cannes Summit and these are an essential component of the package of policies to reduce the risks of moral hazard and the potential for systemic disruption associated with Systemically Important Financial Institutions (SIFIs). This will require legislative changes and administrative actions.  The powers of RBI for effective resolution of regulated entities from this perspective need enhancement. Mergers Voluntary mergers and transfers help consolidation in financial sector and pave the way for stronger financial institutions to rescue the weaker ones. Such voluntary measures, while saving the constituents of weaker institutions, provide business opportunity to the stronger ones to spread their presence in different geographies. The BR Act empowers RBI to sanction a scheme for voluntary amalgamation of banking companies. However, such a power is not available with respect to cooperative banks. Considering the challenges faced in quick resolution of failed cooperative banks, certain enabling provisions in the BR Act facilitating RBI to sanction a scheme for takeover of banking assets and liabilities of a cooperative bank by commercial banks would be desirable. Partial merger of certain businesses or assets and liabilities of banks also may need to be examined. One of the issues that could complicate the resolution of banks through mergers and transfers due to the sensitivity of the process is the applicability of competition law. An enterprise proposing to enter into a combination via a merger or an amalgamation is required to notify the Competition Commission, and the Commission has been allowed up to 210 days to decide on it before the default clause kicks in. The 2011 Bill tries to address this issue. Consumer protection and globally compatible secrecy laws For speedy redressal of consumer grievances, RBI has framed the Banking Ombudsman Scheme by statutory directions under the BR Act. The Scheme is working satisfactorily. Secrecy of customer information is a principle of common law which is practiced in India also by banks, and recognized by courts. Statutory basis for this has to be provided, by clearly setting forth the exceptions relevant to the present requirement of preventing money laundering and cross border financing of undesirable activities. The law should strike a balance between the privacy rights of the customer and the need to share crucial information with law enforcement agencies and other regulators, both domestic and foreign. In matters of crime and proceeds of crime, the larger public interest would outweigh the private interests of individuals. Appropriate amendments may have to be carried out in the BR Act to provide a statutory backing for the banking secrecy laws and the limits on the privacy of customers should be laid down. Protection is required in the law to the regulators with respect to the information collected from the regulated entities including its assessment and analysis made by the regulators or supervisors and the correspondence related to such information. In larger public interest, the law should enable sharing of information with other regulators, both domestic and overseas, for mutual benefit. The recent crisis has demonstrated the need 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches for such cooperation. The absence of specific protection to the information held by the regulators whether collected from the regulated entities or from other regulators impedes sharing of information. Our laws have to be globally compatible and specific exemption from disclosure needs to be provided in this regard. Disclosure of sensitive information could compromise the effectiveness of regulation and supervision. Further, unless the secrecy laws in our jurisdiction are compatible with global standards, it will not be possible to receive from, or share information with, overseas regulators. Appropriate provisions may have to be inserted in the RBI Act and the BR Act in this regard. IV. Conclusion Financial sector is a very important segment of the economy and has direct bearing on growth and prosperity. Strong financial systems need strong legal systems which provide unambiguous and fair legislation. The financial system in India including banking, insurance, capital, taxation, etc. has many regulators, each having a separate mandate. This blend raises pertinent concerns. First, financial system is still characterised by considerable fragmentation of legislation, regulation and enforcement. Second, policy related frictions might arise from the diversity of different legislations and the overlapping of the regulatory jurisdictions. Third, there might be a risk of legal arbitrage among financial jurisdictions. A need has been continuously felt to rewrite and streamline the financial sector laws, rules and regulations and to bring them in harmony with the requirements of India’s fast growing financial sector. The current legislations were drafted in the contemporaneous setting and have had to be amended from time to time to incorporate changes in the milieu. Enacting new law or amending old law is a continuous process to remain aligned to changing circumstances. In the emerging scenario, the task of preventing financial risks has become more important and challenging. Amid global economic worries, this is an enormous task which, on completion, would immensely benefit the financial sector in India and economy at large. A sound legal framework may help deter imprudent risk-taking by financial institutions and reduce systemic risks. Revision of banking sector laws should also be motivated by the recognition that the banking sector has been and remains a critical factor not only for accelerating India’s growth but also for making it inclusive. Harmonising of financial sector legislations, rules and regulations has, therefore, become imperative. I have tried to give my views from regulatory and financial stability perspective. I hope you all will benefit from today’s discussions. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Talent development in Islamic finance over the next decade Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Launching of IBFIM’s Islamic Finance Qualification Framework & Progression Route (IFQFPR) “Talent development in Islamic finance over the next decade”, Kuala Lumpur, 14 December 2011. *      *      * In a highly dynamic, rapidly changing and challenging environment, talent development for the financial services industry has become an even more important agenda to ensure that its growth and development is supported by the necessary skills and capabilities. This is particularly important for Islamic finance given that it has become the most rapidly growing segment in our financial system. With the increased pace of the internationalisation of Islamic Finance, this growth momentum is also taking place in several other jurisdictions. This current global financial crisis which has highlighted the importance that the growth of the financial sector should correspond with the growth of the economy and for risk management and governance practices to be strengthened to ensure its stability and sustainability has also prompted increased interest in Islamic finance. These are the very principles and foundations inherent in Islamic finance. Talent as a thrust for industry advancement The development of the Malaysian Islamic financial system, has now evolved our Islamic finance industry into a progressive, comprehensive and competitive component of the overall financial sector. The market share of Islamic banking assets of total banking industry has grown from only 6.9 percent in 2000 to 22 percent in 2011. The contribution of Islamic finance to the Malaysian economy has also been growing significantly, accounting for 2.1 percent share to the country’s GDP in 2009, as compared to only 0.3 percent in 2000. This has led to greater job creation where employment in Islamic financial industry accounts for 11 percent of total employment in the financial sector.  On the international front, greater liberalisation of the Islamic financial system has seen greater foreign presence and participation in our Islamic financial system. There has also been an increasing trend in foreign participation in the domestic Islamic banking and takaful industry, as well as the Islamic capital market. Moving forward, it is envisaged that Islamic financial institutions in Malaysia will also expand beyond national boundaries to increase economic and financial linkages with other parts of the world. This rapid internationalisation of the financial system and technology advancement will demand a corresponding increase in quality skills and expertise of the industry. Talent upscaling will be even more important in the next decade, to steer the industry’s advancement in the increasingly complex and competitive financial ecosystem. A strong and dynamic workforce will be one of the important pillars for the industry to remain stable and competitive. It will also serve as a catalyst to spur innovation. In terms of talent demand for the overall financial sector, it is anticipated that over the next 10 years, a workforce of about 200,000 employees would be required, which is an increase of 56,000 people from the current 144,000 employees. There will therefore be strong demand across the financial sector, particularly for specialised skills in high growth and niche areas such as wealth management, Shariah advisory, corporate finance and investment advisory services.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Human capital development as key growth area In Malaysia, several dedicated institutions for human capital development in Islamic finance have been established. Contributions by tertiary education institutions, training and research institutions, and private training providers have been important to the development of professionals and expertise in Islamic finance. There are now more than 5,800 students enrolled in Islamic finance related academic courses in Malaysian higher learning institutions. The International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance (INCEIF), established in 2006 to develop qualified professionals in Islamic finance, has now produced 265 Chartered Islamic Finance Professional holders; while approximately 2,000 students from more than 75 countries are currently enrolled at different stages of completion of the Islamic finance programs. In terms of industry training, IBFIM has to date trained 32 percent of the total Islamic finance industry workforce.  Critical components in talent development strategies The vision moving forward for human capital development in Islamic finance is to ensure a steady stream of competent and versatile talent to support greater innovation and dynamism of the Islamic finance industry. This will require the approach to be comprehensive, meeting the highest standards and in close collaboration with the industry so that the learning solutions will continue to remain relevant. The breadth of talent development solution Human capital development needs to be comprehensive and holistic in meeting the requirements for all levels. The horizon of talent development solutions has to be widened towards attracting, developing and retaining talents with required skills and expertise for the industry. It must also meet the specific requirements of the workforce career progression, from the pre-employment stage, during employment and up to the leadership positions. Talent development solutions must also be for beyond the circle of the financial services community, to include other business communities, such as legal fraternity, Government officials and IT solution providers. The advancement of the industry is also dependent on these parts of the private and public sector. Their training needs must also be met through structured training programmes to facilitate their understanding of the specificities of Islamic finance and its value propositions.  Raising standards of training and education programmes The education and training programmes in Islamic finance also needs to achieve the highest quality, be credible and globally recognised. The qualifications developed need to fulfill the expectations of the industry. To ensure the standards, the required infrastructure for standard setting and accreditation for Islamic finance training and education has now been put in place. The Asian Institute of Finance (AIF) is ready to provide accreditation to training programmes offered by training institutes following a rigorous assessment under the new Assessment and Accreditation Framework and to ensure the highest standard of the trainings offered. The Association for Chartered Islamic Finance Professionals, a body entrusted to raise the quality standards and professionalism of Islamic finance practitioners, would also contribute to achieve this objective. This will centralise the setting of standards in Islamic finance and provide the assessments to ensure that the standards are being met. Partnerships and collaboration between the industry and academia There needs to be greater partnerships and collaboration between the industry and academia to align training and development with the requirements of the industry. Greater 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 involvement by the financial institutions is needed in designing the academic and training curriculum, and providing real business exposure and training through internship and sharing of experiences. Industry-universities partnership can also take the form of “summer school” programmes that emphasise on practical aspects of Islamic finance via business operation simulations. This move would provide value-added practical knowledge and hands-on experience to improve the technical competency of the graduates. More structured continuous learning programmes are also needed for practitioners to sustain their professional competencies. For top executives, the ICLIF Leadership and Governance Centre offers programs that aim to develop future business leaders for the financial industry.  Focus on applied research Research is also an important investment for long-term competitiveness of the industry and is a key driver for greater innovation. Research institutions together with the industry must continuously strive towards introducing innovative solutions which will add vibrancy and diversity to the market. Joint research initiatives should extend beyond geographical boundaries, with cross-border initiatives and convergence of ideas. Research by academic faculties and research agencies can also contribute to the knowledge repository of Islamic finance. In addition to research that have been issued by universities in Malaysia, The International Shariah Research Academy (ISRA) has been established as a dedicated international agency for applied research in Islamic finance. Further in-depth research on contemporary Shariah issues relating to risk mitigation, liquidity management and hedging would facilitate the generation of new ground-breaking developments in Islamic finance. Greater involvement of the industry is essential not only to provide funding support, but also to give perspectives that contribute to the implementation of the research output. The launch of IBFIM’s flagship programme today – the Islamic Finance Qualifications Framework and Progression Route – is part of this strategy for upgrading the skills and competencies of the existing talent in the industry. It is an innovative training framework that provides a progressive structured route to the acquisition of the relevant knowledge for the different levels throughout the career of the workforce in the industry. Successful completion of the comprehensive series of programmes would lead to qualifications at three different levels. The modules of the programmes have been developed with extensive consultation with the industry. The framework also offers flexibility in learning, as participants can complete the modules at their own pace. Important in the offering of these programs is that there needs to be clarity in the qualification that is earned so that it avoids confusion with other qualifications offered by other centres of learning to those practitioners aspiring to gain qualifications in Islamic finance. Our resources for investment in human capital development for the industry must be optimised. This would enhance Malaysia’s potential to become a centre of excellence for education in Islamic finance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Thomas Jordan: Financial stability developments of relevance Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Berne, 15 December 2011. *      *      * In my introductory remarks today, I would like to look at the most important developments in the area of financial stability that have taken place since the publication of our most recent Financial Stability Report in June of this year. Our latest analysis reaffirms the need for action which we had already identified back then. Firstly, in view of the high level of risk associated with the current global economic environment, the big banks must – to the extent possible – push quickly ahead with the expansion of their loss-absorbing capital base. Secondly, given the medium-term risks in the real estate market, which are particularly affecting domestically focused banks, it is vital that an effective macroprudential policy framework be developed.  International developments of relevance for financial stability The global economic and financial conditions which affect the stability of the Swiss financial system worsened in the second half of 2011. As my colleague, Philipp Hildebrand, has already mentioned, the outlook for global growth is currently subdued. A major reason for this is the sovereign debt crisis which has been building up in peripheral euro area countries for the last two years or so and is now threatening to spill over into the core countries of the euro area. The European banking sector is particularly affected, as investors fear losses from write-downs on government bonds. The ensuing loss of confidence in the banking system is resulting once again in a sharp fall in activity on the interbank market, which in turn is leading to higher refinancing costs and liquidity bottlenecks. Meanwhile, the European banks themselves are holding back economic activity with their restrictive lending practices. Weak economic activity is further hampering efforts by the affected nations to restructure their budgets. All of these developments have caused a steep rise in credit risk premia in financial markets.  In response to this serious situation, euro area countries have adopted additional measures to strengthen fiscal discipline in a sustainable way and to restore confidence in the European banking sector and the financial markets. The actual implementation of these measures is essential if the financial markets are to be convinced in the long term.  On the whole, we expect that the international environment will probably remain fraught with considerable uncertainty for some time to come; the risks to financial stability will remain correspondingly high.  Situation of Swiss big banks The deterioration in the global economic environment has not left the Swiss big banks unscathed. In the second half of 2011, their profitability suffered from the volatile financial market situation as well as from low customer activity levels. Against this backdrop and given the enhanced regulatory requirements, UBS and Credit Suisse have announced that they will be significantly reducing their risk exposure for the next few years. In addition to this, they have further expanded their loss-absorbing capital base.  The Swiss National Bank welcomes these measures and sees them as further steps towards achieving a sounder capital situation. Additional efforts are necessary, however, because the loss-absorbing capital of big banks is still low, given their risk profile and the considerable uncertainty in the international environment. In order for them to be better equipped to deal 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches with a possible worsening of current economic conditions, the big banks must further improve their capital situation. They can achieve this by retaining earnings. Another measure would be to issue contingent convertible bonds or contingent capital instruments with write-off features, an essential element of the “too big to fail” regulations. They can also strengthen their capital base by accelerating the announced reduction of their risk exposure. By making use of these options, the big banks could quickly and substantially improve their capital situation.  Situation of domestically focused banks Allow me now to move on to the situation of banks with a domestic focus. The capitalisation of most domestically focused banks remains good. Profitability – as measured by the ratio of gross profits to assets – dropped slightly, however; not least because of the low interest rate margins. At the same time, domestically focused banks are having to contend with two significant risk factors, namely interest rate risk, which has remained unchanged at a high level, and credit risk, which has risen further.  Interest rate risk measures the potential for loss which results from a mismatch between the term structure of a bank’s assets (e.g. mortgages) and that of its liabilities (e.g. customer deposits). While the term structure of assets gets increasingly longer, that of liabilities remains very short.  The rise in credit risk was due, on the one hand, to the deterioration in the outlook for the Swiss economy. A slowdown in economic growth in Switzerland could have a negative impact on domestic credit quality, with the result that banks would face the prospect of write-offs on their assets. On the other hand, the continued strong rise in mortgage loans and real estate prices has also caused credit risk to increase further in the past few months. Furthermore, the results of our mortgage lending surveys suggest a high risk appetite on the part of individual banks.  In this regard, the Federal Department of Finance (FDF) submitted two important measures for consultation which should counter potential imbalances in the real estate and mortgage markets: more risk-sensitive capital requirements for mortgage lending and a countercyclical capital buffer.  With more risk-sensitive capital requirements, incentives for mortgage lending should be structurally improved. The countercyclical buffer is a component of the Basel III framework and represents a variable capital requirement which is only activated in the event of excessive credit growth. As soon as credit growth weakens again, the buffer can be deactivated. It is thus not a permanent instrument for boosting capital, but rather a temporary requirement to be employed in exceptional circumstances.  The countercyclical buffer is an important element in the macroprudential toolkit. I would therefore now like to take a brief look at the progress made in the area of macroprudential policy in Switzerland from the SNB’s perspective.  Progress in structuring the macroprudential policy framework At its news conference one year ago, the SNB drew attention to the absence of an adequate set of instruments in the area of macroprudential policy. This was in response to a request by the Parliament’s Control Committees to evaluate our mandate and set of instruments relating to financial stability. So what are the key milestones that have been achieved this year in establishing a framework for macroprudential oversight in Switzerland, in relation both to instruments and to the division of responsibilities?  Firstly, with regard to the above-mentioned countercyclical buffer, the financial stability task force led by the FDF has taken concrete steps towards implementing an important 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 macroprudential instrument. In addition, the proposed structure of this buffer provides for a clear division of responsibilities: After consulting with FINMA, the SNB submits a request to the Federal Council regarding the activation and the level of the buffer. The Federal Council then makes the final decision.  Secondly, in the context of the implementation of the “too big to fail” regulations, the decision-making authority with regard to systemic importance was clearly defined. The proposed legislation gives the SNB the authority to determine which banks and which bank functions are systemically important.  Thirdly, the SNB should be given improved access to information that is necessary for macroprudential analysis. In this context, the Federal Council announced that it would look into ways in which the SNB could gain better access to information from banks in cases where FINMA does not have the requisite data available. To the extent that the existing legal basis does not provide adequately for this, the Federal Council intends to submit a proposal to Parliament in the near future.  The SNB welcomes the progress made in the area of macroprudential policy in Switzerland. What is crucial now is that the appropriate measures are indeed implemented. This is all the more important in view of the fact that the risk of imbalances in the mortgage and real estate markets has increased over this past year. Moreover, owing to its focus on the minimum exchange rate, monetary policy is currently unable to react to potential imbalances in the mortgage market using the traditional instruments. We will therefore continue to work within the relevant committees towards a rapid implementation of an appropriate, streamlined macroprudential policy framework. The decision as to what framework will ultimately apply in Switzerland lies, however, with the policymakers.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Jean-Pierre Danthine: Market volatility, Swiss National Bank liquidity measures and foreign exchange reserves Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Berne, 15 December 2011. *      *      * I would like to address three main issues today. These are the acute market volatility experienced this summer, the impact of the Swiss National Bank’s (SNB) liquidity measures and minimum exchange rate upon our money and foreign exchange (FX) markets, and the management of our FX reserves.  Acute market volatility  The second half of 2011 has, until now, been marked by an extraordinary degree of uncertainty. Volatility on the equity, bond and foreign exchange markets has increased markedly, reflecting investors’ concerns about the softening of global growth, the European sovereign debt crisis, the US debt ceiling crisis and the resilience of the international banking system.  Signs of this acute volatility abound. Allow me to highlight three recent examples. Firstly, between July and early August, the VIX Index, a measure of the volatility of the S&P 500, abruptly doubled. Secondly, the MSCI World Index, a measure of the state of global equity markets, decreased by almost 20% between early July and late September, rebounding in October, only to fall again afterwards. As concerns about bank solvency and credit risk increased banks being at the heart of the crisis the benchmark MSCI World Banks Index also fell by over 25% between early July and late September. Thirdly, as concerns over the security of corporate and government bonds grew, the premia investors have had to pay against bond defaults have increased very significantly. The perceived decrease in the creditworthiness of key European companies and Western European sovereign bonds was highlighted by the very sharp rise of several benchmark credit default swap (CDS) indices for these markets.1 The foreign exchange market has been of particular concern to the SNB, as the Swiss franc’s safe haven properties and the growing dearth of alternative “safe” assets led to massive movements in our currency, which required the SNB to act.  In early August, the real effective exchange rate of the Swiss franc peaked at an estimated level of almost 40% above its post-1990 long-term average.2 The extent of this deviation was very rare, in historic terms, as the previous high point, at the end of 1995, was only 12% above the same long-term average. Since the introduction of the euro in 1999, the volatility of the EUR/CHF exchange rate has averaged approximately 5%.3 In August it rose to almost 30%. As chart 1 shows, three of the largest ever daily negative movements in the EUR/CHF exchange rate also occurred in this period. Since the introduction of the minimum exchange                                                  1 The Markit iTraxx Europe Index, for example, which is composed of 125 investment grade entities from six sectors (auto, consumer, energy, financial, industrial and TMT), more than doubled between July and September. Likewise, the iTraxx Sovereign Western Europe Index, consisting of 15 sovereign CDS across Europe, rose by approximately 70% in the same period.  2 This is an approximation of the real effective exchange rate, assuming constant weights and inflation differentials. 3  Annualised volatility computed over one calendar month on the basis of daily movements.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches rate on 6 September, EUR/CHF volatility has fallen below 10%, though it remains high from a historical perspective.  The introduction of the minimum exchange rate also had an impact on some of the dynamic properties of the Swiss franc. As the red bar on the left side of chart 2 suggests, there was previously a positive correlation between the movements of the Swiss franc and those of risk indicators such as the VIX Index, i.e. investors tend to buy Swiss francs when perceived risk increases. In the same vein, the blue bar on the left of the chart shows that the correlation between the movements of the Swiss franc and those of risky assets, such as the equity shares on the MSCI World Index, has historically been negative. In other words, negative market developments have often been accompanied by a rising Swiss franc. Intriguingly, as the right side of chart 2 shows, the introduction of the minimum exchange rate appears to have had a significant impact on these correlations.  The SNB’s implementation of monetary policy: liquidity measures  On 3 August, the SNB started to implement liquidity measures against the massively overvalued Swiss franc. Let me provide some further information on these operations. That day, the SNB announced that it was narrowing the target range for the three-month Libor from 0.00–0.75% to 0.00–0.25%. It also stated its intention to expand sight deposits at the SNB. These were subsequently increased from around CHF 30 billion at the beginning of August to over CHF 250 billion by the first week of September.  The SNB used a range of well-established instruments to effect this extraordinary increase in the supply of liquidity to the Swiss franc money market, as chart 3 shows. Firstly, reverse repo operations were discontinued. As a result, outstanding reverse repos fell from CHF 26 billion on 3 August to zero a week later. Secondly, the SNB stopped renewing SNB Bills that fell due, and later started to repurchase those that remained outstanding. While these amounted to some CHF 110 billion at the end of July, this figure gradually decreased to below CHF 45 billion by the end of August, reaching some CHF 20 billion by the end of November. Thirdly, to further boost liquidity, on 10 August the SNB also started to employ foreign exchange swaps. These amounted to approximately CHF 80 billion by the end of the third quarter. Fourthly, the SNB again resorted to conducting repo operations, which provided the Swiss franc money market with approximately CHF 18 billion of liquidity in August and up to around CHF 33 billion in November.  These exceptional liquidity measures exerted downward pressure on interest rates. In line with the goals stated in the SNB’s announcement of 3 August, the three-month Libor fell from 17.5 bp on 2 August to a low of 0.3 bp on 5 September, as chart 4 shows. It is now hovering around 5 bp, though it is worth noting that limited volumes of unsecured trades are being conducted in the present environment. The significance of the three-month Libor remains unchanged, however, as reflected by the fact that all money market interest rates are currently close to zero, as is the Swiss franc Libor itself.  Since early August, the Libor futures yield curve has also decreased sharply, with its March 2012 maturity reaching –0.5% on 18 August. That day, the entire curve for the period up to September 2013 also lay below zero. The three-month rate implied in the price of EUR/CHF swaps reached a low of –1.5%4. From a foreign investor’s standpoint, such interest rate conditions make the Swiss franc and its money market less attractive, as intended.  The downward movement of interest rates also affected the short-term borrowing costs of the Swiss Confederation. Since the end of August, the yields from money market debt register claims5 have moved into negative territory. On 23 August, the yields from six-month auctions                                                  4  This was computed on the basis of three-month euro-denominated overnight index swap rates.  5  Geldmarktbuchforderungen der Schweizerischen Eidgenossenschaft (GMBF).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 decreased to –1%, and on 30 August, the yields from three-month auctions went down to –0.75%. At recent auctions, both yields were still negative.  It is interesting to note that these liquidity operations may have affected more than just current and expected short-term rates. After the SNB’s 17 August announcement, the rates of two-year Swiss government bonds briefly moved below zero, and the yields of longer-term Swiss government bonds also decreased significantly. While the yields on other long-term government bonds which are generally considered safe also followed similar patterns, it is nevertheless striking to observe in chart 5 that in the wake of the SNB’s liquidity measures in August, ten-year Swiss government bond yields experienced their largest declines since 1995.  The interest rate and liquidity measures taken by the SNB in August naturally preceded and prepared for the introduction of the minimum exchange rate, in case it proved necessary. The SNB will continue to keep liquidity at exceptionally high levels, but has decided not to set a specific target level for sight deposits at present.  Management of the foreign exchange reserves  In the context of the minimum exchange rate, there has been renewed interest in the management of our FX reserves. Let me repeat here that our investments are subject to the primacy of monetary policy and implemented according to three criteria, namely, in order of priority: security, liquidity and returns. The SNB has to bear the risk associated with exchange rate fluctuations, as any hedge would be equivalent to buying Swiss francs against foreign currencies. The SNB has therefore emphasised the importance of diversification and limiting the concentration risks of our foreign currency investments.  Today, 53% of the SNB’s FX reserves are invested in euro-denominated securities. This is in line with the share of Swiss exports to the euro area, and only five percentage points more than our allocation three years ago, though the size of our FX reserves, excluding swaps, increased from CHF 50 billion in 2008 to over CHF 225 billion by the end of September 2011. In order to promote further diversification, in 2010 the SNB added four new currencies to its reserves, namely Australian and Singapore dollars, Danish krone and Swedish krona. As a result, in addition to euros and these four currencies, the SNB’s portfolio is now composed of 26% US dollars, 9% Japanese yen, 5% pounds sterling and 4% Canadian dollars.  Central banks generally have large holdings of government bonds due to their need for liquidity. As is widely known, in recent months the ratings agencies have been reviewing or have downgraded the credit ratings of many sovereign bonds. Despite this turn of events, approximately 96% of all our investments in fixed-income assets are rated AAA or AA. In closing, I would like to emphasise that we are actively exploring and monitoring new asset classes and currencies in developed and developing markets. The aim of this process is to continually reduce concentration risks and to further diversify the SNB’s FX reserves. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches        
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5      
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Mario Draghi: Interview with the Financial Times Interview with Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, in the Financial Times, conducted by Messrs Lionel Barber and Ralph Atkins on 14 December 2011 in Frankfurt, and published on 19 December 2011. *      *      * Financial Times: We are now more than four years into the financial crisis. What lessons would you draw so far? What has gone right and what has gone wrong? Mario Draghi: We have to distinguish two stages. First was the financial crisis, with its repercussions for the real economy. I think we learnt the lessons that we need a more resilient financial system, a system where we would have less debt and more capital. There has been substantial progress in designing new regulatory policies and some progress in implementing this new design.  The second stage of the crisis is really a combination of, I would say, a challenging political phase, where euro area leaders are reshaping what I called the fiscal “compact,” and a situation where banks and countries, face serious funding constraints. These challenging funding conditions are now producing a credit tightening and have certainly increased the downside risks for the euro area economy. Action is proceeding on two fronts. At last week’s European Union summit you saw a first step towards fiscal rules that are not only more binding, but actually are of a different nature. They would be binding ex ante, which is an entirely new quality, and written into the primary legislations of the member states.  The second line of action is a set of meaningful, significant decisions taken by the ECB last week. We cut the main interest rate by 25 basis points. We announced two long-term refinancing operations, which for the first time will last three years. We halved the minimum reserve ratio from 2 per cent to 1 per cent. We broadened collateral eligibility rules. Finally, the ECB governing council agreed that the ECB would act as an agent for the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF).  Will the three-year refinancing operations give banks an incentive to buy “periphery” eurozone bonds? Not necessarily. Of course banks also have capital difficulties, and these measures don’t necessarily help them on that side. The objective is to ease the funding pressures that banks are experiencing. They will then decide what the best use of these funds is. One aspiration is to have them financing the real economy, especially small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs). What we are observing is that small and medium sized banks are the ones having the biggest funding difficulties, and they are generally the ones who provide most of the financing for the SMEs. And SMEs account for about 70 per cent of employment in the euro area’s corporate sector.  Is this Europe’s version of “quantitative easing”? Each jurisdiction has not only its own rules, but also its own vocabulary. We call them non-standard measures. They are certainly unprecedented. But the reliance on the banking channel falls squarely in our mandate, which is geared towards price stability in the medium term and bound by the prohibition of monetary financing [central bank funding of governments]. Coming back to what banks are going to do with this money: we don’t know exactly. The important thing was to relax the funding pressures. Banks will decide in total independence 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches what they want to do, depending on what is the best risk / return combination for their businesses. One of the things that they may do is to buy sovereign bonds. But it is just one. And it is obviously not at all an equivalent to the ECB stepping-up bond buying. Do you expect, in the next six months, another round of bank recapitalisations and, in some cases, nationalisation? Last week, we had the results of the European Banking Authority (EBA) “stress tests” exercise. But ideally, the sequence ought to have been different: We should have had the EFSF in place first. This would have had certainly a positive impact on sovereign bonds, and therefore a positive impact on the capital positions of the banks with sovereign bonds in their balance sheet. So the ideal sequencing would have been to have the recapitalisation of the banks after EFSF had been in place and had been tested. In fact, it was done the other way round, so the capital needs identified by the EBA exercise reflect stressed bond market conditions. That may exert pressure on banks to achieve better capital ratios by simply de-leveraging. De-leveraging means two things; selling assets and/or reducing lending. In the present business cycle conditions, I think the second option is by far the worst. I understand regulators have recommended to their banks that they shouldn’t go this way, so let’s hope they follow this advice. Couldn’t somebody just say to the EBA, look, just hold off now, this is completely unhelpful?  I think the press statement by EBA somehow hints at that, because they say that there wouldn’t be another exercise next year. To be fair to EBA, the shape of the exercise was decided at a time when the biggest economic threat seemed to be the banking system’s lack of credibility. People feared banks’ balance sheets concealed fragilities that in the end would strain the economies. So they started this exercise thinking that, being transparent, and marking-to-market sovereign bonds, would strengthen the credibility of the banking system and reduce risk premia. At the end, it did not work that way because of the sequencing. But I wouldn’t say it’s EBA’s fault. The big point here though is, at least the world in 2011, has fundamentally changed, if not for the last two years, where a position where equities would be seen as more risky than government bonds is now in reverse…. The big change is that assets which were considered absolutely safe are now viewed as potentially unsafe. We have to ask what can be done to restore confidence. I would say there are at least four answers. The first lies with national economic policies, because this crisis and this loss of confidence started from budgets that had got completely out of control. The second answer is that we have to restore fiscal discipline in the euro area, and this is in a sense what last week’s EU summit started, with the redesign of the fiscal compact. However, we are in a situation where premia for these risks are overshot. When you have this high volatility – like we had after Lehman – you have an increase in the counterparty risk. In the worst case, you can have accidents and even if you don’t have accidents, you have a much reduced economic activity because people become exceedingly risk averse. So the third answer to this is to have a firewall in place which is fully equipped and operational. And that was meant to be provided by the EFSF.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 The fourth answer is to again ask: why are we in this situation. Part of this had to do with fiscal discipline, but the other part was the lack of growth. Countries have to undergo significant structural reforms that would revamp growth.  And the fifth answer is that the idea of introducing private sector involvement (PSI) in eurozone bail-outs was, in retrospect, a mistake?  The ideal sequencing would have been to first have a firewall in place, then do the recapitalisation of the banks, and only afterwards decide whether you need to have PSI. This would have allowed managing stressed sovereign conditions in an orderly way. This was not done. Neither the EFSF was in place, nor were banks recapitalised, before people started suggesting PSI. It was like letting a bank fail without having a proper mechanism for managing this failure, as it had happened with Lehman.  Now, to be fair again, one has to address another side of this. The lack of fiscal discipline by certain countries was perceived by other countries as a breach of the trust that should underlie the euro. And so PSI was a political answer given with a view to regaining the trust of these countries’ citizens.  Coming to the fiscal pact, what is your answer to those who say there is excessive concentration on budgetary rigour at the expense of competitiveness and growth and that actually what is being created is a “stagnation and austerity union”?  The answer is that they are right and wrong at the same time. They are right because there can’t be any sustainable economy without growth and competitiveness and job creation. They are wrong if they think that there is a trade-off between the two. There’s no trade-off between fiscal austerity, and growth and competitiveness. I would not dispute that fiscal consolidation leads to a contraction in the short run, but then you have to ask yourself: what can you do to mitigate this.  Improvement in budgetary positions should elicit some positive market response, lower spreads and lower cost of credit. But two further conditions have to be satisfied: Implementation at national level of the structural reforms needed to enhance growth and jobs creation. And finally, it is necessary to have the right euro area design, implementing the fiscal compact, so that the confidence is fully restored. Austerity by one single country and nothing else is not enough to regain confidence of the markets – as we are seeing today.  Consolidation must also go hand in hand with structural reforms. Each country has its own path that they should undertake. For some, the situation would not be sustainable even if they were outside the euro and were to devalue their currency. That would give only a temporary respite – and higher inflation, of course.  But that was part of the answer in the early 1990s in Italy – it did have an exchange rate adjustment.  If you take that as an example, remember there was no IMF around, there was no EFSF and gross [government bond] issuance in 1992 was a multiple of the figures that we see today. It’s true that Italy moved the exchange rate, but this cuts both ways. It brought a temporary respite to the economy, so that exports could grow, but it also widened sovereign bond spreads because exchange rate risk came on top of sovereign risk. Three or four years down the road Italy still had something like 600 basis point spread with respect to the German bund. Furthermore, the effect of the devaluation would have been only temporary without the structural reforms (abolition of indexation among others) that followed. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches But these austerity programmes are very harsh. Don’t think that some countries are really in effect in a debtor’s prison? Do you see any alternative? They could leave the eurozone?  But as I said before, this wouldn’t help. Leaving the euro area, devaluing your currency, you create a big inflation, and at the end of that road, the country would have to undertake the same reforms that were due to begin with, but in a much weaker position.  But maybe it would be the best thing for the rest of the eurozone? Well, then you would have a substantial breach of the existing treaty. And when one starts with this you never know how it ends really.  You said earlier that it would have been far better if the EFSF had have been in place. So where are we on creating this firewall – what size of bazooka are we talking about? One first observation is that the delay in making the EFSF operational has increased the resources necessary to stabilising markets. Why? Because anything that affects credibility has an immediate effect on the markets. A process that is fast, credible and robust needs less resources.  It sounds like you’re a bit disappointed then with the outcome of last week’s summit then? Actually no, because there was confirmation of previous figures on the EFSF’s resources – and of an additional €200bn that could be provided by the International Monetary Fund. What was also overlooked by many is that the date for a first assessment of the adequacy of resources has been brought forward to March 2012 – in just three months’ time, when the leaders ask themselves whether the resources for the firewall will be adequate. In the meantime, the ECB acting as an agent will make the EFSF operational. Important was also the commitment to clearly restrict the PSI to IMF practices, which should reassure the investors. When do you think the EFSF will be operational? Our aim is to be ready to provide agency functions in January next year.  But can we assume that the idea floated in October of leveraging the EFSF is not actually going to happen? And that bringing in other sovereign wealth funds, Chinese, all this was overpriced. No, I think it is premature and probably wrong to proclaim the EFSF dead. Furthermore I think that if one can show its usefulness in its present size, the argument for its enlargement would be much stronger. What do you say to those who say the solution is to have a very big fire wall and ultimately put the ECB behind it, because that is the only thing which will tame the markets? People have to accept that we have to and always will act in accordance with our mandate and within our legal foundations.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 But if you look at the wording of the treaty, there is nothing that sets a limit on how many government bonds you buy…. We have to act within the Treaty. In general, there must be a system where the citizens will go back to trusting each other and where governments are trusted on fiscal discipline and structural reforms.  Once the firewall is in place with the EFSF, perhaps as soon as the beginning of next year, might you actually stop the SMP (securities market programme)?  We have not discussed a precise scenario for the SMP. As I often said, the SMP is neither eternal nor infinite. Let’s not also forget that the SMP was initiated with the view to reactivating monetary policy transmission channels. So as long as we see that these channels are seriously impaired, then the SMP is justified.  Arguably, the monetary transmission channels are more impaired than ever before, if you look at interest rates in Greece or Italy compared with Germany? The cost of credit is bound to differ because it’s geared to some extent not on our short-term policy rate but on sovereign spreads.  Would the ECB consider putting a limit on yields or spreads, or would that violate the treaty in your view? Sovereign spreads have mostly to do with the sovereigns and with the nature of the compact between them. It is in this area that progress is ongoing. Monetary policy cannot do everything.  But if the economic situation deteriorated, would you be prepared to embark on “quantitative easing” in the style of the US Federal Reserve or Bank of England, in terms of large-scale government bond purchases to support economic growth? The important thing is to restore the trust of the people – citizens as well as investors – in our continent. We won’t achieve that by destroying the credibility of the ECB. This is really, in a sense, the undertone of all our conversation today.  What will be the effect of the British staying out of Europe’s fiscal compact, and is there in your view a risk to the City of London? The UK certainly has shown a capacity to undertake a fiscal correction of an extraordinary size. My more general reaction to all this is that it’s sad. I think the UK needs Europe and Europe needs the UK. There’s a lot that can be learnt from both sides.  The UK has taken legal action against the ECB [over the location of financial market clearing houses]… I can’t comment on that.  What are you expectations for global growth next year? You could have a significant slowdown in several parts of the world. Global growth is decelerating, and uncertainty has risen. At the same time, we have laid a lot of groundwork for a better functioning of economic union in the future and we should draw confidence from that.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The reform of the international monetary system Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the Conference in memory of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, Rome, 16 December 2011. *      *      * 1. Introduction  It is a great pleasure to attend this conference today in honour and memory of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa and to be a member of the panel discussing the reform of the international monetary system. That was a field Tommaso bore responsibility for at the ECB and which I inherited from him.  I would like to focus my remarks on his main critique – which he shared with Robert Triffin – that the international monetary system remains incapable of imposing an acceptable macroeconomic discipline on the world economy. I also wish to examine the reservations he expressed about international policy cooperation being enough to ensure stability.  I would like to organise my remarks as follows. First, I would like to explore the theoretical underpinnings of international policy collaboration, and explain why in practice it seems to fall short of what is needed in today’s global world and why countries remain trapped in short-term policy-making. I will then review some proposals made by Tommaso to correct today’s international monetary system, including the provision of an anchor and an exchange rate mechanism, and consider the consequences of maintaining the status quo. In conclusion, I will argue that it is better to prevent volatility than to cure it. The deployment of ever larger official resources to cope with potential crises cannot be the solution – neither conceptually nor practically.  The policy implications are that there are three key areas where preventive action could and should be taken, and which require structural change by major economies: first, financial developments in emerging market economies (EMEs); second, further financial and economic integration in Europe; and third, reforms to ensure that financial markets serve the real economy and support stability. 2. Analysis  Let me start with the global financial crisis. There is a broad consensus on some of the main factors underlying the global financial crisis – such as the growing and persistent current account imbalances, inadequacies in financial regulation and supervision, the systemic risk caused by excessive leverage combined with risky financial products, and so on. As Tommaso argued, there is also some lack of recognition of the fundamental flaws in the present monetary arrangements, or rather non-arrangements. Being a policy-maker, he not only identified the flaws, but proposed the essence of a solution to the problem. Greater cooperation between economies was a critical element in a reformed international monetary system.  Let me elaborate on this point. Why would international policy coordination be beneficial in the first place? After all, every country strives to meet its own growth and stability objectives in order to produce a strong and stable economy. Isn’t that enough? The message from the crisis, loud and clear, was “no”. The problem is that economic policy actions, particularly those of larger countries, create quantitatively significant spillovers, or “externalities”, for other countries. Hence, achieving a global optimum means having to take such externalities into account in the decision-making process. Therefore, coordination can be regarded as a mechanism to encourage countries to include the potential spillover effects in their policy 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches considerations, in other words, to “internalise these externalities”. Only then is it possible to achieve a Pareto optimal outcome1. In practice, even though international coordination is vital to optimise global welfare, it is notoriously difficult to attain the necessary level of sensitivity and commitment from policy-makers. Economic theory provides us with a conceptual framework that helps explain why this is the case. Countries that impose negative externalities on others create a deviation from the global Pareto optimal outcome. But since such countries lack sufficient incentives to pursue the global optimum, the international community faces a prisoner’s dilemma in which systemically relevant countries pursue policies that produce mutually reinforcing negative spillovers. This dilemma however becomes smaller if the participants interact with each other continually. To put it into our context, if countries repeatedly interact with each other, cooperation becomes more beneficial than pursuing self-interest alone, particularly in complex situations when those involved have numerous options for responding to the strategic actions of others2 Countries do in fact interact with each other repeatedly, but achieving effective international cooperation and internalising externalities still appears to be largely elusive. As Tommaso said, “the self-sufficiency of national monetary sovereignty” 3 is a “false idol”; countries tend to pursue policies which generate unsustainable growth cum imbalances in the short run, thereby neglecting global spillovers and negative feedback loops that undermine domestic long-run performance and stability. I would even go a step further. I would suggest that economic growth which relies on an unsustainable policy framework might even turn out ex post to be an “accounting illusion”.  So why is there such short-termism in policy-making that results in unsustainable domestic policy frameworks and global economic and financial instability? Let me offer four thoughts: First, there is the primacy of the electoral cycle. Policy-makers tend to maximise utility functions, which incorporate only national objectives over a limited time horizon. In such a context, it is difficult to enforce policies resulting from international commitments that may, over the short term and particularly in the run-up to an election, be seen to contradict national objectives. Second, policy-makers face asymmetric opposition to change. Interest groups that profit from the current system are usually far more organised and vocal in opposing change than the silent majority, both nationally but also internationally, which could potentially benefit from economic reforms.  Third, and moving away from political economy considerations, it is very difficult to assess equilibrium values for certain key variables. Therefore, fundamentals are often over- or underestimated depending on the country and the point in time. Imbalances are, thus, financed for too long and at too favourable prices, so any eventual corrections turn out to be very sudden and sharp.  Fourth, there is habit persistence and sluggishness in the adjustment process, as large international players are sometimes trapped in a given policy framework. For example, despite the financial crisis, policy incentives arising from the US’s exorbitant privilege remain unchanged in the presence of sizeable and liquid US financial markets and the strong international role of the dollar as a reserve currency. At the same time, in the case of China, the current growth model still delivers acceptable results – even if it is at the expense of                                                  1 Amartya K. Sen: Collective Choice and Social Welfare. Holden-Day et al., San Francisco, 1970. 2 Mailath, G. & Samuelson, L. (2006). Repeated Games and Reputations: Long-Run Relationships. New York: Oxford University Press. 3 Padoa-Schioppa, Tommaso (2010): “The Ghost of Bancor: the Economic Crisis and Global Monetary Disorder” 25 February 2010, page 4. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 some segments of society and, as such, represents an implicit tax on them. Given that the accumulation of major imbalances in China persists and does not disrupt other aspects of the economy – thanks to financial repression and a closed capital account – the current growth model is perceived as being sustainable. The same could probably be said of other major economies, like the US. Sooner or later, however, the unsustainability of domestic policies can be expected to materialise in a crisis. This is particularly the case if, as we witnessed prior to 2008, rising imbalances go unchecked because of weaknesses in market discipline and, all the while, negative externalities persist without redress owing to the absence of a collective or higher authority to rein in what Tommaso referred to as “robust political and economic interests”. Crises impose potentially severe domestic economic and financial disruptions on an economy and, at best, lead to a more sustainable model of growth, albeit at a very high price. At worst, they condemn a country to protracted low growth. In both cases, global economic performance and stability are undermined to a greater or lesser degree.  3. Responses How should these weaknesses be corrected? Is the answer to be found indeed in international policy cooperation?  I tend to share Tommaso’s view that soft international cooperation alone, though necessary, would not be sufficient. In his words, “coordination fails precisely when it is most needed, i.e. when policy preferences are most divergent”. My experience confirms that even in the wake of the global financial crisis – which brought home global interdependencies and the porosity of national boundaries for national policies – international cooperation continues to be based on the premise that the pursuit of national interests is the best approximation of the Pareto superior result. It is the philosophy underlying the G20 Mutual Assessment Process, which seeks to achieve strong, sustainable and balanced growth.  Another weakness of the current international monetary system is that in its centre of gravity – the United States – economic and monetary policy are shaped to suit domestic interests. The current system mimics therefore, as I said earlier, a generalised version of the Triffin dilemma. Tommaso recognised it as such and identified some of the elements of a solution.  First, he argued for some sort of “common exchange rate mechanism” which would ensure that every country agrees to shoulder its responsibility for the appropriate valuation of their currency and that exchange rates are determined by the interaction between the market and economic policy. He anticipated that this would be well supported by floating regimes for large currencies, while smaller countries may thrive with an intermediate regime consistent with the geographic pattern of their economic and financial linkages, possibly a managed peg to the regionally dominant currency. He observed, for example, the very strong regional interdependencies in East Asia and the momentum these create for a regional monetary arrangement comparable to those which Europe sought after the Bretton Woods system came to an end.  The distinctions between large and small economies, and floating and managed currencies, are particularly revealing at the present time, when we are seeing a large anomaly. We are currently facing an unprecedented situation in which a once-small economy that pegged its currency to that of a large economy has since grown to become the world’s second-largest national economy. The result is a giant economy running a fledgling currency internationally, outsourcing its monetary policy and its international requirements for money (as a medium of exchange, unit of account and store of value) to the globally dominant currency. This has been a major source of imbalances in recent years. The way in which it has been addressed has been unsatisfactory and the effects on the prospects for the global economy are likely to become graver over time.  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches The major economies, while recognising the domestic impact of the policies of others, have yet to appropriately factor mutual interdependence into their utility functions and policy deliberations. In Europe, we had the luxury of reflecting on European interdependencies in decades of calmer conditions when making successive attempts to produce a stable European monetary order, leading up to European monetary union. And still, we did not learn the lessons well enough and are now having to do so the hard way. There is no alternative but for a stricter supranational disciplinary element in Europe and, by corollary, at global level. As Tommaso said, it is nonsensical for countries to believe that they can reap the benefits of economic and financial integration without their policies acknowledging the two-way street.  The second issue is the need for an anchor to ensure the stability of a reformed international monetary system. More specifically, the interplay of demand for, and supply of, the reserve currency should be limited to what supports global stability. Just as Triffin saw an unresolvable tension for global stability arising from the subordination of the management of reserve-issuing currencies to domestic policy interests, Tommaso considered that this tension was keeping the disorder alive. In his view, what was needed was a quantum of supranationality that would hold sway over the global monetary policy stance. And here, he thought more could be made of a supranational currency, the Special Drawing Right (SDR). Tommaso recognised the hurdles to the SDR assuming its heralded role as the key reserve asset, in particular, the need for a critical mass of SDRs in both public and private sector circulation.  Although the SDR may have the potential to reduce the Triffin dilemma, it cannot remove it. As a basket of currencies, it would not reflect the domestic policy interests of the dominant economy, but rather the “average” for the economies of all the currencies in the basket. And in this respect, it would only improve on global stability to the extent that the “average” policy stance was better than the dominant policy. However, a mere average of policies driven by national objectives is no guarantee for the public good of a stable monetary anchor on a global scale. This would require a policy framework anchoring the global standard to an objective of global stability.  An alternative view is that of a multi-polar currency system. The emergence of such a system would accompany the global rebalancing of economic power that is taking place. It would be a market-driven process rather than requiring an international agreement, framework or mechanism. And to be most conducive to global stability, the shift to a multi-currency system should ideally occur gradually.  Like the SDR, it offers a welcome alternative to the reliance on one dominant national currency for stability, and should have the effect of eroding the exorbitant privilege of the US dollar and increasing the policy discipline on all major, internationally-used currencies. But also like the SDR, stability under a multi-currency system would still ultimately rely on nationally-oriented policies, though in the case of the multi-currency system, market participants would choose directly the sets of national policies they prefer. Would this reduce volatility, or would it be even greater, as players switch among currencies, particularly in the transition phase as the currency composition of reserves is re-weighted?  Of course, a shift to a multi-currency system requires that the privilege of incumbency of the US dollar be removed, that the sovereign debt weaknesses in the euro area be resolved, and that the renminbi develop its full international potential.  Now the suggested reforms pose many new questions. Let me focus on two in particular.  First, what political and institutional conditions are necessary to form the basis of greater supranationality? We have travelled along this path in Europe and made some progress, assisted by the principle of subsidiarity. Federations may find themselves with a conceptual headstart, but also highly open, integrated economies have an innate appreciation of the benefits of cooperation. All the same, implementing a shift of authority from the sovereign to super-sovereign level requires finding a way to overcome the perceived democratic deficit. In 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 this respect, Tommaso believed in the cathartic effects of crises – that they exposed flaws in a system and pointed the way forward. The global financial crisis has resulted in the G20 Mutual Assessment Process. Does it go far enough? Might it become a necessary stepping stone to an improved framework for global stability? This prompts my second question: what kind of world are we heading for in the absence of a mechanism or anchor for global stability? The focus is likely to continue to be on measures to deal with volatility, such as increasing reserve buffers, restricting capital flows and heavily managing currency values. All of these come at a cost:  excessive reserves, especially for EMEs, represent a tax on domestic consumption and, if widespread across countries, would produce a systematic excess of planned savings over planned investment, leading to a deflationary bias;   capital controls are an understandable, if unfortunate, response to exceptional surges in inflows and outflows, but they produce externalities of their own, including increasing inflow or outflow pressures on other countries; and   devaluing currencies can trigger beggar-thy-neighbour retaliatory measures that push the global economy into a downward spiral.  Now the failure to properly address these issues in the past has led to the current scramble for financial resources to shore up systemic stability. And the amount of reassurance demanded by markets increasingly exceeds the official resources available by an ever higher margin. National foreign exchange reserves stand again at an all-time high; regional financing arrangements – especially in Europe and Asia – are better endowed and more sophisticated than ever before; and the IMF had its resources trebled in 2009, and will soon reflect yet again upon the adequacy of its resources.  It is clear from this that prevention is always better than cure. Therefore, we must find better ways to reduce financial market volatility. Policy measures to address the problem need to be tailor-made. In emerging markets, where financial sectors are underdeveloped, policy measures need to foster financial development. Domestic savings could then be more easily channelled into domestic investment, promoting domestic income growth and consumption, and rebalancing economic growth away from exports and reducing the incentive to maintain a low currency value. It would also lower the need for reserves and official outflows to advanced countries, and the excessive demand for US dollar-denominated financial assets.  In Europe, especially the euro area, we need deeper financial and economic integration to reduce the uncertainties and inefficiencies in the current institutional framework, so that the region becomes a core area of stability. Financial markets need reform so that their structure, conduct and performance supports stability. This calls for acute risk awareness, responsible risk analysis and appropriate risk pricing. It requires that participants are able to, and do, bear the consequences of their decisions without jeopardising system stability. And achieving these things necessitates an interplay between markets and regulators in such a way that balances dynamism with stability.  Efforts are under way in all these areas, and yet there remains much work to be done. We cannot afford to wait for the cathartic effects of the (next) crisis to improve the functioning of the international financial system.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Philipp Hildebrand: Global and Swiss economic outlook – overview for 2011/12 Introductory remarks by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Berne, 15 December 2011. *      *      * The Swiss National Bank (SNB) reaffirms its commitment to the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro. It will continue to enforce this minimum rate with the utmost determination. It is prepared to buy foreign currency in unlimited quantities. The target range for the Libor remains at 0.0–0.25%, and the SNB continues to aim for a three-month Libor close to zero. Even at the current rate, the Swiss franc is still high and should continue to weaken over time. The SNB stands ready to take further measures at any time if the economic outlook and the risk of deflation so require.  In the third quarter, the global economy picked up again slightly, thanks to positive stimuli from Japan, the US and China. Growth in Europe, however, remained weak and the economic outlook for the euro area deteriorated. In Switzerland, the pace of growth slowed considerably in the third quarter. The substantial appreciation of the Swiss franc over the summer is weighing heavily on the Swiss economy. For 2011 as a whole, real GDP growth of 1.5–2.0% can be expected. This is only because of the favourable economic development in the first half of the year. For 2012, the SNB is expecting economic growth in the order of 0.5%.  The international outlook continues to be highly uncertain. A further escalation of the European sovereign debt crisis cannot be ruled out. This would have grave consequences for the international financial system. Moreover, given our country’s close relations with the euro area, Switzerland’s economic prospects are highly dependent on how the crisis develops.  Compared to the previous quarter, the SNB’s conditional inflation forecast has once again been adjusted downwards. In the short term, inflation will dip into negative territory sooner, owing to the effects of the earlier currency appreciation, which have been stronger than expected. In the longer term, the worsening of the growth outlook for the euro area is dampening inflation. The forecast for 2011 shows an inflation rate of 0.2%. For 2012, the SNB is expecting inflation of –0.3% and for 2013, of 0.4%. These forecasts are based on the assumption of a three-month Libor of 0% and a depreciating Swiss franc. In the foreseeable future, there is no risk of inflation in Switzerland. If foreign demand were to fall off more sharply than expected, downside risks to price stability would emerge. Global economic outlook Following a very weak second quarter, the global economy picked up again slightly in the third quarter, benefiting from the resumption of production following the earthquake disaster in Japan. The decline in commodity prices during the third quarter also had a positive effect. In Japan, the US and China in particular, aggregate economic activity strengthened slightly. In the euro area, on the other hand, economic growth was weak.  The outlook for global growth is nevertheless subdued, and has, if anything, deteriorated since the last monetary policy assessment. The most recent US economic data have been somewhat better than expected, but the escalation of the European debt crisis has clouded the economic outlook for the euro area. Bond yields for fiscally weak states have risen markedly. The growing unease among market participants is also reflected in the increased volatility on the financial markets. Mounting borrowing costs and the high level of uncertainty are contributing to a marked worsening of the business climate in the euro area.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches The SNB has adjusted its growth assumptions for the euro area over the next three years substantially downwards. For the rest of the world, on the other hand, our forecasts remain essentially unchanged. Uncertainty about the future outlook for the global economy remains extremely high. In particular, the European sovereign debt crisis poses grave risks for the international financial system and the real economy.  Swiss economic outlook In Switzerland, the pace of growth slowed considerably in the third quarter. According to preliminary estimates, annualised real GDP increased by only 0.9%. In particular, the substantial appreciation of the Swiss franc over the summer is weighing heavily on the Swiss economy. Exports fell sharply. At the same time, domestic final demand stagnated.  The economic slowdown was accompanied by a slight decrease in technical capacity utilisation. In manufacturing, it is now around the long-term average. In the construction industry, it has declined slightly, but remains at a very high level. Narrow profit margins and mounting concerns over the international outlook held companies’ demand for labour in check.  The introduction of the minimum exchange rate has corrected the massive overvaluation of the Swiss franc and has given companies a sounder basis for their investment planning. This notwithstanding, the situation for a big part of the economy remains difficult. Waning global demand will continue to hold back export growth. Economic uncertainty, coupled with a difficult earnings situation for many companies, will curb corporate investment. Moreover, since October, the seasonally adjusted unemployment figure has risen again slightly. The deterioration in the labour market should constrain both consumer spending and investment in residential construction.  It is likely that the Swiss economy will stagnate in the fourth quarter. For 2011 as a whole, real GDP growth of 1.5–2.0% can be expected. This is only because of the favourable economic development in the first half of the year. For 2012, the SNB is expecting economic growth in the order of 0.5%.  Monetary and financial conditions In October and November, inflation turned negative, a development largely driven by the strong appreciation of the Swiss franc during the summer. Prices for a large number of tradable goods fell markedly. Following the introduction of the minimum exchange rate, the SNB is expecting temporarily negative inflation rates, but not a sustained decline in the general price level. Moreover, surveys also show that medium-term inflation expectations are still positive.  As a result of the substantial expansion of liquidity to combat the strength of the Swiss franc in August, some short-term interest rates turned negative. They have been close to zero since the previous monetary policy assessment. Long-term interest rates also declined further. The yield on ten-year Confederation bonds reached a new low. The expansionary effects of monetary policy are also evident in the growth of the money supply and in real interest rates, which have remained at a low level.  Since the introduction of the minimum exchange rate on 6 September 2011, the Swiss franc exchange rate to the euro has been above CHF 1.20. Compared to August, the Swiss franc has even depreciated more against the US dollar than against the euro. Nevertheless, even at the current exchange rate, the Swiss franc is still high.  In August, the SNB had substantially expanded Swiss franc liquidity, in order to weaken the heavily overvalued Swiss franc. Since then, banks’ sight deposits with the SNB have been at historically high levels. The SNB will continue to maintain liquidity at exceptionally high 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 levels, but has decided not to set a specific target level for sight deposits at present. My colleague Jean-Pierre Danthine will discuss the SNB’s liquidity measures and their effects in more detail.  Both domestic mortgages and corporate lending in the real economy have continued to see robust growth. In the third quarter of 2011, lending standards and conditions for mortgages remained largely unchanged. By contrast, banks reported a slight tightening of lending standards and conditions for corporate loans – especially loans to large companies. Low interest rates continue to have a favourable effect on the demand for loans. In addition, the robust growth in real estate prices, particularly prices for owner-occupied apartments, continued unabated in the third quarter. In this context, the SNB welcomes the recent advances achieved in Switzerland with the introduction of macroprudential instruments. My colleague Thomas Jordan will report on developments in the area of financial stability and macroprudential policy.  Chart of conditional inflation forecast The (dashed) red curve on the chart represents the new conditional inflation forecast. It shows the future path of inflation, assuming that the three-month Libor remains unchanged at 0% over the next twelve quarters, and it covers the period from the fourth quarter of 2011 to the third quarter of 2014. For purposes of comparison, the (dash-dotted) green curve shows the conditional inflation forecast published in the previous quarter, which was also based on the assumption of a three-month Libor of 0%.  Until the second quarter of 2012, the SNB’s new conditional inflation forecast is below the previous quarter’s forecast. This is because the earlier Swiss franc appreciation impacted on prices more quickly than expected. From the third quarter of 2012, inflation rises above the previous forecast, because at this point the negative base effect of price declines since mid-2011 disappears. The muted course of inflation from the end of 2012 stems from the marked deterioration in the economic outlook for the euro area. Overall, despite the expansionary monetary policy, there are no signs of inflation risks over the forecast horizon. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Yaseen Anwar: Micro-credit and the financing of small businesses Introductory remarks by Mr Yaseen Anwar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, on the occasion of the 18th Zahid Husain Memorial Lecture, Karachi, 22 December 2011. *      *      * Honorable Chief Guest, learned Guest Speaker, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen! 1. It is my honor to offer these introductory remarks on the occasion of the Zahid Husain Memorial Lecture. These lectures, as you know, are organized as our tribute to Mr. Zahid Husain – the first Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan. Before introducing our Chief Guest and Lecturer for the day, I would like to briefly dwell upon the personality that was, and the splendid role played by, Mr. Zahid Husain. You may have heard on this topic earlier but it is always heartening to recall stories of success, particularly those that tell of victories achieved while overcoming daunting problems and of the hardships of passing through difficult paths. 2. A close aide of Quad-e-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah, Mr. Zahid Husain was a man who possessed abundant amounts of talent and repute. His illustrious career started from British India and culminated in Pakistan, by serving the country at the highest levels of its hierarchy. He taught at Aligarh Muslim University, he was Pakistan’s first High Commissioner to India, the first Chairman of Taxation Inquiry Committee, and the first Chairman of the Planning Commission Board, thereby authoring the first Five-year Plan for Pakistan. 3. Another feather in his cap was his appointment as the first Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, which was formally declared open by Quaid-e-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah on 1st July, 1948. As the skipper of the country’s Central Bank, which was described by Quaid-e-Azam as the symbol of the country’s financial sovereignty, Mr. Zahid Husain aptly displayed his potential as an economic administrator. 4. In addition, he anticipated the prevailing as well as future economic problems for Pakistan and the importance of economists for their resolution. Accordingly, he made efforts to equip the Bank with the adequate expertise so as to effectively manage the economic development of the country. His efforts, in this regard, bore fruit and he was able to recruit a stellar group of economists at State Bank of Pakistan. 5. It is a testament to Mr. Zahid Husain’s ability to recognize and recruit talent that many of these economists served the nation as key policymakers and also displayed their brilliance at international financial institutions. One of these economists was Dr. Mahbub ul Haq whose work and achievements are exemplary. Besides being an excellent economist, he has been described as “the most articulate and persuasive spokesman” for the developing world. He is famous for his pioneering work in Human Development Theory, for the invention of Human Development Index, for the creation of Human Development Report, and for the establishment of Human Development Centre in Pakistan. He served as Pakistan’s Minister of Finance, Planning and Commerce during 1982–88, besides serving as the Director of Policy Planning at the World Bank and Special Advisor to the United Nations. The respect that he commanded at the international level could be gauged when Mr. Kofi Annan, the then Secretary General of the U.N., said of his demise that “Mahbub ul Haq’s untimely death is a loss to the world ...”. 6. There are other professionals too who started out under the patronage of Mr. Zahid Husain and reached respectable positions in international financial institutions such as Dr. Pervez Hasan, etc. It is a matter of pride for me that the example set by the first Governor of SBP has been followed by his successors. A number of SBP economists have served the IMF and reached its highest echelons. One such economist was Dr. Muhammad Yaqub, who spearheaded the Central Bank during one of the most challenging times in the country’s 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches history and Mr. Muhammad Ashraf Janjua, who was a former Deputy Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan. This is in addition to a considerable number of non-economist professionals from the State Bank of Pakistan who have served their respective professions on the national as well as on the international stage. 7. Those of us witnessing Pakistan’s current progress may find it hard to imagine the challenging times that the country bore shortly after its birth and through its infancy stages. Without quoting specific examples here, it is suffice to say that those were really very testing times. Although resources available to the nation then were quite low, the courage and passions of our founding fathers pulled the country through. They devoted their body, soul and personal resources, in entirety, during the journey from scratch to sky-scraper. Mr. Zahid Husain was amongst those great personalities. 8. He never hesitated in accepting the challenging tasks and, in the same spirit, led the Central Bank successfully in those testing periods of our country’s history. The nation also recognized his commendable efforts and has tried to repay her debt to him for the meritorious services rendered for the country. Accordingly, on the occasion of the Silver Jubilee of State Bank of Pakistan in 1973, it was decided to institute an annual series of lectures and to name the series in commemoration of Mr. Zahid Husain. 9. Since then, we have organized 17 lectures in the series and invited eminent economists and financial experts from around the globe as Guest Speakers. The latest one took place in the year 2010 wherein Mr. Kent Mathews, Sir Julian Hodge Professor of Banking and Finance, Cardiff Business School, United Kingdom shared his thoughts with the audience on “Banking Efficiency in Emerging Market Economies”. These lectures provided an excellent opportunity for the participants to share ideas on issues of topical importance. 10. Before moving forward, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Justice (Retired) Nasir Aslam Zahid – the son of Mr. Zahid Husain – for his attendance. He scarcely needs an introduction. He is one of the most prominent personalities of the country – not only due to his status and accomplishments in the judiciary but also for his postretirement service to the nation. He served all of the judiciary’s vital organs – he was the Chief Justice of Sindh High Court, then a judge of the Federal Shariah Court, before finally serving the Supreme Court of Pakistan. He enjoys an untarnished reputation within and outside the judicial circle. Even after retirement, he has continued serving the nation with his involvement in human rights issues and education. He is currently the Dean, Faculty of Legal Studies and the Head of the Hamdard School of Law at the Hamdard University, Karachi. I am thankful that he has very kindly accepted our invitation and spared the time to grace the occasion with his presence today. 11. Now, before introducing our speaker for the day, allow me to humbly add a few words about the role played by State Bank of Pakistan with regard to today’s subject – “Micro-Credit and Financing of Small Business”. First, our own research department has been engaged in documenting, through national surveys, the workings of the product, labor and credit markets of the informal sector – with a particular focus on the manufacturing sector. The results of these surveys have started to trickle down. Secondly, you may remember that the 5th Pakistan Microfinance Country Forum was recently held in Karachi on 2nd December, 2011. Some details concerning the issue were given in my Inaugural Address at that Forum. Since there has been hardly any change in factual position since then, I would like to avoid repetition as much as possible and limit myself to a few words about the developmental role of State Bank of Pakistan. 12. As you are aware, Central Banks of developing countries are supposed to perform both traditional as well as developmental functions, in order to achieve macroeconomic goals; and SBP is no exception. The nontraditional or promotional functions, performed by the State Bank, include the development of financial frameworks, the institutionalization of savings and investment, the provision of training facilities to bankers, and the provision of credit to priority sectors. In this regard, SBP has always endeavored to meet the genuine 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 credit needs of different sectors of the economy, thereby serving as a catalyst to the process of economic development. As I have mentioned earlier in my speeches, efforts to bring Microfinance into the mainstream formal financial system started in 2000 & 2001 in the aftermath of the promulgation of the Microfinance Ordinance and, since then, we have witnessed the establishment of new microfinance banks, the transformations of large microfinance institutions, the diversification of funding sources, the development of inclusive financial services, the emergence of alternative delivery channels, and the piloting of “Microfinance – Credit Information Bureau” (MCIB). Against this backdrop, a Small & Medium Enterprise (SME) Finance Department was established in State Bank of Pakistan in July 2008 to focus on providing an enabling regulatory framework for SMEs, assessing their credit needs, capacity development of Banks and DFIs and for building awareness through seminars and conferences, along with the promotion of financial services for export-led industrial growth. 13. Regarding the regulatory approach of SBP, I would like to quote short excerpts here from my speech at the Pakistan Microfinance Country Forum: “In developing regulations for microfinance, the State Bank has pursued a bottom-up approach, along with use of strong analytical and problem solving skills and industry consultation. Since the inception of microfinance banking in Pakistan, our goal has been to determine the proportionality of a regulation before it is put in place. Hence, the regulatory approach has remained gradual and in line with the evolution of the sector…” “In the new Microfinance Strategic framework  2011–15, SBP has laid out a detailed strategy to promote sustainable growth of the sector. The strategy’s effectiveness and success hinges on growth dynamism fundamentally coming from microfinance operators themselves. The role of SBP is to develop the banking infrastructure, to encourage the use of successful global practices, and to provide the regulatory and supervisory mechanism that enable MFBs to develop viable business models”. 14. We shall soon have the pleasure of hearing our distinguished speaker, Professor Banerjee’s, thoughts on this subject. I am sure his lecture today will introduce us with something special on the topic, not only because of his extensive research on the subject but also because of candidness of his approach. Perhaps, not many of us will have witnessed this openness and honesty of thoughts earlier – the kind that is evident from the last sentence of the concluding chapter of his most recent book titled “Poor Economics”. Let me quote that very sentence for you: “At least we can stop pretending that there is some solution at hand and instead join hands with millions of well-intentioned people across the world – elected officials and bureaucrats, teachers and NGO workers, academics and entrepreneurs – in the quest for the many ideas, big and small, that will eventually take us to that world where no one has to live on 99 cents per day”. 15. Now let’s turn to our guest speaker himself. Ladies and gentlemen, we are honoured to have with us, Dr. Abhijit Vinayak Banerjee, the Ford Foundation International Professor of Economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA. His teaching and research have won him accolades the world over and he stands as a giant in his profession. Just to introduce him to our guests here, Dr. Banerjee has attended the University of Calcutta, Jawaharlal Nehru University and Harvard University, successfully earning his Ph.D from the latter. 16. During 1988 to 1992, he taught as an Assistant Professor of Economics at Princeton University. He moved to Harvard University in 1992 as Assistant Professor of Economics, before joining the M.I.T. in 1993 as Pentti J.K. Kouri Career Development Associate Professor of Economics. He became Associate Professor of Economics in 1994 and then Professor of Economics in 1996. He is the co-founder of Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL) at M.I.T, which runs field experiments aimed at measuring different ways to save the world. In 2009, J-PAL won the BBVA Foundation “Frontier of Knowledge” Award in the development cooperation category. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches 17. Professor Banerjee’s general research areas include economic development, information theory, theory of income distribution, and macroeconomics. 18. As you know, an economist’s caliber – particularly an academic one’s – is primarily judged by the quality of his publications; and to date Dr Banerjee has published no less than 60 papers in the world’s leading economic journals. The important lesson from this volume of research is that it has focused on real world issues with real world solutions. His latest research is based on studying economic interventions on the basis of “randomized controlled trials.” The idea is simple enough – to compare groups of people with and without policy intervention over a period of time; akin to the trials of new drugs. 19. In addition to his scholarly work, he has authored three books, including his recent one called “Poor Economics”, which has received the attention of scholars across the globe. And this is not the all; he is an ex-president of the Bureau for the Research in the Economic Analysis of Development, a Research Associate of the NBER, a CEPR research fellow, an International Research Fellow of the Kiel Institute, a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the Econometric Society and has been a Guggenheim Fellow and an Alfred P. Sloan Fellow. He has also been a recipient of the Infosys Prize 2009 in Social Sciences and Economics. 20. Dr. Banerjee and his colleagues at J-PAL have worked with a global network of researchers to conduct experiments in the poorest places of the world and have derived conclusions that are believed to have challenged economists’ and policy makers’ thoughts about impoverished areas. Their findings have concluded beyond broad generalizations to show that the poor do not always act in ways that conform to the views and programs of well-meaning relief agencies, revealing a portrait of poverty as complex as the movements of financial markets. 21. Professor Banerjee will be delivering his lecture today on the topic of “Micro-Credit and Financing of Small Business”. Needless to emphasize that it is an important topic, particularly when seen in the backdrop of the challenges faced by the poor in gaining access to formal financial services. Although much has been done in this regard, the stage of absolute resolution has yet to be reached. 22. Here, we should not forget to mention the names of Dr. Akhtar Hameed Khan in Pakistan and Professor Muhammad Yunus in Bangladesh for their pioneering work in the subject area – providing a substantial source of assistance to the poor community – and their efforts for the alleviation of poverty and increases in the standard of living. 23. I would like to avail this opportunity to thank Dr. Banerjee on behalf of this forum for taking out the time from his extremely busy schedule and taking the trouble to fly from USA to join us here in Pakistan. 24. Before I conclude my remarks, I would also like to thank you all for joining us here and for participating in today’s knowledge-sharing event. I am sure that Professor Banerjee’s lecture today will be of immense utility for the audience, since it will enlighten us with the latest thoughts, developments and trends regarding the subject. 25. It gives me immense pleasure to introduce and invite Professor Banerjee. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Carlos da Silva Costa: Fostering cooperation between the ESS and the ESCB   Opening address by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the Bank of Portugal workshop on “Fostering cooperation between the ESS and the ESCB”, Lisbon, 25 November 2011. *      *      * Members of the Committee on Monetary, Financial and Balance of Payments Statistics, Colleagues, Ladies and Gentlemen,  I am very pleased that the Banco de Portugal can host this Workshop on “Fostering cooperation between the European Statistical System (ESS) and the European System of Central Banks (ESCB)” – an event meant to recognise and celebrate the 20th Anniversary of the Committee on Monetary, Financial and Balance of Payments Statistics (CMFB) – and I would like to extend a warm welcome to all of you for joining us today.  It is also my great pleasure to have the opportunity to briefly address you on this joyous occasion.  Let me start by saying that the Banco de Portugal thinks highly of the work that the CMFB has undertaken for the last two decades in assisting the Commission to achieve close cooperation with the European Union (EU) Member States in the fields of monetary, financial and balance of payments statistics. I would like to praise specially the advisory role provided by the Committee in the context of the issues raised by the application of the Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP).  Over this 20-year period, the CMFB acted in a very relevant fashion, accompanying the reinforcement of integration in Europe, especially during the creation of the Economic and Monetary Union.  The Committee was able to develop the right conditions for an effective and mutually beneficial cooperation between, on the one hand, the national statistical institutes and the Eurostat and, on the other hand, the national central banks and the European Central Bank (ECB), thus fostering the interchange of statistical knowledge among these entities and contributing to bringing about efficient data collection and compilation as well as access to high-quality EU and euro area economic and financial statistics. Ultimately, the work of the CMFB has contributed very positively to building further trust in official statistics.  I remain convinced that, to help us coping with the predicaments that the euro area is facing at the present juncture, the CMFB still has a unique and significant role to play.  Indeed, four years after the beginning of the largest financial crisis since the Great Depression, global financial stability has yet to be secured and many policy challenges remain to be addressed:   Global recovery is not proceeding at a balanced pace   Large global imbalances persist   Widespread public debt sustainability concerns have emerged   Links between weak balance sheets of both governments and the banking sector have led to renewed tensions in financial markets, particularly affecting the euro area.  At the national level, it is clear that utmost priority must be placed in restoring public debt sustainability, increasing domestic savings and enhancing potential growth in the crisis-hit countries. These are necessary conditions to stabilise external debt and put it on a 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches downward path. These objectives are at the core of the recently approved financial assistance programme to Portugal.  At the EU level, a new economic governance model is needed to deliver fiscal discipline, prevent sustained losses in competitiveness and promote financial stability. For this purpose, in October 2010, the European Council endorsed the proposals put forward by a special task force on economic governance led by President van Rompuy. Building on the recommendations of the task force, the European Parliament and the Council adopted, in November 2011, the six legislative proposals presented by the European Commission in September 2010.  The new economic governance model comprises:  A reformed Stability and Growth Pact, aimed at enhancing the surveillance of fiscal policies and applying enforcement measures more consistently and at an earlier stage   New provisions aimed at strengthening national fiscal frameworks   A new surveillance mechanism of macroeconomic imbalances.  It remains to be seen whether the new surveillance framework will prove sufficient to ensure a smooth functioning of the euro area.  The current turmoil in financial markets that I have concisely addressed, together with the challenges posed by globalisation and the vulnerability of economies to cross-border financial risks, call for the need to fully and timely capture this evolving reality by means of relevant statistics, produced and disseminated on a regular basis.  Statistics are a public good. Therefore, compiling and communicating top-quality statistics require efficient production and dissemination processes, in line with international standards and in compliance with commitments to national and international organisations.  The design, implementation and monitoring of EU policies constantly require statistical support to ensure that the policies address the relevant issues and that the expected results will be achieved. Just as EU policies evolve, good statistics have to develop in parallel.  In this regard, it is necessary to strike a proper balance between reducing the respondents’ reporting burden and requiring more data (e.g., raw micro data) for compiling high-quality statistics. Enhanced collaboration among statistics compilers is also warranted, mainly as regards the interchange of quantitative information and knowledge for statistical purposes. Effective and efficient interagency statistical cooperation, especially at international level, is instrumental to the quality, relevancy and cost-effectiveness of macroeconomic statistics. To reach this stage, I believe that we need to further strengthen the statistical governance in Europe.  With this in mind, I would like to draw on the speech made by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, former president of the ECB, at the 3rd ECB Conference on Statistics, in 2006. In his communication, he mentioned that “Good governance is particularly important for statistics that have a direct administrative and policy use in Europe, such as the indicators for assessing the convergence of EU Member States that do not yet belong to the euro area and the statistics underlying the excessive deficit procedure”. From there, he moved to the importance of interagency cooperation for statistics purposes and the role played by the CMFB in this process, emphasising that “While Eurostat is responsible for these statistics, it can benefit, when deciding upon conceptual issues, from the considerable statistical expertise available at the Eurostat, the ECB, the NSIs and the NCBs, as brought together in the CMFB”. Another important point raised by Mr Trichet in his speech regards the need to safeguard the independence of the statistical function. On this topic, he said that “... the compilation of government finance statistics – and all other statistics for that matter – should not be subject to political considerations. The compilers of these statistics must act in full 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 scientific independence, and the government must ensure that sufficient resources are made available for their task”. He also highlighted the need to periodically appraise the relevance of extant statistics, by stating that “... it is important to regularly review the cost/benefit ratio of existing statistics that were agreed upon many years ago”.  These wise words are still relevant today and I fully support them.  I find particularly interesting the idea expressed by Mr Trichet on the same occasion that “over time the European statistical systems will develop in the direction of genuine systems with regional competence centres, coordinated by the European institutions. The mutual interdependence of statistics compilers would then increase, which in turn calls for a further strengthening of international statistical governance.”  That being said, I now turn to the subject that brought us here today, which is twofold: the Lisbon Workshop and the related Banco de Portugal’s sponsorship of the book that celebrates the 20th Anniversary of the CMFB.  I will start with the latter.  To celebrate its 20th Anniversary, the CMFB thought of publishing a book offering a recollection of the main milestones that were achieved during these two decades, as well as some reflections on a number of statistical issues in which the Committee is expected to be involved in the future.  In recognition of the good work carried out by the CMFB through all these years, the Banco de Portugal decided to support that initiative by sponsoring the publication of the book. The outcome of this undertaking will be presented by the next speaker in a little while.  As to the Lisbon Workshop, its principal goal could be summarised in the following statement: Drawing from the past to prepare for the future! This is, in my opinion, a very fitting and commendable proposition.  During the two sessions of the Workshop and the ensuing debate the participants are expected to draw on the lessons learnt from CMFB’s past mandates to find ways to further reinforce the collaborative efforts between central banks and statistical offices, with a view to better coping with the challenges ahead as regards official statistics (e.g., early identification of the likely changes and the true underlying economics of the events and transactions that have to be measured).  It is my firm belief that your combined efforts and your expertise will bring in a dynamic, productive and efficient meeting, with interesting presentations and fruitful discussions about the issue of interagency statistical cooperation at national and EU levels. Before giving the floor to Mr Cadete de Matos, for him to proceed with the commentary and delivery of the book, I would like to conclude this brief address by wishing you all the best in whatever your future holds.  Thank you very much.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Rundheersing Bheenick: Bank of Mauritius – improving financial literacy Transcript of impromptu remarks by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the prize-giving ceremony to reward record-setters and champions of the 2011 Inter-Youth Championship as well as winners of the Monetary Policy Challenge and Essay Competition, Port Louis, 20 December 2011. *      *      * Thank you all for honouring us with your presence here this afternoon.  I can safely say that when I came here five years ago, this kind of event would not have taken place. You would probably never have been invited to the central bank, for the central bank was a very closed institution. It dealt only with banks and not with anything else.  For our 40th anniversary in 2007, we decided to open up gradually. Part of that opening up was to reach out to other operators in the economy beyond bankers. We thus started the dialogue with private sector operators and real sector operators. While we were doing that, we thought we should also reach out to the younger generation. We launched several initiatives. We opened up the Bank to financial education and financial literacy and to many things which the Bank had never done before, for example the creation of a Bamboo garden. I am happy to say that gradually, staff started embracing the concept of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) within the Bank itself. And what we are doing today, guiding the tentative steps of the young in the direction of a brighter future, is precisely in the context of CSR.  We believe strongly in what we are doing. We believe that inspecting banks, keeping them well-capitalized and well-supervised, is not enough. We must educate you and inform you of what we are trying to do – we must have informed citizens.  Most people have not even heard of the central bank and when they happen to hear about it they hear bad things. When the press expects the central bank people to reduce rates, they are hiking up rates; when commentators on radios expect them to do one particular thing, they are doing the opposite. But when you look back over the years you find that the economy and the financial sector have been quite stable, and inflation is more or less tamed. So, the central bank people have not been doing things so badly after all. We are not as bad as you might tend to believe if you only read the press or the boohoos all day long on the different radio stations.  We hope that you, young people who participate in our Monetary Policy Challenge will help us to get our message across much better and in a more efficient manner.  I understand that the Monetary Policy Challenge, now in its fifth year, has been attracting more and more participation. Originally, we were not very sensitive to the academic year and the claims that having to sit for exams had on your time. Gradually, we learnt to live with your programme, hence the wider participation. We are glad to see so many of you and I want to congratulate all the winning teams. This year, on the boys’ side the two Royal Colleges have doubled the top prizes and on the girls’ side, it’s all Loreto and nothing else. So I look forward to more competition for both the boys’ side and the girls’ side.  Competition is what keeps us going. Competition is what makes the country more efficient. Competition is what makes our bankers more efficient. A more informed citizen, a more financially-literate customer base is what is required in our country to make sure that our banks do not make what I call “supernormal profits”.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches We also welcome the young athletes who participated in the Interclub Youth Championships – the other part of our CSR outreach. Our athletes have been doing very well. Some of the early winners in the first year have actually made the whole country proud by turning in an excellent performance at the last Jeux des Iles1. And I understand from my good friend Vivian Gungaram2 that we have high hopes for a few who are present here. He even mentioned one to me as a future Buckland3. I hope that those dreams will be realized and we at the central bank are very happy to accompany you for part of that journey.  We have a record number of records established this year. The year before we had 10 records established. This year I understand 14 records have been established. That’s what I mean when I tell you that you must become more efficient and more competitive.  So, thank you very much Mauritius Athletics Federation for the work that you are doing and for which I encourage you. We hope that we have still better performance, bringing a rich harvest of gold medals next time not just bronze.  Good luck therefore to our young athletes who are here, to your parents and your mentors. I say bravo, well done and wish you to persevere in your sporting career. And you can rest assured that your Bank will continue to take care of its major business which is to take care of the value of the rupee. I think we have taken a fairly good approach to it so far – the rupee has been quite stable and I see no reason why it should not continue on that track.  I would like to thank all those who have participated in these competitions, all those who made the competitions possible, all those who marked the papers, Deputy Governors and my colleagues from the Bank who participated in the different activities that led up to making all this possible.  Let me wish you all – the teams, parents, teachers, everybody dear to you, a very merry Christmas and a happy new year.  Thank you for your attention.                                                  1 The Jeux des Iles (games of the islands) of the Indian Ocean is a multi-sport competition whereby athletes from the various islands of the Indian Ocean meet since 1979. They are held every four years and are currently gathering seven delegations: Mauritius, Seychelles, Comoros, Madagascar, Mayotte, Reunion Island and the Maldives. 2 Mr Vivian Gungaram is the Secretary of the Mauritius Athletics Association. 3 Stephan Buckland is a retired Mauritian track and field athlete who competed in the 100 and 200 metres. In 2001, Buckland became the first athlete in history to win the 100m, 200m and the 4x100m relay at the Francophone Games in Ottawa, Canada. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Anselmo Teng: Strengthening financial cooperation between Guangdong and Macao Speech by Mr Anselmo Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at the inauguration of the Bilateral Application of IC Cards in Guangdong and Macao and launching of MacauPass UnionPay Dual Currency QuickPass Cash Card, Macao, 1 December 2011. *      *      * The Honourable Secretary for Economy and Finance, Mr. Tam Pak Yuen,  The Honourable President of The People’s Bank of China Guangzhou Branch, Mr. Luo Bochuan,  The Honourable Director of the Economic Affairs Department of the Liaison Office of the Central People’s Government in the MSAR, Mr. Wang Xindong,  The Honourable Director of the Coordinating Department of the Liaison Office of the Central People’s Government in the MSAR, Mr. Xu Shuang,  The Honourable President of China UnionPay, Mr. Xu Luode,  The Honourable Chairman of the Board of Directors of MacauPass, Mr. Liu Hei Wan,  Dear Guests,  Good Afternoon!  All along, the Macao Monetary Authority has been assiduously helping and promoting our financial sector to explore their business scope, which includes organizing delegations to visit and study set-ups overseas and on the Mainland with a view to finding suitable partners in business cooperation. I am honoured to have been invited today to a ceremony commemorating the Inauguration of Bilateral Application of IC Cards in Guangdong and Macao and the Launching of MacauPass UnionPay Dual Currency QuickPass Cash Card. I am here to witness a fruitful result achieved in the cross-border financial business cooperation between Mainland and the MSAR. I hereby convey my best wishes to the cooperation between the financial sectors of the two jurisdictions for even more fruitful results in the future.  After the establishment of the MSAR, the liaison and cooperation between the financial sectors of Guangdong and Macao has been closer and more frequent. The trend is beckoning. In 2008, the State Council promulgated the “Outline of the Plan for the Reform and Development of the Pearl River Delta”, in which financial cooperation was designated to be one of the main areas for cooperation. In March this year, the Guangdong Province and the MSAR executed the “Guangdong-Macao Cooperation Framework Agreement”, which further promoted the financial integration of the two economies and their financial businesses. More favourable conditions for development have been created. It expands the scope of development for the financial business cooperation of the two places which signifies that the overall cooperation between Guangdong and Macao has entered into a new stage.  Under the auspices of the Guangzhou Regional Branch and Zhuhai Branch of the People’s Bank of China and China UnionPay, the MacauPass issues today the UnionPay Dual Currency QuickPass Cash Card which realizes the cross-border use of the IC Cards in Guangdong and Macao. With immediate effect, the MacauPass QuickPass Cash Card will be applicable to ChinaUnion terminals located in both places. At the same time, Mainland residents can make use of MacauPass terminals via UnionPay QuickPass Cash Card. The service has signified further integration of financial infrastructures of both areas. It has realized the interchangeable use of stored value cards issued separately in the North region and South Region of the country. Simultaneously, it facilitates small payments made by 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches residents of Macao and tourists of the Mainland, perfecting financial services of the Mainland and the Macao SAR. It further embodies the gradual implementation of financial cooperation under the “Guangdong-Macao Cooperation Framework Agreement” by practitioners of both areas. It has injected fresh momentum into financial cooperation between Guangdong and Macao.  We do hope that the Guangdong-Macao financial cooperation can ride the tide to strengthen cooperation, enhance the already fruitful results, within regulated framework and under risk control, so as to promote full economic integration between Guangdong and Macao and synchronize infrastructures of both areas. I hereby would like to express, on behalf of the Monetary Authority of Macao, our gratitude to all sectors of the community for their support in the process. Thank you for your endeavour and cooperation and our best wishes to the MacauPass UnionPay Cash Card for a tremendous success in their business endeavour. At the same time, I do hope Guangdong and Macao will continue to work shoulder to shoulder to fulfil every item of financial cooperation under the “Guangdong-Macao Cooperation Framework Agreement”, so as to achieve Guangdong-Macao financial cooperation and secure more fruitful results in promoting appropriate diversification of the Macao economy.  Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Introducing innovative services to meet credit needs in Uganda Speech by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the year-end stakeholders’ function and sharing of Compuscan’s vision 2012, Kampala, 8 December 2011.  *      *      * The Board of Directors CompuScan Information Technologies,  Managing Director CompuScan CRB Limited,  Representatives of the Development Partners (Word Bank, KfW, GIZ),  Representatives of the Participating Institutions (PIs),  Distinguished Guests,  Ladies and Gentlemen.  I would like to welcome you all to this event to launch officially the Compuscore and CompuScan’s Vision 2012. I would also like to thank the Board of Directors and Management of CompuScan CRB for inviting me to preside over this function.  Credit markets are plagued by informational problems, and these problems are especially acute in developing economies. Informational problems raise transactions costs, often to such an extent that potential borrowers are denied access to credit in the formal sector. The adverse consequences of informational imperfections for financial markets were analysed in the 1970s by Joseph Stiglitz and George Akerlof; work for which they received the Nobel Prize. The etymology of the word “credit” is the latin verb “credere”; to trust or believe. Unfortunately trust alone is rarely sufficient to ensure that a creditor will ever get her money back; hence credit decisions must be made on the basis of accurate, reliable data. Without such data creditors will be reluctant to risk their money.  A key challenge for policy makers concerned with financial market development is how to design policy interventions which can mitigate informational imperfections and thus reduce their negative externalities. The kernel of the challenge is how to ensure that accurate and reliable information about those which wish to raise finance can be acquired in a cost effective manner by those who provide finance and bear the risk of doing so. Credit Reference Bureaux provide an institutional solution to the problem. A well functioning Credit Reference Bureau mitigates information related market failures because it is compulsory for all participants in the credit markets to provide and share information, in circumstances where they may have private incentives not to do so. Furthermore, the pooling of information in a Credit Reference Bureau reduces the social costs of acquiring information. This was the motivation for the Bank of Uganda, with the support of development partners – KfW, GTZ and the World Bank – to introduce a Credit Reference Bureau in Uganda.  Our development partners have helped to subsidize the Credit Reference Bureau system in its initial phase of operation. Although the services of the credit reference bureau are provided to private enterprises, driven by the profit motive, a subsidy in this case was warranted because of the social benefits which a well functioning credit reference service can generate, which exceed the private benefits accruing to individual financial institutions. Nevertheless, now that the institutional framework for the credit reference service has been established, the costs of providing credit reference services will fall and hence there will be much less of a need for ongoing subsidy.  In the three and a half years since Compuscan commenced Credit Reference Bureau operations in Uganda, in May 2008, great progress has been achieved. All supervised financial institutions – commercial banks, credit institutions and deposit taking microfinance institutions – are participating. A total of 640,000 financial cards have been issued to the customers of financial institutions; these are all borrowers or prospective borrowers. Nearly 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 50,000 credit enquiries are made to the Credit Reference Bureau every month. Furthermore, strong safeguards have been built into the system, stipulated through regulations issued by the Bank of Uganda, to protect the accuracy and confidentiality of information given to the Credit Reference Bureau and to ensure that it is only used for the purposes for which it is intended.  To remain competitive, Credit Reference Bureaux worldwide must not stand on their laurels; they must introduce innovative services to meet the evolving needs of their clients. Compuscan is currently introducing a Credit Scoring System which is intended to facilitate quicker and better decision making by the participating financial institutions.  We are now nearing the end of the first major phase of Credit Reference Bureau operations in Uganda. Looking ahead, we hope to expand the scope of coverage of the Credit Reference Bureau to include credit providers which are not supervised financial institutions; for example utility companies, mobile phone companies and SACCOs. We will also open up the market for credit reference services to competition after September 2012, when the rights of Compuscan to be the sole Credit Reference Bureau expire. Competition should benefit customers of the credit reference services because of the incentives it will give service providers to reduce costs and introduce new products.  I would like to commend Compuscan for its achievements over the last three and a half years in successfully launching the credit reference bureau in Uganda and for now introducing the Credit Scoring System. I would also like to thank all of our development partners, especially KfW, GTZ and the World Bank, who have supported the project through both financial and technical assistance.  Thank you for listening.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 H R Khan: Financial inclusion and financial stability: are they two sides of the same coin? Address by Shri H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at BANCON 2011, organized by the Indian Bankers Association and Indian Overseas Bank, Chennai, 4 November 2011. *      *      * The speaker acknowledges the valuable contributions of Dr. Rabi N Mishra, Ms. Dimple Bhandia, Ms. V. Vinitha and Mr. Surajit Bose in preparation of this presentation. It is always a pleasure to be a part of such a confluence of bankers and researchers on contemporary issues in banking and finance but to choose to speak on an area which needs to be either “wholesomely new” or “extensively revised” at such a forum becomes a challenge. I thank the organizers, the CMD of Indian Overseas Bank and the Chairman of IBA for offering me this opportunity to share my own thoughts on a topical issue that has engaged attention of policy makers in India and abroad in the recent times. The Reserve Bank is intimately involved in efforts to ensure both financial inclusion and financial stability in India. Being a part of this institution, I have had a very large intellectual as also operational canvas to roam around. That in fact, encouraged me to avail of this opportunity to discuss these two important dimensions of the economic issues which have shaped the tone and tenor of financial sector policy space globally over the last decade or so. The more one deals with them in juxtaposition, the more their mutual exclusiveness gets demystified. Let me explain, how? The importance of financial inclusion based on the principle of equity and on inclusive growth with stability has engaged the renewed attention of policy makers internationally in recent years. It is being increasingly recognized that despite tremendous growth in the banking sector and significant improvements in all areas relating to financial viability, profitability and competitiveness, the glass remains half-full. There remain concerns that banks have not been able to include vast segments of the population, especially the underprivileged sections of the society, into the fold of basic banking and financial services.   The recent global financial crisis has also brought the focus on financial stability to the centre stage. The debate has been quite wide-ranging encompassing, inter alia, the definition of financial stability and the implication of financial stability for growth and welfare. Many lessons have been learnt. One, that financial stability can be jeopardized even if there is price and macroeconomic stability. Two, that financial stability has to shift from being an implicit variable to an explicit variable of economic policy and three, that a threat to financial stability anywhere in the world is potentially a threat to financial stability everywhere. Fourth and most importantly, we have learnt that while financial instability can hurt even the most advanced economies, the damage it can cause in poor and developing economies can be particularly severe. People with low levels of income have no headroom to bear downside risks, and their livelihoods can be disrupted by financial instability. It is therefore even more important that countries such as ours pay particular attention to preserving financial stability even as we deepen and broaden our financial sector at home and integrate with the rest of the world1. The developments in the recent years have ensured that the pursuit of financial inclusion and the pursuit of financial stability are no longer policy options but policy compulsions. The key challenges emerging from this conclusion is how to achieve the goal of financial inclusion,                                                  1  “Financial Stability: Issues and Challenges”, D. Subbarao, September 2009. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches i.e., providing basic financial facilities to a wider segment of society while ensuring that the stability of the financial system is not compromised. An important question which emerges is whether increased and wider access to the formal financial services works in tandem with policies aimed at enhancing financial stability or does it work at cross purposes and jeopardize financial stability, i.e., are financial inclusion and financial stability two sides of the same coin or are they two different disparate goals.  These are some of the issues I have picked up to enunciate. First, I will share my thoughts on how financial inclusion and financial stability must co-exist and that it is difficult, in the longer term, to envisage prevalence of one without the other. Next, I will discuss the various ways in which financial stability and financial inclusion complement each other, going on to discuss the ways that they may be in conflict and work at cross purposes. I will then touch upon how a suite of enabling regulatory framework, effective policies for consumer protection and greater financial awareness and literacy can work together to exploit the synergies between financial inclusion and financial stability. Finally, I will briefly outline the manner in which financial stability considerations have been woven into the Reserve Bank’s initiatives towards greater financial inclusion. Financial inclusion and financial stability: mandatory co-existence The first point I would like to make as I explore the relationship between financial stability and financial inclusion is that the two must co-exist. Financial inclusion may be difficult without the stability of the financial system while it is difficult to envisage continuing financial stability when an increasing chunk of the socio-economic system remains financially excluded. Let me elucidate. Financial inclusion has been defined, by the Committee on Financial Inclusion, as the process of ensuring access to financial services and timely and adequate credit where needed by vulnerable groups such as weaker sections and low income groups at an affordable cost2. It primarily represents access to a bank account backed by deposit insurance, access to affordable credit and the payments system. There has been significant, albeit, slow progress towards greater financial inclusion around the world in recent years. According to estimates by an ADB Working Paper3, in Africa, Kenya has pioneered an interesting process of financial inclusion through mobile phone payment solutions. Latin American countries such as Peru and Bolivia have attempted to put in place some very enabling regulatory environments for microfinance. In these two countries, rapid growth over the past seven years has included six million clients in the formal financial system. Brazilian policymakers achieved universal coverage of over 5,500 municipalities by enabling banks to use retail agents. This new low-cost delivery channel triggered expansion of formal financial services to 12 million clients in only six years. Latin America has also demonstrated the potential of conditional cash transfers into simplified bank accounts as a way to connect beneficiaries to formal finance while simultaneously lowering delivery costs to the government. Transfer challenges motivated the use of agents in Brazil. In Mexico, beneficiaries increased savings and investment with more than 90 per cent of households started to use banking services. The benefits from financial inclusion are well understood and well documented. Financial inclusion, more particularly when promoted in the wider context of economic inclusion, can uplift financial conditions and improve the standards of lives of the poor and the disadvantaged. Access to affordable financial services would lead to increasing economic                                                  2  As defined by the Committee on Financial Inclusion (Chairman: C. Rangarajan, 2008). 3  ADBI Working Paper Series No. 259 – “Financial Inclusion and Financial Stability: Current Policy Issues” (Dec 2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 activities and employment opportunities for rural households with a possible multiplier effect on the economy. It could enable a higher disposable income in the hands of rural households leading to greater savings and a wider deposit base for banks and other financial institutions. It will enable the Government to provide social development benefits and subsidies directly to the beneficiary bank accounts, thereby drastically reducing leakages and pilferages in social welfare schemes. Thus, financial inclusion could be an instrument to provide monetary fuel for economic growth and is critical for achieving inclusive growth. Further, expanding the reach of financial services to those individuals who do not currently have access would be an objective that is fully consistent with the people-centric definition of inclusive growth which attempts to bridge the various divides in an economy and society, between the rich and the poor, between the rural and urban populace, and between one region and another. An analysis of World Bank Development Indicators implies a strong link between financial access (measured in terms of commercial bank branches per 100,000 adults and deposits per 1000 adults) and economic development. Empirical evidence indicates a distinct rise in income level of the countries with higher number of branches and deposits of commercial banks. Higher number of bank branches per 100,000 adults and more number of deposit accounts per 1000 adults are observed in high income countries than countries in the low and middle income categories. Though the cause-effect relationship could be the subject of detailed research, the fact that there is a progressive increase in income levels of the countries as financial access increases is empirically evident.  Source: World Development Indicators 2010, World Bank Just as it is difficult to envisage continuing financial stability without financial inclusion, especially in the long term, it is difficult to envisage the success of policy efforts to expand the reach of financial services unless banks and other financial services providers are sound, the financial markets are functioning smoothly and financial market infrastructure is robust. A recent World Bank report shows4 that nearly 60 percent of the economies experienced a contraction in real per capita income in 2009 as a result of the deepening of the global financial crisis. Worldwide volume of deposits and loans shrank, with a median decrease of 12 percent in the ratio of deposit value to Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and a median decrease of 15 percent in the ratio of value of loans to GDP. I have discussed how financial inclusion and financial stability need to co-exist if policy measures pursuing either objective have to achieve any degree of success. Let me return now to the key question I flagged at the outset – whether financial inclusion and financial                                                  4  “Financial Access: The State of Financial Inclusion through the Crisis”, Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP)/The World Bank Group , 2010. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches stability are two sides of the same coin and mutually reinforce each other or are they disparate goals that would contradict each other and work at cross purposes. There are, in fact, several ways in which financial inclusion can contribute to maintaining a sounder and more stable financial system. Financial inclusion and financial stability: working in tandem First, financial inclusion can improve the efficiency of the process of intermediation between savings and investments while facilitating change in the composition of the financial system with regard to the transactions that take place, the clients that use the various services, the new risks created, and possibly the institutions that operate in newly created or expanded markets. As the balance sheet of the financial sector grows more diversified and encompasses a broader spectrum of economic agents, its contribution to a more resilient economy is commensurately higher. Second, for financial institutions, especially banks, financial inclusion helps provide a more stable retail base of deposits. As the recent global crisis also demonstrated, stable retail sources of funding as against reliance on borrowed funds can greatly enhance the soundness and resilience of financial institutions and can reduce volatility in earnings. Low income savers and borrowers tend to maintain steady financial behaviour through the business cycle both in terms of deposit keeping and borrowing. Thus, during periods of systemic crises, deposits from low income clients typically act as a continued source of funds even as other sources of credit dry up or become difficult to roll over. Small customers, thus, provide big opportunities to garner stable deposits. In the absence of such deposits, financial institutions may find it difficult to continue lending. This credit channel has the potential to aggravate the impact of the crisis on the local economy than would otherwise be the case. Third, financial inclusion facilitates greater participation by different segments of the economy in the formal financial system. The presence of a large informal sector can impair the transmission of monetary policy as a significant segment of financially excluded households and small businesses make financial decisions independent of, and un-influenced by, the monetary policy actions of the central bank. As the share of the formal financial sector increases through greater financial inclusion, it yields an important positive externality by making monetary policy transmission more effective. Fourth, to the extent that financial inclusion helps people move from the cash economy to bank accounts which can be monitored, it helps facilitate implementation of Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) guidelines and makes it possible to deploy suspicious transactions’ monitoring and reporting to a larger share of financial transactions in the economy. Recent Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Guidance on5 “Anti-Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Measures and Financial Inclusion” concluded that financial exclusion undermines the effectiveness of an AML/CFT regime and recommended that a country’s level of financial inclusion and initiatives to expand financial inclusion should be considered, when the effectiveness of their AML/CFT regime is assessed. Fifth, financial inclusion can contribute to enhanced financial stability through contributing to the improved health of the household sector, of small businesses and, to some extent, that of the corporate sector. The health of the household sector is improved through improved economic linkages, reducing reliance on the costly informal sector and through improved ability to make and receive payments. The benefits of this cannot be overstated given that for the household sector the implications of a lack of access to banking services can be severe.                                                  5  FATF Guidance on “Anti-Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Measures and Financial Inclusion”, June 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Lack of access affects the ability of a household to receive government transfers, or to make payments or to accumulate cash surpluses for planned expenses or emergencies. Individuals who have no option but to carry cash are exposed to security risks. Such access also reduces the cost of making payments. Social benefits include protection against loss due to theft, improved mechanisms for social transfers and other remittances (including tax and benefit remittances) and improved economic linkages for the rural and deprived communities6.The lack of access to or availability of a vehicle for saving could also result in households, especially low income households, resorting to expensive short-term debt. There are many anecdotal instances of high interest rates leading to households being caught in a debt trap in our own country while the impact on financial stability of increased leverage of households was succinctly demonstrated by the recent crisis in the microfinance sector. Financial inclusion can improve the access to finance and the quality and cost of the service that small businesses receive from banks. These factors are key to the profitability and prosperity of these businesses and that of the economy. Research has revealed increased formal savings can help reduce cost of credit and facilitate business expansion, for example, through increased availability of low cost deposits. This has the collateral benefit of improving resilience of small businesses, even large businesses. Sixth, in most cases, efforts to include an increasingly larger section of the population within the fold of formal banking and financial services have resulted in the deployment of innovative solutions and outsourcing arrangements. Such financial innovations have the potential of reducing costs and thereby contributing to increasing the overall efficiency of the economy and the financial stability. They may also, through faster information dissemination and more efficient functioning of the financial markets, contribute to improving the efficiency of transmission of monetary policy. Of course, financial innovations and outsourcing arrangements come with their own set of risks which could pose challenges for the overall policy framework for the pursuit of financial stability. But I will discuss this a little later. Finally, financial inclusion, through careful policy orientation, may help facilitate reduction in income inequalities and, by bridging the gap between the prosperous and the poor, can foster social and political stability.  Financial inclusion and financial stability: working at cross purposes This is not to say that there are no risks to financial stability emanating from greater financial inclusion. One only has to recall the savings and loan crisis in the US in 1980s to appreciate that even financial institutions geared to cater to the retail investors and, thereby, to foster financial inclusion, could be a source of financial instability. The recent crisis in US subprime markets is another case in point. Policy makers have often endorsed marketing to subprime borrowers as a means of financial inclusion7. With hindsight, it seems clear that such over-extension of credit has the potential to affect the quality of the credit portfolio of banks and financial institutions and could have sown the seeds of financial fragility, and ultimately of financial instability. The position may be further aggravated by regulatory or governmental forbearance which has the potential to vitiate the credit culture amongst the target group. As elucidated by Prof. Raghuram Rajan8, “easy credit” as a response to bridge the gap between the haves and the have-nevers could prove to be a                                                  6  “Financial Access and Financial Stability” – Paper written by P. Hawkins, FEASibility Limited South Africa for BIS (2010). 7  Collard, S. and Kempson, E. (2005), Affordable Credit: The Way Forward, York: Joseph Rowntree Foundation. 8  Rajan G., Raghuram (2010), Fault Lines : How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten The World Economy. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches costly way of redistribution and create a fault line along the financial sector where enormous stresses could build up and lead to an instability in the system akin to the subprime crisis of recent times. Our own experience with local entities, such as, cooperative banks, deposit taking non-banking financial companies and Regional Rural Banks – which are largely geared to meet the needs of the poor and the un-banked – has highlighted the risks of poor governance, connected lending, geographic concentration leading to vulnerability to natural calamities and downturns. The recent experience of the microfinance industry is another example of an initiative to foster financial inclusion resulting in financial stress to the very institutions which are promoting inclusion. Hence, the risks for financial institutions catering to the less developed and low-income markets need to be well understood. First, these markets typically involve a large number of low ticket clients/transactions with commensurate burden on operating costs. Second, these segments are typically associated with informational inefficiencies with most borrowers unable to produce any collateral or to provide an adequate track record of repayments. Third, financial institutions venturing into these segments for the first time often need to incur substantial costs as they adjust their business practices and processes to the fresh rules of the game. Fourth, financial services can be used to launder illegally obtained funds as well as fund terrorist activities. This could be accentuated if for expansion of finance access too much of regulatory forbearance by way of relaxed KYC norms is given even for large volume/high frequency transactions. While, as discussed above, greater financial inclusion can facilitate monitoring of a larger share of suspicious transactions, the emergence of payment services, in particular person to person remittance facilities, to cater to the needs of an increasing large base of retail clients may also provide opportunities for illegal activities. Conversely, there are challenges posed by AML-CFT requirements to the goal of achieving financial inclusion and, hence, the FATF Guidance states there is a need to “take account of the nexus between financial integrity and financial inclusion and the cross-reinforcement between these two objectives”.  Fifth, outsourcing of activities by banks, including for financial inclusion, also poses reputational, financial and fidelity risks which may impact the health of the institution and of the financial system9. In particular, the reputation risks associated with outsourcing may impact the activities of the entire bank and not just the outsourced activities in case of any mishap or misdemeanour by the outsourced agents. There are also systemic risks associated with the entire banking industry relying on a single or a few vendors, as is frequently the case, especially in the early stages of innovations/outsourcing. These risks need to be carefully managed by banks, in particular, through a system of checks and balances which could, inter alia, involve well defined contractual arrangements, standards for due diligence, exposure monitoring, cash and other limits, rating of the agents/Business Correspondents (BCs), periodic audit/inspection, etc. and the use of information, communication and technology (ICT), for managing operational and financial risks. Further, the design of appropriate compensation structures, including performance based features, can ensure a reasonable fee to the agents while ensuring adequate incentives for preventing misuse of the system by the agents. Sixth, risks would also arise out of the business model of specialised non-bank institutions {e.g. Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs)} which cater exclusively to the needs of the low income group. These institutions face concentration and funding risks which can contribute to overall systemic risks as has been amply demonstrated by the recent experiences in Andhra Pradesh. The greater involvement of commercial banks in the provision of services to the low                                                  9  The Report of the Internal Group to Examine Issues relating to Rural Credit and Microfinance (Chairman: Shri. H. R. Khan), Reserve Bank of India, July 2005 (Khan Committee). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 income group and with institutions catering to the low income segment can go a long way towards mitigating the risks. Finally, as I discussed earlier, the pursuit of financial inclusion has often been attempted through low cost delivery channels, innovative products and outsourcing agencies. These developments come with their own set of risks which could jeopardize financial stability. For example, during times of stress, financial innovation can further complicate the transmission of monetary policy. In any case, during periods of financial instability, it may be difficult to predict the consequences of financial innovations thereby adding an additional element of uncertainty to an already uncertain economic environment. Facilitating financial inclusion with financial stability: financial regulations and literacy & consumer protection Let me quickly sum up the discussions so far. It is clear that there are some potential costs of financial inclusion. There are also some important benefits which play out over cycles of booms and busts and through periods of financial crises. The end result is a deeper, more diversified and resilient financial system as well as healthier corporate and household sectors which can enhance financial stability. There are risks to the financial institutions from financial inclusion. There is, however, not enough evidence that these risks are hugely systemic in nature. On the contrary, savers and borrowers in the lower segment have been evidenced to maintain more consistent financial behaviour during financial crises as compared to customers in other segments. To this extent, they add to the resilience of financial institutions. In any case, the risks prevalent at the institutional level are manageable with known regulatory & prudential tools, greater financial awareness and literacy and with more effective customer protection practices. As highlighted at the very outset, achieving greater financial inclusion and maintaining financial stability are now complementary policy compulsions. The challenge is to ensure both while exploiting the synergies between the two policy objectives. The answer arguably lies in a facilitative regulatory and supervisory structure which ensures that the formal financial system delivers affordable financial services to the excluded population with greater efficiency without compromising on the acceptable levels of safety and soundness. In this connection, an important role can be played by credit information bureaus that provide a database to capture all outstanding loans for individual borrowers and in prevention of multiple-lending and over borrowing10. Also important is a regulatory environment which facilitates the promotion of new lines of businesses with idiosyncratic risk profiles whose contribution to systemic risks is relatively low. An effective consumer protection policy framework is also a critical component of any regulatory environment which aims at meeting the goal of financial inclusion while promoting the soundness and resilience of institutions and of the financial system. For the entire framework to be effective, greater financial literacy and awareness would remain very critical. There are a range of cross country experiences which testify to the efforts underway for the achievement of a balance between financial inclusion and financial stability through a facilitating regulatory framework, especially relative to consumer protection and reputational risk mitigation. Let me briefly recount some such experiences which have supported an accessible and stable financial sector environment in their respective jurisdictions: a. Brazil, new regulations have been attempted to achieve universal access by enabling partnerships between banks and third-party agents. Brazil was the early leader in agent banking through the large-scale introduction of “banking                                                  10  Report of the Sub Committee of the Central Board of Directors of the Reserve Bank of India to Study Issues and Concerns in the MFI Sector (Chairman: Shri Y H Malegam), January 2011 (Malegam Committee). 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches correspondents” to distribute welfare grants to unbanked Brazilians. The oversight is focused on the financial institution with the central bank getting access to all data on the agents while attempting to also give the financial institution enough freedom to articulate the relationship with the agents on their own terms.  b. Kenya and the Philippines, where central banks have had a key role in supporting mobile phone payment schemes and allowed regulatory space to mobile phone operators. In Kenya, the e-money transfer service M-PESA offered by mobile network operator Safaricom has achieved impressive progress thus far.  c. Philippines launched the first successful mobile payment service in a developing country in 2004. Once market innovation and learning satisfied the needs of regulators and mobile operators, regulation was created and implemented to provide legal certainty and create a level playing field to allow new players. d. Bolivia and Uganda, which also demonstrated that micro-deposit-taking can flourish in the regulated financial system with timely and appropriate policies. Regulators have incorporated non-profit innovators into the formal system by creating legal paths toward a license. New laws, specially designed for previously unregulated NGOs, were passed, whereby they will keep their non-profit status and be allowed to collect deposits and offer extra financial services. e. Indonesia, which has proved how public-owned financial institutions may become the driving force behind economic development in rural areas. The government owned development bank, Bank Rakyat Indonesia (BRI), which specializes in microfinance is the biggest provider of rural financial services within Indonesia. Even when the Indonesian banking system collapsed during the Asian financial crisis, BRI’s micro-banking division remained relatively profitable 11. It is, however, important to note all these experiences need to be evaluated in the country specific context and their replication in other jurisdiction has to be carefully thought through. The lesson, however, is that prudential regulation has an important role to play in ensuring the initiatives taken to provide basic financial services do not themselves become a source of risk or fraud. Prudential regulations which ensure the soundness of financial institutions providing basic financial services to the excluded, on the one hand, and which put in place robust consumer protection guidelines, on the other, bolster public confidence in the various initiatives taken to ensure greater financial inclusion. If regulations are to foster financial inclusion, they need to be commensurate with risks. A recent BIS paper12 highlights the need for regulation of financial innovations for financial stability to be calibrated to the nature and risks of each different service/innovation. In calibrating the regulatory framework for basic financial services according to their contribution to systemic risks for the entire financial system it will be necessary to ensure that financial regulation itself does not become a cause for exclusion. The Indian experience Let me now briefly describe the Indian experience with financial stability and financial inclusion. Financial stability is not a mandate of the Reserve Bank of India as per its statute. Financial stability considerations have, however, always been taken note of by the Reserve Bank in its                                                  11  ADBI Working Paper Series No. 259 and “Small Customers, Big Market:Commercial Banks in Microfinance” by Malcolm Harper and S S Arora (2005). 12  On harnessing the potential of financial inclusion by Peter Dittus and Michael Klein: BIS, May 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 policy making process. This is particularly so in the period since the balance of payments crisis in the early 1990s. Since 2004, financial stability has been formally added as a policy objective of the Reserve Bank of India along with price stability and inclusive growth. More recently, financial stability is being pursued explicitly by the Reserve Bank with the setting up of a Financial Stability Unit with the remit to conduct continuous macroprudential surveillance of the economy. Financial inclusion has also been a major policy objective in the Indian context since long though the term financial inclusion has come to the forefront only of late. In fact, the Reserve Bank is perhaps the only central bank in the world which attempts to reach the remotest locations of the country in a bid to create awareness and promote inclusion. The objective of achieving greater financial inclusion in India has been pursued in a regulated space. The framework for financial inclusion has been bank led to a large extent and banks are closely regulated and supervised entities in the Indian context. Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) engaged in activities which facilitate financial inclusion are also largely regulated while a regulatory framework for the Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) is also under contemplation13. Importantly, the broad compulsions of the health and resilience of financial institutions and that of financial stability have not been lost sight of even as financial inclusion has been pursued with vigour. It is pertinent to note at this point that the remit of the recently established Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC) which is the apex level inter-institutional body for financial stability in the country also includes financial inclusion. The foundation for promoting greater financial access in the country can be traced to the findings of the all-India Rural Credit Survey in the early 1950s. The findings of the Survey indicated that, out of the total borrowings of farmers in 1951–52 estimated at Rs. 7.5 billion, commercial banks provided less than one per cent while moneylenders provided 70 per cent. The distribution of bank branches was also highly skewed in favour of urban and metropolitan/port centres in 1969. Even in terms of distribution of bank credit, the share of private corporate business exhibited an overwhelming increase, from 44 per cent during 1957–61 to over 60 per cent for the quinquennium ending 196914. These disturbing features brought out by the survey culminated in the process of nationalization of major public sector banks with a view to leveraging the banking system as a tool for promoting a slew of social objectives of which inclusion was one. The initiatives in this direction included the requirement that banks could open a branch in a location with one or more branches only if they had opened four in a location with no or a few branches. The branch licensing policy of the Reserve Bank of India has undergone a sea change since then in terms of liberalisation but the cornerstone of the policy, till date, remains one of encouraging banks to open an increasing number of branches in the less banked regions of the country by linking of the regulatory framework for opening branches to, inter alia, penetration in un-banked areas. The extensive branch network of many Indian banks have today provided them with a strong base of stable core deposits – widely recognised as a critical element for the resilience of the banking system to the headwinds of any financial instability.  Mandated priority sector lending (40 per cent of lending in case of domestic banks and 32 per cent in case of foreign banks) was another policy initiative aimed at ensuring flow of affordable credit to the less privileged sections and segments. Importantly, there is no interest subvention involved in the lending by the banks to priority sectors (except for the insignificant percentage of loans extended under the Differential Rate of Interest scheme to                                                  13  On December 2, 2011, Reserve Bank of India has issued a circular wherein a new category of NBFC – Non Banking Financial Company – Micro Finance Institutions has been introduced. The regulatory directions for NBFC-MFIs have also been issued along with the circular. 14  “Financial Inclusion and Financial Fragility: An Empirical Note”, S. Ghosh, 2008. 
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches the most disadvantaged people and Government’s interest subvention in respect of agricultural loans). The usual norms of capital adequacy, asset classification and provisioning apply to such lendings, implying thereby that the quality of the credit portfolio was to be maintained and the soundness of institutions was not compromised with even as financial inclusion was promoted. The concept of no frills accounts with low or zero minimum balance was introduced in 2005 to enable a larger section of the poor and under-priviledged section. Simpler KYC norms were introduced for this section of society with a view to ensuring that people without documentary proof of address and /or identity are not deprived of banking facilities while at the same time ensuring that the minimum requirement for the proper identification of each customer is complied with. The recently introduced “Aadhar” project by the Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDA) will, by providing a clear proof of identity for all residents, pave the way for the entry of under-priviledged citizens into the formal banking system within the ambit of prevalent regulation. Following the recommendations of the Khan Committee, Reserve Bank of India paved the way for branchless banking (through the business correspondents/Business facilitator model) in 2006 in recognition of the fact that it would be difficult to provide access to banking facility for every household in around 600,000 villages in the country through brick & mortar branches. Simultaneously, sufficient safeguards in the form of biometric identification of customers, guidelines for the appointment and functioning of agents, including stipulation of distance criterion from a base branch, same or next day accounting of customer transactions and adherence to the risk mitigation norms for outsourcing of activities have been put in place from the perspective of consumer protection to address the risk of reckless selling of products and services by agents working to earn commission. Non-banking and non-financial entities have been permitted into the financial inclusion space in a calibrated manner largely to help banks in offering customized payment and remittance services to customers with adequate safeguards. Payment services operated by the non-banks were brought under regulation of the Reserve Bank of India after the notification of the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 and the broad approach has been that these entities will provide fee based services without obtaining access to customer funds (for example, mobile wallets provided by non-banks through the mechanism of the escrow account with a bank).  The Self Help Group-Bank Linkage Program introduced in the 1990s facilitated the formation of tremendous synergies between the formal financial sector and the informal sector. Provision of banking services to the poor households was achieved without relaxation of capital adequacy and other prudential norms for microfinance entities and other institutions.  Consumer protection issues have remained at the forefront even as the drive for financial inclusion remained at the top of the Reserve Bank of India’s policy agenda. In 2005, the Reserve Bank facilitated the establishment of the Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI) in order to ensure that a comprehensive code of conduct for fair treatment of customers is evolved and the adherence of banks to the code is monitored on a continuous basis. Recent initiatives have focused on the reports of excessive/usurious interest rates being charged by the MFIs in a non- transparent manner/ and other questionable practices/processes including coercive recovery methods. A regulatory framework aimed at MFIs is being contemplated by the Reserve Bank of India and will be issued shortly15. A comprehensive financial literacy programme aims to equip the hitherto unbanked and unaware to make best use of the increasing access to financial services, even as the Banking Ombudsman System has been established to provide a forum for grievance redressal. In fact, the cornerstone of the Reserve Bank’s Platinum Jubilee celebrations in                                                  15  Refer to footnote 11. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 2009–2010 was an outreach programme aimed at educating low income groups, preferably in the remote areas, to demand financial services and at encouraging banks to supply financial services needed by the poor. The initiative continues to be an ongoing endeavor well after the completion of the Platinum Jubilee year.  Recent policy initiatives to drive financial inclusion, including formulation of a board approved Financial Inclusion Policy (FIP) by the banks, also attempt to strike a balance between the requirements of financial inclusion and that of soundness of financial institutions and stability of the financial system. The Malegam Committee has made a series of recommendations to address reports of excessive interest rates, over-borrowing, ghost borrowers and coercive recovery practices in the microfinance sector. Some of these recommendations have been implemented and will aid in ensuring that the industry continues to play a facilitative role in achieving greater financial inclusion16. The Business Correspondent/Business Facilitator (BC/BF) model of branchless banking has been introduced as a possible solution to overcome barriers of geography posed for financial inclusion. For success of this model it has been envisaged that appropriate technology need to be adopted on a sufficiently large scale to make the system viable and fail proof. While suggesting that alternative delivery channels need to be explored and adopted to expand the banking outreach, the Reserve Bank of India has advised banks to not to lose focus on brick & mortar structures in unbanked villages. These structures could represent simple low cost intermediate entities comprising minimum infrastructure for operating customer transactions and supporting up to 8–10 BCs at a reasonable distance of 2–3 kms. This will lead to efficiency in cash management, documentation and redressal of customer grievances. This will also provide a supervisory mechanism over the operations of the BCs/BFs. Another very important aspect that is being impressed upon the banks is that for the BC/BF model to succeed, the agents, who are the first level of contact for customers, have to be compensated adequately so that they too see this as a business opportunity for reasonable earnings and do not indulge in unethical practices. The wide range of policy initiatives undertaken in the country has yielded rich dividends and there has been tremendous progress in bringing an increasingly growing share of the populace closer to financial systems. Over 50,000 villages with a population of over 2000 are covered by banking services and nearly 75 million no frills accounts have been opened till March 2011. A recent Reserve Bank Working Paper17 arrived at an index of financial inclusion (IFI) as a measure of financial inclusion for the country using data on three dimensions of financial inclusion viz. banking penetration, availability of banking services and usage. Based on data from 2006–07 to 2009–10, the paper categorised the majority of Indian states as states with low levels of financial inclusion. These findings are confirmed by empirical evidence. As per recent statistics, only 57 per cent of the population has a bank account and only 30,000 of the 600,000 habitations in the country have a commercial bank branch. As against this, in UK three per cent of households are unbanked, in Sweden less than two per cent of the adult population did not have an account in 2000, in Germany, the figure was around three per cent and less than four per cent of adults in Canada and five per cent in Belgium lacked a bank account. A lot therefore needs to be achieved further in order to realize the goal of inclusive growth with stability. In particular, we should also not lose focus that financial inclusion is part of the wider concept of economic inclusion and that effective risk mitigants have to be in place while we pursue the financial inclusion objectives vigorously so that the efforts are viable and sustainable overtime.                                                  16  Refer to footnote 4. 17  RBI WP series no. 8/2011 “Financial Inclusion in India” by S K Chattopadhyay. 
12 BIS central bankers’ speeches Concluding thoughts Let me now conclude with a few final observations. Financial inclusion is the key to inclusive growth with its motto of empowerment of poor, underprivileged and low income/skilled rural/urban households. Amartya Sen18 convincingly argued that poverty is not merely insufficient income rather the absence of wide range of capabilities, including security and ability to participate in economic and political systems. Financial inclusion is designed to bring about the capability to participate and contribute among the economically and socially excluded people by creating equal opportunities. Achieving sustainable financial inclusion will require a systemic effort which leverages technology, viable business models and appropriate regulatory framework cohesively. While further research is needed to better understand the transmission channels and potential feedback loops between financial stability and financial access and to identify policy solutions aiming to balance both objectives in a sustainable manner, it is evident that financial inclusion and financial stability need to coexist. The Indian experience has proved that financial inclusion can work within the framework of financial stability given an enabling regulatory environment. Also providing testimony to this are the experiences of a host of other countries, some of which I have briefly described earlier. A combination of viable business strategies targeted towards the population at the bottom of the pyramid, lower transactions costs with technological innovations and appropriate regulatory environment have helped foster greater financial inclusion with stability. The twin objectives of financial stability and financial inclusion are arguably two sides of a coin but it is imperative that a robust risk-mitigating framework which exploits their complementarities while minimising the conflicts is adopted to ensure that they do not work at cross purposes.                                                   18  Sen, Amartya, (2000): “Development as Freedom”, Anchor Books, New York, 2000. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Ignazio Visco: Investing in knowledge – young people and citizens, training and employment Talk by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the 30th National Congress of the Italian Association of Children’s and Family Court Judges (AIMMF), Catania, 25 November 2011. *      *      * When I was asked to speak at the 30th National Congress of the Italian Association of Children’s and Family Court Judges (AIMMF), I certainly did not imagine that it would be one of my first talks as Governor of the Bank of Italy. So I have wondered whether it might not be best to withdraw from the engagement, since the issues one would expect me to deal with in my new role might be thought to be different, more pressing. But the reasons that led me to accept your invitation in the first place have not lost any of their force. The title of this session, “We are born children, but we become citizens”, not only imbues our everyday economic policy efforts with ultimate meaning but also prompts us to examine the structural problems holding our economy back, and to think about schools and education, public-spiritedness and respect for the rule of law, and human and social capital. And that is what I intend to do here today. It means tackling the issues key to the economic and human progress of our country. The current economic and financial crisis The economic and financial crisis that began in 2008 has compounded the difficulties that the Italian economy had been struggling with for a decade. Between 1995 and 2007, per capita GDP had grown on average by just over 1 per cent a year, compared to nearly 2 per cent in the euro area. The recession that hit almost all advanced economies in 2008–09 struck more profoundly in Italy than elsewhere. Even with little or no growth, the low interest rates made possible by the adoption of the single currency and measures aimed at public finance adjustment made the cost of servicing the large public debt bearable. In recent months, however, the heightened tension in financial markets has made this balance precarious, fueling operators’ doubts over the sustainability of Italy’s sovereign debt. The measures adopted starting this summer have improved the public finances but are not sufficient to achieve the lasting, structural rebalancing that the country needs in order to return to growth. Italy’s failure to thrive is in good part due to the hesitancy with which the economy has responded over the past twenty years to the challenges of technological innovation, the emergence of new economies in the world arena, and the powerful increase in European integration. Entry into the monetary union did away with the ephemeral gains deriving from the devaluation and imposed greater fiscal discipline on Italy in order to qualify for membership. Boosting growth potential requires wide-ranging measures, including a reform of the institutions responsible for economic governance, to stimulate business activity and encourage sustainable work inclusion, especially of women and youth. The main measures needed have long been perfectly well known and include: heightened competition, particularly in protected service sectors; wider access to risk capital, especially for innovative firms; regulation of the labour market and a social welfare system which, acting together, help reallocate human resources towards more productive uses; and a more efficient civil justice system. There is, however, one further point that is at least as important, namely measures to increase the stock of human capital. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Human capital and new technologies Economists have always paid heed to the role of education and knowledge in increasing the productive capacity of individuals. More recently, we have come to use the term “human capital” to indicate people’s endowment of skills, technical ability and know-how. The term thus recognizes the economic value of this endowment in improving the quality of work, increasing the efficiency of production processes and facilitating the adoption and development of new techniques and products, with benefits to individuals and the system as a whole. This pool of skills and knowledge evolves over time in response to changes in the technological paradigm. Starting in the 1990s, the rapid spread of new information and communications technologies and their constant advancement have radically changed the nature of the skills demanded by the productive economy. New technologies enable the automation of routine activities that require the simple application of standard skills and can be codified into sequences (however long) of instructions. The new technologies tend to reduce the demand for labour for all such activities, while they favour managerial and intellectual roles, and, to a lesser extent, non-repetitive manual jobs as well. Where such trends have been more pronounced, they have been of less benefit to those with intermediate education levels, mainly associated with the possession of a standard skill set. No longer is human capital acquired once and for all at school and then applied in standard fashion throughout one’s entire working life. What educators call “competence” has become crucial: namely, the ability to mobilize internal resources (knowledge and know-how) and external resources in an integrated way to cope with often unprecedented and non-routine situations. “Competence” interacts with innovation and enables rapid adaptation to change; together with specialized knowledge, it allows innovation to emerge from the everyday, by effectively combining available resources with known concepts. These are the inputs necessary to a fundamental change of gear for mature economies, which need to shift away from a model of growth based essentially on emulation and progressive advance towards a technological frontier to one centring on the ability to generate innovation independently, thus advancing the frontier itself. It will be increasingly necessary to cultivate 21st-century skills, namely critical thinking and an aptitude for problem-solving. Traditional areas of knowledge (including languages, mathematics, science, economics, civics, but also history, art, geography, and our great tradition of classical education) will continue to be an indispensable resource, but will need to be integrated within a dynamic context in which receptiveness towards innovation, as well creativity, intellectual curiosity, the ability to communicate effectively, and openness to collaboration and teamwork, will be decisive. Italy’s laggard performance Italy is lagging behind the main developed countries, both in high school and university education and in the skill levels of young people and the adult population. Italy’s low stock of human capital by international standards is a longstanding issue. At the time of national unification in 1861, the adult population averaged less than one year of education as against four or five in France, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States. As Giovanni Vecchi recalls in his recent book In ricchezza e in povertà, at the beginning of the last century two British historians, Bolton King and Thomas Okey, observed in a volume entitled Italy Today: “Education is the gloomiest chapter in Italian social history, a chapter of painful advance, of national indifference to a primary need, of a present backwardness, that gives Italy (next to Portugal) the sad primacy of illiteracy in Western Europe”. Since then, there has been considerable progress in education levels, but not enough to bridge the gap. In 2009, according to the latest OECD figures, 54 per cent of Italians aged 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 between 25 and 64 years had earned a senior high school diploma, compared with the OECD average of 73 per cent. The gap was narrower but still substantial for younger age groups: in the 25–34 age bracket, the proportion of Italian senior high school graduates rose to 70 per cent, against an OECD average of 81 per cent. The proportion of children completing junior high school studies has also been rising, gaining more than 10 points in recent years to over 80 per cent. For university education, however, the gap is certainly worrying. Here, Italy seems hard put to keep up with the other advanced countries: again in 2009, the proportion of graduates in the 25–64 age group was less than 15 per cent, or just half the OECD average; amongst people aged between 25 and 34 years, it exceeded 20 per cent, compared to an OECD average of around 37 per cent. Over the past twenty years, direct testing of reading comprehension, logical and mathematical skills, and the ability to combine pieces of information to solve problems of varying complexity, reveals a similarly worrying picture. At the end of primary school Italian students are at least as skilled as in the other developed countries, but in the later stages of formal education they fall behind. For 15-year-olds, the gap found by the PISA survey carried out by the OECD in 2006 corresponded to around one school year; and although this diminished between 2006 and 2009, it remained significant. The gap reflects severe disparities between different parts of Italy, with the scores in the North slightly above the OECD average and those in the South dramatically lower. These disparities are subject to various interpretations involving their geographical distribution or the discrepancies between different schools rather than within any individual school. Yet the fact remains that a country like ours, poor in material resources and now lagging on various fronts, should invest in “knowledge”, not “below” or “around” but above the average of other countries with more natural resources. Such deficits are also observed in respect of the skills of the adult population. The international Adult Literacy and Lifeskills Survey (ALL) conducted in 2003 to gauge functional literacy and numeracy together with analytical and problem-solving abilities shows that about 80 per cent of Italians aged between 16 and 65 are unable to apply linear reasoning and draw inferences of average complexity by extracting and combining information provided in written texts that are little more than basic. They are, that is to say, functionally illiterate: they lack adequate reading comprehension, logical and analytical skills to respond to the demands of modern life and work. This is the highest percentage in any of the advanced countries surveyed. For purposes of comparison, the corresponding figure in Switzerland and the United States is 50 per cent, in Canada 40 per cent, and in Norway 30 per cent. These deficits represent a milestone, all the more so for a country like ours with our longstanding shortfall in growth. This is why education policies should not seek just to close the gaps with the other advanced countries but must rather aim for a radical reversal of the situation. Collective decisions and individual choices In order to accomplish this, there is a need for reflection on the tools society uses to increase the stock of human capital and on the determinants of individuals’ educational choices. We must analyze both the places where human capital is developed, namely schools and universities, and the reasons for individual choices that sometimes seem unwarranted in light of the economic returns to education. Learning and research evaluation mechanisms, greater decision-making autonomy, and the linking of public funding to indicators of quality in teaching and research in universities are recognized internationally as important to the effectiveness of an educational system. The successive reforms in Italy in recent years seem to be a step in this direction, but the effort for improved and more efficient organization has been undermined by the inadequacy of both public and private resources devoted to the accumulation of human capital. And the situation risks getting worse in the current economic climate. In the middle of the last decade, a point 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches in time for which an international comparison is possible, investment in knowledge – approximated by total public and private expenditure on higher education, research and development, and software – amounted to 2.4 per cent of GDP in Italy, as opposed to an OECD average of 4.9 per cent. The capacity of the educational system to absorb and generate new ideas has probably also been constrained by slower generational turnover, which has dramatically reduced the number of young people in teaching positions. According to OECD estimates for 2009, only 9 per cent of teachers in Italian senior high schools were under 40 years old, compared with 25 per cent in Germany, 34 per cent in France, and over 40 per cent in the United Kingdom and the United States. In the same year, according to the Eurostat database, 16 per cent of university teachers in Italy were under 40, as against 30 per cent in France, 39 per cent in the United Kingdom and 47 per cent in Germany. Yet despite these shortcomings, the metrics available indicate that education remains a worthwhile investment in Italy. People with more education have less difficulty in finding employment, have less discontinuous work careers and earn higher salaries. According to the OECD, in 2009 the average earnings gap in the adult population between people with at most compulsory schooling and high school graduates was close to the average for the developed countries, whilst that between the latter and university graduates, although smaller than in the other major countries, was close to 50 per cent (compared to 63 per cent in France, 67 per cent in Germany, 78 per cent in the United Kingdom and almost 90 per cent in the United States). The additional return over and above that from a senior high school diploma of a degree in a scientific discipline is, in Italy, between three and four times greater than that derived from a degree in the humanities. Yet, at the end of the last decade, 20 per cent of young people between the ages of 18 and 24 with a junior high school certificate had not gone on to any further qualification, about half of young people aged 20–24 with a senior high school diploma had not enrolled at a university, and of those that had gone to university, nearly half failed to complete their degree. So what are the reasons for this apparent discrepancy between the returns to education and people’s educational choices? Firstly, the economic benefits of higher education are not properly perceived. According to the results of a survey for the European Commission this year, scarcely half of young Italians see higher education as advantageous. This is the lowest proportion amongst all EU countries. Approximately two-thirds of Italian respondents recognized that university training does improve job opportunities, but only a third – less than in all the other countries surveyed – expected a gain in terms of higher remuneration. This lack of awareness exacerbates the consequences of the obstacles (often economic in nature) to investment in education. The strong correlation between family background and educational choices reduces social mobility. Individuals suffer as a result, and so too does society as a whole, which fails to cultivate and use talent emerging from less privileged backgrounds. Learning and integration difficulties are even greater for the children of foreign nationals. By the end of primary school, around a third of them, compared with 2 per cent of Italian children, have already fallen behind the normal education cycle, and the disadvantage is amplified in later years, as is shown by the smaller proportion promoted to junior high school and their greater likelihood of dropping out at the end of compulsory schooling (twice as high as among Italians). In the absence of effective integration mechanisms, our country’s stock of human capital thus risks being further penalized by the rapid increase in the relative proportion of young people with foreign backgrounds, which Istat projects to exceed 30 per cent by 2050. Furthermore, the Italian economy’s ability to reward and make the most of human resources remains poor. Wage differentials by educational attainment are not only smaller than in other countries but are much smaller for younger than for older workers. Entry-level wages are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 now at the same level, in real terms, as decades ago, and people entering the workforce today appear to be precluded from the income growth registered in the meantime. This is probably due to the hesitancy – compounded by the financial and economic crisis – with which Italian industry has adapted to the trends that have changed the world so radically. It is possible that the generally inadequate standard of education provided by the school system – at least as perceived by firms – is a factor in the low salaries offered (and the accordingly low investment in human capital). In terms of the labour market, increased flexibility has certainly facilitated the absorption of the very high levels of unemployment registered in the mid-1990s. But while it has sustained the employment of young people, this increased flexibility – together with protracted wage moderation – may have led firms, especially the less efficient ones, to put off investment in R&D and advanced technologies. Indirect evidence of this is the fact that, in the teeth of conventional economic theory, Italy’s shortage of the human capital required by the new technological environment is linked to the comparatively low extra return to university graduates entering the labour market. So far I have concentrated on university education, a key component in the human capital stock of any modern economy, as it furnishes specialized skills that are not readily codified and that form the basis for the further advancement of knowledge and, hence, the technological frontier. Good graduates are produced by good universities, but, above all, good universities are in need of good students who are capable of learning to think critically and creatively to solve problems. Such students are cultivated at the lower levels of the education system, and many recent studies concur that investment in knowledge directed towards the early years of education is the most effective, and that learning deficits at this stage are difficult to make up for in subsequent years. Human capital and social capital Investing in knowledge, especially in the early years of schooling, is important for many reasons, not just because of the positive effects on the productivity of individuals. The benefits of education go beyond private financial gain. For instance, better-educated people on average enjoy better health, due also to their increased awareness of the value of prevention and the cost associated with risk behaviors. According to Eurostat, at 25 years of age the residual life expectancy of a male Italian senior high school or university graduate is 58 years, compared with 53 for those with only compulsory schooling (for women, 62 and 59 respectively); at 65 years of age, the gap in life expectancy is reduced but not eliminated, still amounting to two years for men and one year for women. The benefits of better education extend to many other aspects of life. Of special significance to this particular gathering is its positive influence in curbing lawlessness. Whilst we do not have a statistical breakdown for Italy, the data for Sweden and the United States show that a higher average level of schooling brings a substantial reduction in the crime rate against both persons and property. Among other things, this results in significant cost savings for the community. This outcome is the product of various mechanisms. In strictly financial terms – other things being equal – education reduces the incentives for crime by decreasing the gain compared to that achievable through legal means. Furthermore, there is a cultural impact stemming from the enhanced opportunities for socialization of people going to school compared with dropouts. Conversely, an increase in lawlessness in a community or area may reduce the incentives for school attendance for young people who are lured by the prospect of even small but immediate gains and driven by a strong copycat effect. It is no surprise, then, that it is in social milieus and geographical areas with lower levels of schooling that crime is rife. Nor is it an accident that those same circles and areas have a smaller stock of “social capital”, a factor increasingly recognized as important also to economic development. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches A community of educated and socially aware individuals, which is more likely to condemn deviations from legality and to recognize the benefits of cooperation, is in fact also more inclined to subscribe to values and norms that facilitate the achievement of the shared goals with which “social capital” is frequently identified. For our country this is a particularly meaningful concept, whose broad modern acceptance derives from Robert Putnam’s celebrated study of Italy’s regional administrations. It was that study that turned the spotlight on the poorer endowment of social capital in the regions of southern Italy compared to the Centre and North. In a market economy, social capital plays a central role by lowering transaction costs and so facilitating commerce between economic agents. This benefits the degree of financial development, the average size and innovation propensity of firms, the design of institutions, and, ultimately, the rate of economic growth. In contexts where education, trust in others and willingness to cooperate are limited, vertical relationships characterized by subordination, cronyism and exploitation are more likely to prevail. It is in such conditions that lawlessness can take hold and crime – including organized crime – spread more easily. The social and economic costs can be enormous. Some Italian work has used econometrics to gauge the extent to which the North-South development gap can be ascribed to organized crime. Comparing per capita GDP in some southern regions (where crime has taken hold in relatively recent years) and in several regions in the Centre and North (which had statistically comparable baseline characteristics but where organized crime has not become similarly entrenched), it is estimated that the cumulative economic growth of the former in the thirty years from 1977 to 2007 was some 15 percentage points less. The corresponding impact on the development of regions marked by the long-established presence of mafia-style organized crime can be assumed to be greater still. Whilst these are estimates to be treated with great caution, they do give an indication of the relevance of crime to the inhibited development of the southern regions and of the entire country. How does one go about augmenting a community’s social capital? Civic sense, trust, and willingness to cooperate are values that take time to ingrain themselves, and they display considerable persistence over time. Putnam even traces the current regional discrepancies in Italy back to the different political regimes prevailing in the late Middle Ages. Other scholars, however, maintain that the endowment of social capital can be increased – albeit slowly – by working on factors more directly influenced by policy choices. The role of schools and education is central. There is a strong correlation, for instance, between the literacy levels in the different regions of Italy at the end of the 19th century and the degree of trust in others observed today. Education level is not the only thing that matters, though. International data also suggest the importance of teaching methods: where active participation and teamwork by students is favoured over the traditional hierarchical relationship with teachers, one finds more trust in others and in institutions as well as more cooperative attitudes. Where more horizontal teaching methods predominate, one may find greater willingness to delegate decision-making within firms and less conflict in the organization of labor. Some concluding considerations Like other countries in Europe and around the world, Italy is going through a very difficult stage. But our economic problems are only partly the consequence of the severe global recession. Rather, their origins go far back and are rooted in structural characteristics; today’s financial troubles reflect the budgetary policies of past years. There can be no illusion that macroeconomic interventions are capable of remedying these shortcomings, and this is not so much due to their now limited scope for action as to the belief that only by resolving its structural weaknesses can the Italian economy gain a new lease on life. Our economy must be made more inclusive through increased labour market participation, especially for young 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 people and women, by eliminating the needless obstacles to economic activity and the barriers connected with family background. This is the meaning of the continual calls for the removal of constraints, vested interests, and restrictions on competition and economic activity. The lack of competition curbs output and employment in many sectors, impinges on competitiveness and the innovative capacity of the entire economy, hinders the regeneration of a manufacturing base that is still too fragmented, and prevents talent from emerging. The institutional system must be such as to favour business dynamism, growth, stability and certainty in the regulatory framework, and to overcome the infrastructure deficit, particularly in high-tech sectors. The North-South labour market divide can be overcome through comprehensive regulatory and welfare reform; more decentralized and flexible collective bargaining arrangements could enable the remuneration and organization of labour to be better tailored to actual production conditions. Particular attention should be paid to the southern regions, where structural weaknesses are more acute. Human capital and investment in knowledge represent one of the key economic policy variables. The economic returns both to the individual and to the community are unquestionable. They are important not only for their direct impact on productivity but also for their indirect effects, which emerge in the interaction between individuals, in the growth of public spirit, respect for the law and belief in the triumph of justice, and the fight against corruption and crime – two major factors curbing sustained and continuous economic growth. It is clear, however, that despite the great advances since national unification we have not yet made good Italy’s historical lag. There is a pressing need for a strong commitment, both in the public and private sector, to invest in knowledge now, in order to break the vicious circle of the small stock of human capital and its undervaluation. As an economist, I have considered the consequences of human capital for economic development. However, this talk is not intended to offer a mechanical or one-sided vision of the dynamics of this relationship. It would be narrow-minded to think that knowledge is important and should be invested in solely because it can increase our rate of economic growth. Knowledge, learning, can also help to stimulate public spirit and increase social capital, both of value in and of themselves quite apart from the benefits to economic growth. In other words, investment in knowledge constitutes a crucial factor in social cohesion and welfare. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 William C Dudley: What the euro crisis means for taxpayers and the US economy Testimony by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, before the Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services and Bailouts of Public and Private Programs, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, US House of Representatives, Washington DC, 15 December 2011. *      *      * I. Introduction Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Quigley, other members of the Subcommittee, it is an honor to testify before you today to discuss the economic and fiscal challenges facing Europe and the potential implications for the United States. My name is Bill Dudley, and I am president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Let me preface these remarks by stating that the views expressed in my written and oral testimony are solely my own and do not represent official views of the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or any other part of the Federal Reserve System. Additionally, because I am precluded by law from discussing confidential supervisory information, I will not be able to speak to the financial condition or regulatory treatment or rating of any individual financial institution. The Federal Reserve seeks to promote financial stability in order to enable U.S. businesses and households to maintain their access to credit and to ensure sustained economic growth. Although the U.S. economy is currently expanding at a moderate pace, we face significant downside risks, mostly relating to the sovereign debt crisis in Europe. Because developments in Europe will have an important bearing on the prospects for growth and jobs here in the U.S., the Federal Reserve is monitoring the situation there closely. This is also why we have taken special steps, in cooperation with other central banks, to support the flow of credit to households and businesses. I welcome the opportunity to testify on these matters today. II. Europe Within the European Union, seventeen countries share a common currency, the euro. The situation in the euro area is very unsettled, with pressure on sovereign debt markets and local banking systems. The euro area has the capacity, including the fiscal capacity, to overcome its challenges. However, the politics are very difficult, both because the problem has many dimensions, and because many different countries and institutions in the euro area have to coordinate their actions in order to achieve a coherent and effective policy response. Europe’s leadership has affirmed its commitment to the European Union and its single currency monetary union on numerous occasions. And the leadership is working to achieve greater policy coordination in areas such as fiscal policy. Putting all the countries using the euro on a clearly sustainable fiscal path would help restore market confidence. Assuming that Europe ultimately succeeds in managing this situation, a stronger union will emerge that will be viewed as more robust and resilient. This would be a welcome development for the U.S. If, in contrast, Europe were not to be fully successful in charting an effective course, this could have a number of negative implications for the U.S. In particular, there are three possibilities that I would like to highlight for the Subcommittee today. First, if the European situation were to deteriorate, then the euro area would face even more serious fiscal and economic challenges. As a result, growth within the euro zone would 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches weaken and this would lead to less demand for U.S. goods and services that are exported to Europe from companies and workers here. This would hurt growth here in the United States and would have a negative impact on U.S. jobs. It is important to recognize that the euro area is the world’s second largest economy after the U.S. and an important trading partner for us. Also, Europe is a significant investor in the U.S. economy, and vice versa. Thus, what happens in Europe has significant implications for our economy. Second, if the European situation were to deteriorate, this could put pressure on the U.S. banking system. The good news is that U.S. banks are much more robust and resilient than they were a few years ago. U.S. banks have bolstered their capital significantly, built up their loan loss reserves and have significantly larger liquidity buffers. Also, the direct exposures of U.S. banks to the countries in Europe that are facing the most intense fiscal challenges are actually quite modest. The bad news is that the exposures of the U.S. banks climb quite sharply when one also considers the exposures to the core European countries and to the overall European banking system. This means that if the crisis were to broaden further and intensify, this could put greater pressure on U.S. banks’ capital and liquidity buffers. Third, if the European situation were to deteriorate further, financial markets would likely become more stressed. This could tighten the availability of credit to U.S. households and businesses. It could also cause equity prices to fall and this would have a negative impact on Americans’ pension and 401(k) holdings. This tightening of financial conditions would damage the U.S. recovery and result in slower output growth and less job creation. At a time that U.S. unemployment is very high, this is a particularly unacceptable outcome. In the extreme, U.S. financial markets could become so impaired that this would dry up the flow of credit to households and businesses. III. U.S. dollar swaps In terms of what actions the official sector in the United States has taken or could take with regard to Europe, I wish to emphasize that any and all such actions pursued by the Federal Reserve are motivated by the mandates Congress has given to the Federal Reserve to promote price stability and maximum sustainable employment here in the United States. When the Federal Reserve System was created by Congress in 1913, it was given the responsibility of providing liquidity to the financial system in times of stress in order to shield the economy, to the extent possible, from the severe effects of financial instability on economic activity and jobs. While the economy and the markets have evolved substantially in the century since then, this basic principle continues to guide our efforts today. Central banks around the world have an important lender of last resort role. This role is important in order to protect the economy against financial instability. In today’s globally integrated economy, banks headquartered outside of the U.S. play an important role in providing credit and other financial services in the U.S. – providing a total of about $900 billion in overall financing within the U.S. For these banks to provide U.S. dollar loans, they have to maintain access to U.S. dollar funding. At a time when it is already hard enough for American families and firms to get the credit they need, we have a strong interest in making sure that these banks can continue to be active in the U.S. dollar markets. Banks headquartered outside the U.S., like banks that are headquartered here, make extensive use of dollars in their financing activities. In part, this is due to the fact that the U.S. dollar is the world’s number one currency – a status that brings with it many benefits for our country. It is in the U.S. national interest to make sure that non-U.S. banks that are judged to be sound by their central bank are able to access the U.S. dollar funding they need in order to be able to continue to finance their U.S. dollar assets. If the access to dollar funding were severely impaired, this could necessitate the abrupt, forced sales of dollar assets by these 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 banks, which could seriously disrupt U.S. markets and adversely affect U.S. businesses, consumers and jobs. One way we can help to support the availability of dollar funding is by engaging in currency swaps with other central banks. This has been used as a policy tool dating back to 1962. Recently, the Federal Open Market Committee decided to re-launch this tool, cooperating with five other central banks. Our intention is to create a credible backstop to – but not supplant – private markets. Banks with surplus dollars are more likely to lend to banks in need of dollars if they know that the borrowing bank will be able to obtain the dollars it needs to repay the loan, if necessary, from its central bank. This action is designed to support financial stability, avoid an unnecessary tightening in financial conditions and support economic activity and jobs in the United States. In particular, by reducing the cost of dollar funding via the swap lines last month, we reduced the pressure on banks in Europe to abruptly liquidate their U.S. dollar assets. Thus, this step will help to insulate U.S. markets from the pressures in Europe and support the availability of credit to U.S. households and businesses. European banks are particularly active in areas such as trade finance, project finance, energy lending and municipal finance – a sharp contraction of the financing they provide would be harmful for the U.S. economy as a whole including for U.S. exporters, firms working on infrastructure projects, the energy industry and hard-pressed state and local governments across the country. U.S. financial institutions currently do not face difficulty obtaining liquidity in short-term funding markets. However, were conditions to deteriorate, the Federal Reserve has a range of tools available to provide an effective liquidity backstop for such institutions and is prepared to use these tools as needed to support financial stability and to promote the extension of credit to U.S. households and businesses. In sum, I am hopeful that Europe can effectively address its current fiscal challenges. The Federal Reserve is actively and carefully assessing this situation and the potential impact on the U.S. economy. At this time, although I do not anticipate further efforts by the Federal Reserve to address the potential spillover effects of Europe on the United States, we will continue to monitor the situation closely. Thank you for your invitation to testify today, and I look forward to your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Deepak Mohanty: Economic and financial developments in Andaman and Nicobar Islands Speech by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at Andaman Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Port Blair, 22 December 2011. *      *      * The assistance provided by Dr P K Nayak and Shri Suraj S is acknowledged. I thank the Andaman Chamber of Commerce and Industry for inviting me to address this distinguished gathering. This picturesque Union Territory (UT) of Andaman & Nicobar Islands (ANI) in the Bay of Bengal covers 0.25 per cent of the national geographical area but accounts for only a fractional share of 0.03 per cent of national population. This explains why ANI has the lowest population density of 46 per square kilometre as against 382 at the all-India level. The high literacy rate and per capita income make ANI as one of the leading UTs in India in terms of socio-economic developments. Further, the lushness of its landscape with bio-diversity and attractive spots for eco-tourism make it a prime tourist attraction. Notwithstanding these social and geographical advantages, ANI faces several developmental challenges, especially in the aftermath of tsunami that wreaked large-scale damage in December 2004. Apart from natural and rich human resources, it is important to have a well-functioning financial system for sustainable economic development. In recognition of this, the Reserve Bank has stepped up its efforts in recent years to enhance the penetration of the formal financial sector and promote financial inclusion with a view to improving the well-being of our society. In this regards, the Reserve Bank has been undertaking special initiatives for extending the outreach of banking facilities in states and union territories. Against this backdrop, I propose to briefly outline the economic and financial structure of the UT of ANI as well as highlight various financial inclusion initiatives taken by the Reserve Bank. In conclusion, I shall flag some issues that need policy attention. Background Andaman & Nicobar Islands, a Union Territory of India since 1956, is an archipelago of 572 islands (306 islands and 266 rocks) and has a geographic area of 8,249 square kilometre. Of these islands, only 38 have human habitation. The UT is bestowed with abundant green vegetation and marine wealth besides huge potential for culture fisheries. It covers the Indian subcontinent’s richest rain-forest and houses indigenous tribes of Negroid and Mongoloid origins. The diversified mangroves have been included in the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) Global 200 list of the world’s highest priority biodiversity “hot spots”. Furthermore, these islands are included in the UNESCO-designated Biosphere Reserve/Zone (Indo-Malayan Bio-geographic Zone). According to the Forest Survey of India (2005), 87 per cent of the total geographical area of ANI is under forest cover and only about 50,000 hectare is available for cultivation and allied activities distributed among various islands. At present, the major crops being grown are paddy, coconut, arecanut, vegetables and fruits. ANI has an aggregate coastline of 1,912 kilometres, which is about one-fourth of the total coastline of India. The Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) around the islands encompasses around 0.6 million square kilometre which is 30 per cent of the EEZ of India. This provides a great opportunity for development of fisheries and other marine resources. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Social indicators As per the Census 2011, the total population of ANI registered a decennial growth of 6.7 per cent with a total population of about 3.80 lakh. ANI consists of three districts, viz., South Andaman district, North and Middle Andaman district and Nicobar district. Over 88 per cent population of the UT lives in the first two districts of which 37 per cent live in urban areas. Nicobar district does not have any urban area. While the sex ratio in North and Middle Andaman and South Andaman districts has increased to 925 and 874, respectively, in 2011 from 884 and 824 in 2001, the sex ratio of Nicobar district has decreased to 778 in 2011 from 857 in 2001. The population density in ANI has increased from 43 per square kilometre in 2001 to 46 per square kilometre in 2011. The literacy rate in the Islands was high at 86.3 per cent in 2011 as compared with 74.0 per cent at the all-India level (Table 1). Table 1 Andaman and Nicobar Islands: select socio-economic indicators  Macroeconomic structure The UT of ANI has significant potential for growth given its natural resource endowment. However, the comparative isolation of the islands from the mainland, scattered islands, difficult communication system, and heavy reliance on the government for supply of inputs and smaller base of local market are the major constraints in achieving rapid growth. In line with the national economy, during the last decade, the economy of ANI has undergone significant structural transformation. The dominance of primary sector has declined and the share of the tertiary sector has increased. The reduction in the share of primary sector could partly be attributable to reduction in cutting of forest timber as per the decision of the Supreme Court. Further, there was reduction of agricultural produce due to submerging of land in the wake of the tsunami. The increase in the share of services sector is attributable to enhanced construction activities due to rehabilitation measures and increased government expenditure in the post-tsunami period. The share of industrial sector, however, remained more or less stagnant. As per the available information from the Central Statistical Office (CSO), in 2009–10 the per capita income (NSDP) of ANI was over 62 per cent higher than all-India per capita income. However, during 2009–10, the growth in NSDP of ANI decelerated to 2.7 per cent mainly due to the sharp decline in the growth of the industrial and agriculture sectors. Notwithstanding this deceleration in growth, the average annual growth rate improved during the second half of the 2000s to almost 10 per cent from 6 per cent in the first half. The average growth of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 NSDP of ANI generally remained higher than that of the all-India NDP during the period 2005–10 (Chart 1).   Table 2 Sectoral net domestic product (at 2004–05 prices)  (in per cent)  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches The increase in the average growth of NSDP of ANI during 2005–10 was mainly driven by industrial and services sector. The industrial sector made a sharp recovery from a low growth rate of 1.5 per cent during the first half of the 2000s to 12.4 per cent in the second half of the decade. However, it is observed that the growth rate in this sector has remained highly volatile during the entire decade. The agriculture sector witnessed a turnaround from negative growth during 2000–05 to a growth rate of 3.7 per cent during 2005–10 (Table 2). Drivers of growth Keeping with the overall trend in the country, the economic activity in the UT is dominated by the tertiary sector and its share has been continuously rising. The share of the primary sector has been declining and the share of the secondary sector in NSDP is static at around 3 per cent. There is hardly any manufacturing activity in the UT which is mostly concentrated in wood processing, and with the present restrictions on the exploitation of forests has led this activity to stagnate. Within the tertiary sector, construction activities, transport, storage and communication and public administration have been the major drivers of growth.  Agriculture The average rainfall in the islands is very high and spread over eight months during  April–November each year which produces a humid tropical climate. The agro-climatic condition in these islands is suitable for cultivation of plantation crops like coconut, arecanut, fruits like banana, mango, pineapple, guava, jackfruit and spice like clove, nutmeg and pepper. The soil has low water retention capacity. Out of a total reported geographical area of 8,24,900 hectares in 2009–10, the total cropped area in the Islands stood at 16,535 hectares (Table 3). Table 3 Land utilisation pattern during 2009–10   Among the major crops, while the production of paddy has increased, the yield has gone down. The production of coconut, which covers maximum area under production, remained stagnant. Performances of other plantation crops were mixed. According to Agriculture Census 2005–06, the number of operational holdings as well as area have increased primarily for the holding size-class of less than 1 hectare and to a lesser 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 extent for holding size 1 to 2 hectares. Mainly institutional land falls in the 10 plus holding class. The average size of operational holdings has also decreased from 2 hectare in  2000–01 to 1.88 hectare in 2005–06 which indicate the increasing fragmentation of land holdings in the UT (Table 4). Table 4 Number, area and size of operational holdings in ANI   Industry  The absence of a sizeable local market for manufactured goods and the need to bring much of the raw materials from the mainland are considered the main impediments in the development of industries. Therefore, large and medium scale industrial activity is absent in ANI. The industrial base of ANI consists mainly of small and tiny industries. The industries in the region are mainly timber and agro-based. The recent years have seen a decline in industrial output owing to closure of wood-based industrial units. There are 1,961 registered small-scale industrial (SSI) units in the Union Territory as at end-March 2010 (Table 5). 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Table 5 Industrial scenario of Andaman and Nicobar Islands   Tourism  The Andaman & Nicobar Islands have an unique combination of sprawling beaches, rising hinterland and dense equatorial forests. More than 50 per cent of the forest area is Tribal Reserves, National Parks and Wildlife sanctuaries. Any development activity in the islands including tourism has to be sensitive to ecological fragility. The key challenge facing the growth of tourism in ANI is connectivity and the commensurate infrastructure to ensure better accessibility. In this context, there is considerable scope for public-private partnership in sustainable development of tourism in the region. In recent years, the private sector has increased its role in providing transport services, theatres, restaurants and shops. The number of units as well as employment provided by the private sector has increased over time. This trend needs to be reinforced.  Infrastructure Given the geographical and topographical peculiarities of these islands, including separation by sea over great distances, there is no single power-grid for all the electrified islands but several diesel generator sets cater independently to the power requirements of an area/island. At present, ANI faces significant power shortage. Due to a steady rise in population the demand for inter-island ferrying of goods and movement of people has become important. Lack of adequate transport facilities is a serious bottleneck in the economic development of the islands. Further opening up of air traffic could give a boost to trade and tourism.  Fiscal scenario  As Andaman and Nicobar Islands is a Union Territory (UT) without legislature, all allocations for receipts and expenditure are made from the Union Budget. The UT’s primary source of revenue emanates from non-tax receipts, which constitutes more than 80 per cent of revenue receipts. Non-tax revenues have been steadily increasing in recent years. On an average, total 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 revenue receipts to GSDP ratio was around 4.7 per cent during 2007–12. The tax to GSDP ratio in ANI was less than 1 per cent which was far below the all-India average of 5 per cent for all states. Revenue expenditure to GSDP ratio increased mainly on account of the Sixth Pay Commission award. However, capital outlay to GSDP ratio has declined (Table 6).  Table 6 Receipts and expenditure   Financial developments  It is important to have a well-functioning financial system for sustainable economic development. While the Reserve Bank has been actively engaged in the development of the financial sector, it has stepped up its efforts in recent years to enhance the penetration of the formal financial sector and promote financial inclusion with a view to improving the well-being of our society. Let me first broadly outline the financial fabric of ANI. There was a gradual improvement of banking penetration in ANI in recent years. This is evident from the fact that the average population per bank branch improved to11,000 at end-June 2010 from 13,000 at end-June 2002. The banking network is largely dominated to public sector banks.  
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches The recent trend in the growth rate of deposits in ANI was lower than the corresponding growth rate recorded at all-India level. The credit deposit (C-D) ratio in ANI at 37.6 per cent at end-December 2010 was significantly lower than the ratio of 76.7 per cent at the all-India level (Chart 2 and Table 7).  Table 7 C-D ratio by population group  As at end-March 2010, almost 58.3 per cent of total priority sector advances were absorbed by small enterprises. Agriculture accounted for only 8.3 per cent of total priority sector advances during the same period. The occupational credit structure is dominated by personal loans, followed by advances to trade and industry (Chart 3).  Chart 3 Occupational credit   Financial inclusion In the context of financial inclusion initiative taken by the Reserve Bank, the banks are being sensitised to pursue the inclusive drive. It may be observed that the progress of banking in terms of the branch expansion was stagnant during the period 2007 to 2010 though there was an improvement in terms of deposits and credit expansion. Due to the recent initiatives 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 taken by the Reserve Bank, the number of branches has increased from 37 in 2010 to 42 in 2011 (Chart 4).   Source: BSR, RBI. Further, in pursuance of the overall financial inclusion strategy, a total of 47 villages with population over 1,000 were identified in the three districts of ANI. Of these, 17 villages have been identified in South Andaman, 21 in North and Middle Andaman and 9 in Nicobar. A total of 37,370 no-frill accounts have been opened up to end-June 2011 in ANI. As at end-March 2010, the total number of Kisan Credit Card (KCC) issued in ANI was 7,000 and the amount of loan sanctioned under the scheme was 158 crore. As at end-June 2011 a total of 9.5 crore was disbursed to 1260 SHGs.  Financial inclusion measures Financial inclusion is important for bringing the poor and under-privileged sections of the society within the banking fold and thereby generating and sustaining equitable growth. Let me now turn to the various measures initiated by the Reserve Bank for promoting financial inclusion. First, the Reserve Bank for long has instituted a mechanism called “priority sector lending” through which credit is channelised to certain preferred sectors, which, inter alia, include small-scale industry, small businesses and agriculture. In the post-reform period, the priority sector group has been expanded to include advances to retail trade, educational loans, micro-finance and low-cost housing. This has helped in furthering the cause of financial inclusion. Second, the Union Finance Minister announced in the Budget 2010–11 that every village in the country with over 2000 population must have access to banking services by March 2012. In order to operationalise this process, commercial banks have prepared financial inclusion plans which have been submitted to the Reserve Bank. As brick-and-mortar branches will not be viable in very small centres, the approach is to meet this challenge through the business correspondent (BC) model and by leveraging communication technology. Under this model, 
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches banks appoint agents who provide basic banking services at the door-step of a client on behalf of the bank. Third, the Reserve Bank has asked banks to open no-frills accounts. These accounts have no or very low minimum balance requirement and have provisions for small loans by way of overdrafts. This is a very convenient account for small depositors, especially in rural areas.  Fourth, a major impediment for a common person to open bank account is the “Know Your Customer” (KYC) norm. The norm has been relaxed for small accounts, viz., deposits up to 50,000 and credit up to 1 lakh. A simple introduction by an existing account-holder in a bank should be adequate to open an account. In this regard, Aadhar, the Unique Identification Number (UID) Project of the Central Government, which aims at providing a unique ID number for everyone in the country, will help the poor to establish their identity to meet the banks’ KYC norms. Fifth, farmers can get credit from banks conveniently through Kisan Credit Cards (KCCs) and General Purpose Credit Cards (GCCs).  Sixth, financial literacy becomes critically important. While several banking facilities are available, a common person may not be aware of them. Hence, the Reserve Bank has initiated a “Project Financial Literacy” with the objective of disseminating information regarding the central bank and general banking concepts to various target groups. Our “Financial Education” website link offers basics of banking, finance and central banking for children of all ages. Our website is also available in 13 languages.  Finally, this is also a learning process for the Reserve Bank. We recognise that being responsible for banking, we must be sensitive to the needs of a common person. Accordingly, our Governor, Dr. Subbarao initiated the outreach programme as a part of our Platinum Jubilee celebrations. Under the outreach programme, the top management of the Reserve Bank visits at least one village in every state and union territory with state government officials and commercial banks to give focused attention on financial inclusion. This has been highly enriching experience for us to understand the ground realities. Accordingly, we have decided to continue these programmes.  Policy challenges First, the developmental activities pursued so far have been propelled by direct involvement of government in all areas of economic activities. However, there is a need for broad-based economic strategy with greater involvement of the private sector.  Second, the limited size of the local market is a major constraint to growth. The UT should focus on a outward-looking policy of exports to the mainland in areas in which it has a natural advantage such as marine products, horticulture and floriculture.  Third, the islands have an exclusive economic zone (EEZ) which is about 30 per cent of the country’s EEZ and endowed with unique marine habitat and coral diversity. However, this resource is not adequately tapped. There is a need to develop fishery for export to the mainland. This will not only boost the income of the UT but also significantly reduce transport cost as currently ships ferrying goods to the islands return empty to the mainland.  Fourth, there is a need for renewed thrust on agriculture. Horticulture, floriculture, plantation crops, medicinal plants and dye plants offer a lot of opportunities for the potential investors.  Fifth, given the high level of literacy and strategic location there is strong potential for development of information technology.  Sixth, tourism potential of the islands can be promoted through high-value low-volume eco-tourism. This will need greater investment in tourism infrastructure. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 Seventh, the Great Nicobar Island is located centrally between Singapore/Colombo and just north of the sea traffic route to South East Asia and beyond. This is an extremely busy route and substantial part of the world’s commercial traffic flows through this area. Development of South Eastern tip of Nicobar as a trans-shipment port for container handling, bunkering and refuelling of international/national ships passing through this route has great economic and strategic potential.  Eighth, with the step-up in economic activity, the investment demand can be enhanced. The banks need to be more proactive in supporting private investment and enterprise. This will help in improving the current low level of C-D ratio through greater penetration of banking.  Conclusion The comparative isolation of the Andaman and Nicobar islands from the mainland, scattered landscape, difficult communication system, heavy reliance on government departments for supply of inputs and smaller base of local market are the main impediments to the rapid growth of the economy. However, the UT of ANI has immense potential for achieving higher growth aided mainly by extensive marine resources, high literacy rate, conducive work environment and strategic location. In achieving this goal, government efforts need to be supplemented by private initiatives where the banking sector has an important role to play. This will help in further improving the well-being of masses in the islands. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Anand Sinha: Financial reporting in the context of financial stability – a regulator’s view on some accounting issues Address by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at an event organized by Muscat Chapter of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), Muscat, Sultanate of Oman, 21 December 2011. *      *      * Inputs provided by P R Ravi Mohan and Amarvir Saran Das are gratefully acknowledged. 1. Dr. Ashraf Nabhan Al Nabhani, Dean, College of Banking and Financial Studies, Mr. Kishore Rabi, Chairman, ICAI Muscat Chapter and other delegates. It gives me great pleasure to address this august gathering organised by the Muscat Chapter of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI). I am given to understand that the Muscat Chapter, the 19th overseas chapter of the ICAI is amongst the most active chapters of the ICAI and has been engaging in capacity building for Omani accountants and imparting professional education in the Sultanate. A key initiative is its tie up with the College of Banking and Financial Studies (CBFS) in assisting them with their accounting curriculum. This Chapter’s engagement with the College of Banking and Financial Studies is just one of the many ways in which the banking community and regulators can benefit from the technical knowledge base of the accounting community. 2. The history of the Indian accounting profession can be traced back to the enactment of the Companies Act in 1857 that introduced for the first time the concept of preparing balance sheet on a voluntary basis by companies. We have come a long way since then and the ICAI, established in 1949 by an act of Parliament, is today the world’s second largest professional accounting body after the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), with over 180,000 members. Over the six decades of its existence, it has played a vital role in nation building through its services. 3. In line with its motto of “Ya Aeshu Suptaeshu Jagruti” (a person who is awake amongst those that sleep) and its emblem of the Garuda, the “vahana” of Lord Vishnu, the Institute is playing a key role in keeping a watchful eye on financial statements, ensuring that they represent a true and fair view of the state of affairs. 4. As regulators and supervisors of India’s banking system, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) places a significant amount of reliance on inputs provided to us by your profession through the statutory audit and long form audit reports of banks as well as our annual interactions with the statutory auditors of commercial banks. We also have periodic interactions with senior members of the Institute at various fora and take a keen interest in the latest developments in this field.  5. RBI has closely worked with the Institute on accounting issues in the banking sector. In October 2001, the RBI set up a Working Group under the Chairmanship of Shri N D Gupta the then President of the Institute to identify gaps in compliance with accounting standards issued by ICAI and also recommend steps to eliminate such gaps. Based on the recommendations of the committee, landmark guidelines on compliance with accounting standards were issued to banks in March 2003 to ensure strict compliance with accounting standards and avoid qualifications in financial statements.  6. RBI had formed a committee in 2000 to study the observance of international standards and codes in India in various individual areas of the overall financial system. With respect to Indian accounting and auditing standards, it was found that there were several gaps when compared to the international standards and recommendations were made to reduce this gap. I am happy to note that the ICAI has since issued many accounting standards, which have substantially reduced this gap. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 7. While on the subject of RBI’s insistence on adherence with international best practices and our ongoing benchmarking against these standards, I would like to draw your attention to the Report on Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC), a joint initiative between the IMF and World Bank in 2004 which among others, reviewed the strengths and weaknesses of the corporate accounting and auditing practices in India. Some of the major recommendations were to bridge the gaps between International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRSs) and Indian accounting standards, strengthening the monitoring and enforcement mechanism, introducing practices to ensure compliance with code of ethics by auditors of public interest entities and taking steps for improving professional education and training arrangements.  8. India also participated in the Financial Sector Self Assessment Programme (FSAP), a joint initiative of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank that attempts to assess the stability and resilience of financial systems in member countries. Based on India’s experience in the FSAP and subsequent self-assessments, the Government of India, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, constituted the Committee on Financial Sector Assessment (CFSA) to undertake a comprehensive self assessment of India’s financial sector, the report of which was submitted in 2009. 9. The CFSA made an assessment of Indian accounting and auditing standards and came up with some key recommendations that proved critical for the Institute. The report, inter-alia, suggested convergence with IFRS at the earliest and creating awareness among auditors and others involved in the process to ensure that systems and procedures are in place to comply with the IFRSs. Another important recommendation is that India should contribute significantly in the agenda setting of the IASB and its technical output. The challenge before the Institute is to take this up in right earnest by identifying persons with requisite competence to participate in global forums, the benefits of which will flow to the profession at large.  Accounting issues in the context of the financial crisis 10. The global financial crisis and the consequences thereof exposed some weaknesses in the accounting and auditing aspects. During the course of my presentation here I would like to place before you some issues relating to financial reporting in the context of financial stability. 11. There was widespread criticism that certain accounting practices either contributed to or at the very least, exacerbated the severity of the crisis, in view of its failure to deal with illiquid markets and distressed sales. The G20 Working Group on “Enhancing Sound Regulation and Strengthening Transparency”, in which I had an occasion to work actively, recommended that accounting standard setters should strengthen accounting recognition of loan loss provisions by considering alternative approaches for recognizing and measuring loan losses that incorporate a broader range of available credit information. Accounting standards setters and prudential supervisors were advised to work together to identify solutions that are consistent with the complementary objectives of promoting the stability of the financial sector and of providing transparency of economic results in financial reports. 12. G20 report also recommended that the IASB should enhance its efforts to facilitate the global convergence towards a single set of high-quality accounting standards and also opined that accounting standard setters should accelerate efforts to reduce the complexity of accounting standards for financial instruments and enhance presentation standards. These recommendations together with the recognition within the accounting and audit profession that there were certain drawbacks in the current standards has necessitated large scale revision of various standards especially those relating to financial instruments and Fair Value Accounting. During the global financial crisis, the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and the US Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) established a Financial Crisis Advisory Group comprising senior leaders with broad international experience to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 address accounting issues emerging from the global crisis. The key issues identified by the FCAG involved:   the difficulty of applying fair value (“mark to-market”) accounting in illiquid markets;   the delayed recognition of losses associated with loans, structured credit products, and other financial instruments by banks, insurance companies and other financial institutions;  issues surrounding the broad range of off-balance sheet financing structures, especially in the US; and    the extraordinary complexity of accounting standards for financial instruments, including multiple approaches to recognizing asset impairment. Some of these weaknesses also highlighted areas in which IFRS and US generally accepted accounting principles (US GAAP) diverged.  13. While these aspects were identified by accounting professionals, regulators expressed concerns on systemic risk arising out of procyclicality in accounting standards. Procyclicality in policy making refers to financial developments and policies that add momentum to the economic cycle and have an amplifying effect on economic fluctuations. The procyclicality embodied in capital regulation and accounting standards was among the identified causes underlying the global financial crisis. The in-built procyclicality amplified business cycles, affecting both the degree of credit expansion in benign conditions and the degree of credit contraction in the downturn. 14. The requirement to use fair value accounting for assets and liabilities in illiquid markets has serious disadvantages from the point of view of regulators, and of systemic financial risk. A mark-to-market approach i.e. fair value accounting contributes to excessive leverage during boom periods and leads to excessive write-downs in busts. Under such accounting irrational exuberance in asset prices can feed through to high published profits and perhaps bonuses, encouraging more irrational exuberance in a self-reinforcing fashion: when markets turn down, it can equally drive irrational despair. If all market participants attempt simultaneously to liquidate positions, markets which were previously reasonably liquid will also become illiquid, and realisable values may, for all banks, be significantly lower than the published accounts suggested.  15. Volatility in financial statements is also a concern for the regulator. Fair value accounting introduces volatility into financial statements through the following channels:  Volatility on account of changes in underlying economic parameters. For instance if interest rates increase, the fair value of bonds reduces and vice versa.  Volatility produced due to measurement errors and/ or changing views regarding the economic prospects through the business cycle. Fair value measures generally represent the present value of a stream of expected cash flows. Very often the determination of expected cash flows involves statistical techniques which may have some amount of estimation errors as well as other errors.  Volatility arising on account of using a mixed measurement model i.e. one that uses fair value for some categories of assets and liabilities and amortised cost for others thereby reducing the netting effects that a full fair valuation of assets and liabilities would produce. 16. Another area which has received focus is the delayed recognition of impaired assets. Accounting standards today rely more on an “incurred loss” model to recognise losses where an event such as non-payment of dues for 90 days triggers the provisioning. Consequently, there is an overstatement of interest income in the early life of loan. When a series of defaults during a downturn trigger provisioning requirements, there is no stock of provisions available to absorb credit losses. These losses directly impact the income 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches statement of the bank and constrain further bank lending, thus exacerbating the procyclicality. This cycle-neutral approach to provisioning failed to account for the excessive deterioration in loan portfolio associated with excessive credit growth. There is broad international agreement on the need to have provisioning based instead on an “expected loss” basis where life time losses are recognised early, i.e. provisions are increased in good times for the possibility that the environment may deteriorate in future. However, the implementation of such a model has its own difficulties with regard to the estimation of expected losses and the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and the US Federal Accounting Standards Board (FASB) are still engaged in deliberations on the modalities of implementing such a model. 17. The IASB has issued exposure drafts with an expected loss model which attempts to mitigate these shortcomings by recognizing losses and making provisions thereof earlier during the life of the loan. However, presently, IASB and FASB’s deliberations revolve around a three bucket approach to capture the pattern of deterioration in credit quality. Under this model, loans are classified into three categories depending upon the possibility of expected losses. Loans, where there are no events with a direct relation to possible future defaults, are placed in the first bucket. The second and third buckets are used for loans affected by events that have a relationship to possible future defaults such as a drop in housing prices i.e. a trigger event to which the default possibility of a loan/ portfolio of loans is sensitive to has occurred. In the second bucket, expected credit losses are not identifiable for individual loans whereas in the third bucket expected credit losses are individually identifiable. The provisioning requirements also differ according to the bucket. Whereas entities are expected to provide expected life time losses for the second and third buckets the proposed approach for the first bucket is to make provision for 12 month of expected losses though this is yet to be agreed upon. Since there is no direct relationship to possible future defaults, lifetime expected losses are not required to be recognised for loans placed in the first bucket. Further, the criteria and guidelines for transfer between categories are still at the discussion stage. 18. Let me dwell upon some of the proactive measures initiated by RBI to mitigate the effect of procylicality in the Indian context. Recognising the procylicality caused by provisioning norms, the RBI has tried to build buffers through provisioning requirements.  Firstly, banks are required to maintain provisions on assets that are classified as standard and are not showing signs of impairment. Sector specific provisions requiring banks to provide more for standard assets in certain sensitive sectors have also been prescribed.  Secondly, banks are required to classify accounts as NPA where there are inherent weaknesses observed in the account even if there are few credits recorded before balance sheet date to avoid NPA classification. Banks are also required to put in place appropriate internal systems to eliminate the tendency to delay or postpone the identification of NPAs, especially in respect of high value accounts.  Thirdly, in 2009, observing the trend in profits being made by banks, the Provisioning Coverage Ratio (PCR) requirement for banks was introduced to address apprehensions about asset quality due to exuberant lending during the boom phase. Banks were required to build up a PCR of 70% of gross NPAs by September 2010. PCR was intended to be an interim measure and it was hoped that it would be replaced by a forward-looking counter-cyclical provisioning methodology being developed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and IASB. Since this is taking time, RBI is working on a methodology similar to Spanish dynamic provisioning framework as an interim measure.  19. As regards PCR, it was decided to freeze the PCR with reference to the gross NPA position in banks as on September 30, 2010, since in the absence of a calibrated methodology it would be difficult to allow banks to use the countercyclical provisions built up 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 under PCR freely and there were certain design issues too,. The buffer (surplus of provisions over specific provisions) will be allowed to be used by banks for making specific provisions for NPAs during periods of system wide downturn, with the prior approval of RBI. 20. The financial crisis also led to heavy criticism of accounting rules that permitted certain structured/ special purpose entities and exposure to remain off-balance sheet. A key concern with such instruments and vehicles is that they have a tendency to veil the risks off-balance sheet and a robust accounting framework that provides for the recognition and disclosure of these risks is a prerequisite to their introduction. The IASB has tried to rectify the situation by introducing IFRS 10 on Consolidated Financial Statements while the FASB has also worked towards toughening off-balance sheet accounting rules.  21. In India, the RBI has always followed a cautious and gradualist approach towards complex exotic financial products and has taken steps to reduce and contain the regulatory arbitrage between the banking and the shadow banking sectors (mainly the Non Banking Financial Companies i.e. NBFCs) by considerably upgrading the prudential rules for NBFCs. 22. Overall accounting for financial instruments had become highly complex and rules based in the period leading up to the crisis and IASB’s project to replace IAS 39 with IFRS 9 is a welcome initiative. However, delays in finalising proposals relating to impairment and hedge accounting coupled with recent proposals to reopen classification and measurement of financial assets are a cause of concern. IASB’s classification requirements for assets revolve around the business model approach whereas FASB’s approach is based more on the characteristics of the instrument. Further, FASB’s approach may also entail more items in the balance sheet being carried at fair value. Implementation of IFRS in India 23. The convergence to IFRS in India is a work-in-progress and I would like to dwell upon the implementation issues and challenges with particular reference to the Indian banking system. 24. As part of the G20’s efforts to evolve a single set of global high quality standards, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA), Government of India released a roadmap that provided for a gradual convergence to IFRS in a phased manner commencing from April 1, 2011. In terms of the road map, commercial banks in India are required to converge with IFRS with effect from accounting periods beginning April 1, 2013. While the MCA placed on its website thirty five IFRS converged Indian Accounting Standards (Ind AS) in 2011, it stated that the standards will be implemented after various issues including taxation are resolved.  25. In order to address the implementation issues and facilitate formulation of operational guidelines to facilitate the IFRS convergence for the Indian banking system the RBI has formed a Working Group. Specific issues relating to (i) classification and measurement of financial assets, (ii) classification and measurement of financial liabilities and hedge accounting, (iii) amortised cost and impairment, (iv)fair value measurement, (v) presentation, disclosure and balance sheet formats and (vi) derecognition, consolidation and residuary issues are being dealt with by the Working Group.  26. With respect to the financial sector in India, there are special issues and challenges in view of the large scale revision of standards pertaining to financial instruments (IAS 39) which are of central importance to the banking system. IASB had indicated that the period 2009 to 2011 will be kept as a stable platform by them to facilitate convergence by many countries during this period. However, the global financial turmoil and the consequences thereof in the accounting scenario necessitated large scale revision of various standards especially those relating to financial instruments and fair value accounting.  27. As India attempts to transition to IFRS, the biggest challenge to the banking sector which is of equal concern to us as regulators, is the lack of clarity and uncertainty regarding 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches the finalisation of IFRS 9: Financial Instruments (scheduled to replace IAS 39) and its convergence with US GAAP. One of the intentions behind scheduling banks for a later convergence was to avoid having them first apply IAS 39 and immediately transition thereafter to its replacement viz. IFRS 9. Countries like Canada which have recently converged to IFRS found it easier on account of pre-existing standards being fairly well aligned with IAS 39, which is not the case in India. With the delay and uncertainty in finalisation of IFRS 9, the convergence process has become almost equal to chasing a fast moving target. 28. The finalisation of impairment provisions of IFRS 9 at an early date is a critical issue which needs to be addressed by the IASB and FASB. Our apprehensions are that the current proposals contained in the exposure draft or the three bucket model for provisioning are difficult to implement and operationalise. Further, in countries like India, there may not be enough data available to apply the highly quantitative and statistical techniques to implement a robust expected loss model to recognise impairment losses. Therefore, the Working Group has suggested through its comment letter to the IASB, the need for a practical expedient that allows for a simpler rule based model specified by the regulator at least in the initial years. We hope that the IASB will consider this while finalising the requirements on impairment. 29. In a country like India, where financial markets are still developing and are not as deep and liquid as in developed countries there are specific concerns regarding the implementation of fair value accounting in the absence of quoted prices and illiquid markets for several instruments. Consequently, the implementation of fair value accounting would necessitate a dependence on valuation techniques using unobservable inputs which would also bring in a fair share of estimation errors. 30. There are also some major technical issues arising for Indian banks in the course of convergence. Differences between the IFRS and current regulatory guidelines on classification and measurement of financial assets, focus in the standard on the business model followed by banks and the challenges for management in this area, lack of adequate number of skilled staff and modifications to IT systems and processes are some of the other challenges that may need to be tackled in due course. 31. Apart from being preparers of financial statements, banks are also significant users of financial statements and base their lending and investment decisions on the financial statements of their customers. This aspect makes skill building all the more important for Indian banks as IFRS implementation will not only impact their accounts and finance teams but will pervade to their credit and investment analysts and decision makers. The RBI has been proactive in facilitating skill building by conducting seminars and training programmes as well as providing faculty support to some institutions. I am glad to learn that the ICAI too has incorporated IFRS in its curriculum for students and has introduced a certificate course on IFRS for its members. There is also scope for the RBI, banking system and the ICAI to work together to build skills in this area. 32. Let me conclude by stating that there are several areas of common interest between regulators, bankers and accountants and frequent interaction and interface between these groups would be of mutual benefit to all. I thank you for this opportunity to share a regulator’s perspective on some current accounting issues. References  1. Report of the Financial Crisis Advisory Group(2009)  2. Report of the Committee on Financial Sector Assessment (2009)  3. Fair Values and Financial Statement Volatility, Ms. Mary E Barth (2004)  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Ignazio Visco: Conference in memory of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa Introductory remarks of Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Bank of Italy conference in honour of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, Rome, 16 December 2011. *      *      * I am very grateful to all of you for being here today for this conference in memory of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa. I am glad that we have been able to bring together so many of his colleagues and friends who down through the years had the fortune to appreciate his intellectual and human qualities. And I am especially glad that we are gathering here at the Bank of Italy, the institution where he spent a good part of his professional life and the environment in which he first built an international reputation. An institution that, like the others he worked in, he helped to forge and to which he always remained deeply attached. For many of us Tommaso was more than a colleague; he was also a friend and a mentor. You could always count on his advice, his ability to anticipate and find concrete solutions to problems. Conversation with him was always enlightening; you benefited from having your ideas challenged, you sharpened your reasoning, you learned, from his example, how to deliver results. In the year since his untimely death I have often missed his wisdom and acumen, his lucid vision of the road ahead, and I have often found myself trying to guess what his advice would have been at a time when we face so many difficult challenges in Italy, his native country, and Europe, the ideal to which he devoted much of his life. Tommaso was devoted to his country and was always conscious of its great potential. But his innate optimism did not blind him to its serious weaknesses or to the troubles that lay ahead. He considered Italy a country suffering from a grave illness: twenty-five years of healthy growth after the Second World War had been followed by two decades of growth achieved with “toxic stimuli”: “a combination of inflation and currency devaluation, deficit-financed public expenditure, accumulation of debt and impoverishment of capital”.1 The result was a country at once heavily indebted and under-capitalized, growing too slowly, where social inequalities were bound to increase. With his writings, speeches and actions, as Minister for the Economy he sought to instil a sense of urgency in an often hostile political environment: it was vital to act immediately and simultaneously for stability, growth and social equity. A sense of urgency, I must say, much vindicated by recent events.  The underlying problem, in his view, was that Italy had lost the ambition to excel. As he put it so vividly, “Italy is like a cyclist who is capable of extraordinary sprints to catch up with the group, but incapable of taking the lead or breaking away. It seems that only the anguish of lagging behind and the nightmare of being excluded enable us to summon up the energy and the will to do our best.”2  Well, once again we are at a point where it is imperative to demonstrate our determination to react to an emergency; but it is also time to take, as Tommaso used to say, a longer-term view of the problems of the Italian economy and to tackle the structural impediments to sustained growth. With regard to Europe too, in his last years Tommaso saw his fears materialize, with alarm and some bitterness. Although he is rightly considered one of the architects of the euro, he sensed from the very start that the single currency was an unfinished project. He was among the first to warn of the dangers of a “currency without a State”. He was deeply dissatisfied                                                  1 T. Padoa-Schioppa (2007), “Intervento del Ministro dell’Economia e delle Finanze all’Assemblea dell’Associazione Bancaria Italiana”. 2 Corriere della Sera, 16 May 2005. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches with the political inertia that had followed the introduction of the single currency. He clearly perceived the risks posed by inadequate governance in the macroeconomic field, in financial regulation and supervision, and by a union that “failed to satisfy, even for the functions that have been attributed to it, the cardinal principles of western constitutionalism (balance of powers; the democratic vote; the majority principle)”.3 He pleaded unflaggingly for a closer political Union.  Tommaso was not an academic economist. He had a special gift for using insights from theoretical economics to challenge received ideas and established practices. At the same time, he challenged academic economists to go beyond simplistic behavioural assumptions and to take the role of institutions fully into account. Institutions and their design indeed constituted a leitmotif in his thinking, whether in connection with central banking, market infrastructures, European integration or global monetary arrangements. He always stressed the need to clearly identify the nature and scope of the public good that needed to be provided in order to design the most suitable set of rules and institutional framework case by case. At the same time, he had a dynamic view of issues and institutions: only by looking at underlying economic trends could one predict which new demands would drive the evolution of institutions in the future.  Thus, for example, a fundamental insight of his – from early on in his career as an economist and, let me add, as a political scientist – was that growing economic and financial integration and interdependence, both in Europe and at the global level, would inevitably require a profound rethinking not only of how to allocate policy-making responsibilities but of the very concept of national sovereignty. He certainly did not underestimate the difficulty of this process or the resistance it would meet. Like Jean Monnet, Tommaso was fond of quoting the words of the Swiss philosopher Henri-Frédéric Amiel: “Experience starts over with every individual. Only institutions become wiser, as they accumulate the collective experience.” We can only add that institutions lucky enough to have had public servants as clear-minded and far-sighted as Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa really have had a chance to become wiser.  To conclude, Tommaso’s example is a constant source of inspiration, a model of the kind described in one of his favourite quotes from Machiavelli: “A wise man ought always to follow the paths beaten by great men, and to imitate those who have been supreme, so that if his ability does not equal theirs, at least it will savour of it. Let him act like the clever archers who, designing to hit the mark which yet appears too far distant, and knowing the limits to which the strength of their bow attains, take aim much higher than the mark, not to reach by their strength or arrow to so great a height, but to be able with the aid of so high an aim to hit the mark they wish to reach.” [Machiavelli, The Prince, translated by W. K. Marriott (1908), Chapter 6] We have decided to commemorate Tommaso by taking his ideas as a starting point to discuss some of the burning economic issues of today’s real world, an approach, I believe, he would have appreciated. We have prepared four background notes, one for each session of the conference, to summarize his thoughts and legacy on each of the four themes that were at the centre of his work: monetary policy and payment systems, financial system regulation and supervision, the process of European integration, and the reform of the international monetary system. I think that the notes give ample testimony of the depth and vitality of his contribution.                                                  3 Corriere della Sera, 3 May 1998. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Before the panel discussions, however, we will have the pleasure of being addressed by Italy’s Prime Minister, Professor Mario Monti, whom I thank warmly for confirming his acceptance of our invitation in spite of his many pressing engagements.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Christian Noyer: “The Brussels agreement is sound” – interview with  Le Télégramme Interview with Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, in Le Télégramme, published on 15 December 2011. *      *      * Does the Brussels agreement protect the euro area over the long term?  I believe it is a sound agreement. It includes rules of governance that had been missing up until now. Of course, we had the Stability and Growth Pact, but it was of an inadequate legal standard, and it was not complied with as it should have been. Setting up clear rules of governance that are sound in substance and that will be integrated into the constitutions and organic laws of Member States is a good solution that should provide us with lasting protection. What would be the consequences of France losing its triple-A rating?  I do not know what rating agencies will do. What I see is that these agencies have managed, through their criticisms, to weaken the positive sentiment that prevailed on markets after the Brussels summit. In addition, downgrading France’s credit rating does not seem justified when considering economic fundamentals. Otherwise agencies should start by downgrading the United Kingdom which has larger deficits, the same level of debt, more inflation and a lower growth rate than us as well as slumping credit. What is the legitimacy of these rating agencies? Agencies have become totally incomprehensible and irrational. They make threats, even though Member States have taken strong and positive decisions. Rating agencies behave as if nothing had happened. It may seem that agencies are no longer a useful guide for investors. Would you say that their judgments are based on political criteria? Indeed, in the arguments they develop, there are more political arguments than economic ones. Credit agencies have downgraded the ratings of three large French banks. Are our banks undercapitalised? No, they are very well capitalised, in particular compared to their European and US counterparts. The importance of this downgrade should not be overstated especially since rating agencies have recently downgraded most large banks in developed countries. There is no doubt that the capital buffers of our banks are largely adequate in relation to levels in the global banking system. It is true that we are asking them to enhance their soundness in order to meet the new regulatory requirements that have been agreed at the European and global level. Banks are doing this through their own resources and needless to say without State aid. That is why I have no concerns about the French banking system.  Should banks’ customers, companies and individuals, fear a credit crunch?  No, and the figures bear it out. French banks’ lending activities remain very robust: up 8% for mortgage lending, up 5.6% for corporate lending and up 5.1% for lending to SMEs. It is precisely their retail banking business that makes them sound and profitable. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Is France condemned to undergo a period of prolonged austerity?  France must be extremely rigorous in the management of its public finances. A balanced budget must rapidly be restored, which presupposes in particular a structural reduction in government spending. Like many other countries, we have been living above our means for too many years. We need to stop accumulating debt. Growth will return if confidence does. And to reinstate confidence, we must guarantee that our public finances will be consolidated.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Yaseen Anwar: Role of financial institutions and capital markets in Pakistan’s economy Speech by Mr Yaseen Anwar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the PAF Air War College, Karachi, 21 December 2011. *      *      * The Commandant PAF Air War College, Members of the Faculty and the Future Leaders of the Armed Forces I am delighted to be invited by the PAF Air War College which is one of our premier institutions of the armed forces of Pakistan, to share my views on the Role of Financial Institutions and Capital Markets in the Pakistan Economy. The importance of Financial Institutions (FIs) cannot be overemphasized. FIs perform the vital function of intermediation between providers of investable funds (depositors, securities holders etc) and the users of such funds (namely businesses). No economy can progress unless its financial sector facilitates its business activity consistently, and in the case of a developing country like Pakistan, these FIs act as a necessary catalyst for economic growth as well. The State Bank of Pakistan, as the central bank of a developing country, has played two very critical roles with respect to the financial sector. Firstly it ensures soundness of banks and DFIs through prudential oversight with a view to maintain financial stability; secondly it pursues a developmental objective under which it facilitates financial markets developments and enhancement of access to finance. Over the years much has been accomplished, yet a lot more is yet to be achieved. The banking system, which constitutes 88 percent share of the total financial sector, is comprised of 34 commercial banks and 4 specialized banks. The share of non-bank financial institutions is approximately 12 percent, and includes leasing companies, Mudarabas, insurance companies, investment banks, housing finance companies, venture capital companies, and mutual funds. The Banking sector of an economy is generally the most significant player and performs three primary functions which include the facilitation of the payment system, mobilization of savings, and allocation of loanable funds. By virtue of its pivotal role, the banking sector can exert its positive influence on various other segments of the economy. During the course of my speech, I would be giving you a historical perspective of the development of financial sector in Pakistan, followed by a discussion of challenges and opportunities of present scenario. Finally, I would like to share with you our priorities related to the banking sector for the future to come. Historical perspective The current structure of the financial sector in Pakistan is the result of several policy shifts and developments. The eras of financial sector developments in Pakistan can broadly be segregated into 1947–70, 1971–90 and 1991 to date period. Prior to 1971, the primary focus was on developing commercial banks in the private sector and creating development finance institutions backed by the government. The private sector development, however, almost clogged during the period 1971–1990, owing to the nationalization policy of the government. During this period, the banking sector came under the government’s control. Since 1990s, more liberal and market-based reforms have been followed. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Period of 1947 to 1970 At the time of independence in 1947 the banks services were adversely affected and by June 30, 1948, the number of branches of scheduled banks came down to only 81 in the territories now comprising Pakistan. However, commercial banking made tremendous progress and achieved phenomenal growth since independence as by December 31, 1973 i.e., before nationalization, there were 14 scheduled Pakistani commercial banks with 3,323 branches all over Pakistan and 74 branches in foreign countries. Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) played a significant role in the early industrial development of Pakistan from the sixties up to about the mid eighties. These DFIs were major channels for routing development funds to the private manufacturing sector and achieving socio-economic objectives such as encouragement of new entrepreneurs, setting up of industries in less developed areas and wider diffusion of industrial ownership. However in the 1980s and 1990s many DFIs ran into problems stemming basically from poor management, excessive bad loans, withdrawal of incentives or resource constraints, and considerable losses to the point of their financial ruin. They were also unable to compete with the increasingly nimble banking sector of the 1990s which was able to capture substantial investment banking business. Period of 1971 to 1990 As you may be aware, all 14 Pakistani commercial banks were nationalized and merged into 5 banks from January 01, 1974, and the financial landscape of the country changed significantly. One of the rationales given for nationalization was the fact that private banks were likely to neglect small borrowers and other priority areas, and it was thought that with nationalization, the government could direct credit to desired sectors. Consequently, various steps were taken, which included commencement of subsidized credit schemes, introduction of a complex system of credit ceilings, and the imposition of controls on interest rates. The experiment of nationalization, however failed to give the desired results, as political interference in lending decision and also in the appointment of the boards and chief executives marred the operations of these banks. The efficiency of the banks was affected severely, and by the end of 1980s, the banking sector in Pakistan had become unsuitable for adequately meeting the growing financial needs of the country. Period of 1991 to date Realizing the inherent weaknesses in Pakistan’s financial system, a broad based program of reforms was framed for the financial sector in the early 1990s. The reform agenda included, among others, financial liberalization and deregulation measures which were: privatization of NCBs, removal of restrictions on opening‐up of private banks, phasing out of subsidized and mandatory credit schemes, removal of caps on deposit and lending rates of banks, abolishment of the system of credit ceiling, and switching towards a market based approach of credit distribution, etc. These measures were implemented over time with gradual improvement that continues today. The State Bank of Pakistan played a pioneering role in these reforms, and has championed the developments in the financial sector. A brief summary of some of the major steps taken under these reforms are as follows: For privatization of nationalized commercial banks, the Government injected Rs. 30.7 billion to offset the losses incurred by these banks and recapitalized them. Professional bankers were appointed as Chief Executives and persons from the private sector enjoying a reputation of competence and integrity were nominated on the Board of Directors and ultimately the banks were privatized. Besides the privatization, fresh licenses were also issued to private sector sponsors to set up new commercial banks. These new banks provided the necessary competitive stimulus in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 system, and have contributed to the enhancement of banking services in Pakistan. Resultantly the overall share of private sector owned commercial banks in the banking sector assets increased from almost negligible in 1991 to about 80 percent by June 2004. The legal and regulatory framework was strengthened significantly, and State Bank powers under the Banking Companies Ordinance were enhanced in order to make it an effective regulator. Here I would like to emphasis that strengthening of the framework is a dynamic process, and as recently as in April 2011, the amendments in the BCO were carried out which further reinforced SBP’s role as regulator of the banking sector. The prudential regulations and various guidelines issued by SBP provided the essential impetus for prudent operations of the banks and DFIs. Under the regulatory framework, corporate governance, and risk management standards have improved significantly across the industry. These regulations also aim to enhance the quality of oversight of the Board of Directors of banks, mainly by (a) ensuring that only reputable and competent persons sit on these boards and (b) requiring that the members fulfill their responsibilities towards policy making for their respective banks. Foreign direct investment in the banking sector was made more viable; and since liberalization, large numbers of reputable foreign shareholders have invested in locally incorporated Pakistani banks. At the same time several foreign banks have opted to operate in Pakistan in branch mode as well. One of the most recent positive development is the entry of largest Chinese bank ICBC in Pakistan that started operations earlier this year. Since capital of a bank provides the buffer against unexpected losses, it is essential for any bank to have adequate capital to survive the ups and downs of a business cycle and to bear exogenous shocks successfully. The Capitalization of the banks has been enhanced steadily over the years. The minimum paid up capital (net of losses) was set at Rs.1 billion in 2003, increased to Rs2.0 billion by 2005, Rs6.0 billion by 2009, and Rs.10 billion to be achieved by 2013. In addition to Minimum Capital Requirement (MCR), SBP also adopted internationally accepted solvency standard of Basel I in 1997; and the revised standard of Basel II has been enforced since 2008. Under this regime, banks have to maintain a Capital Adequacy ratio of 10%. The ratio is calculated keeping in view the risk profile of a bank’s assets, with an ultimate objective to ensure that banks carrying higher risk assets should be required to hold more capital. Over the years the monitoring of banks and DFIs has also improved. The on-site inspection and off-site surveillance has increased the level of supervision of SBP. Electronic information gathering has made oversight timely and consequently more effective. The SBP also undertook massive capacity building during the late 1990s and early 2000s to upgrade the level of expertise of its officers. Merit-based recruitment, competency-enhancing training, performance-linked promotion, and induction of skilled human resources are now regular feature of SBP’s corporate strategy. The IMF and World Bank in their banking sector assessment of 2004 state Quote: “far reaching reforms have resulted in a more efficient and competitive financial system. In particular, the pre-dominantly state-owned banking system has been transformed into one that is predominantly under the control of the private sector. The legislative framework and the State Bank of Pakistan’s supervisory capacity have been improved substantially. As a result, the financial sector is sounder and exhibits an increased resilience to shocks”. Unquote. Present day scenario Before I discuss the present day challenges and opportunities, let me first identify the key performance figures of the current banking sector. Total assets of our banks amount to Rs7.7 trillion as of end June 2011. The deposits stand at Rs6.0 trillion, while Advances and 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Investments of the sector are Rs3.8 trillion and Rs2.6 trillion respectively. In spite of the economic slowdown, the pretax profit of the banking sector for year 2010 was Rs105 billion and for the first six month of 2011 it was Rs77 billion. The banks stand at a healthy Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) of over 14 percent and have shown a steady increase in capital even in absolute terms, and equity of the banks is now Rs722 billion (June 2011). While the picture appears quite stable, the key challenge comes from the word I used just now “economic slowdown”. We have witnessed the impact of an economic slowdown through rising credit risk in the banks. The gross non-performing loans which were low in 2007 (7.6%) are now at 15.3% as of June 2011. Thanks to our conservative provisioning regime, the net NPLs are still at a reasonable level at 5.5%, but we are aware that unless an economic turnaround is achieved within a reasonable time, the impact of high credit risk can cause serious problems, at least for some banks. Since FY07, banks in Pakistan have been able to withstand the headwinds from weakening macroeconomic fundamentals. While they have remained largely insulated from the first round of shocks from the global financial crisis, we cannot ignore the adverse trends that have risen since then. The Global Financial Crisis (GFC) has continued despite the recovery efforts of advanced economies and has morphed from a financial crisis to a sovereign credit crisis with serious political implications. The crisis brought forth the realization that organizations which are not just too-big-to-fail but also too-interconnected-to-fail are the major source of systemic risk. It reinforced the fact that complete reliance on mathematical model-based risk management systems is insufficient in assessing the wide array of risks faced by the financial sector, some of which need more qualitative analysis and judgment. Most importantly, it showed how its protracted duration severely impaired the basic function of the financial sector i.e. efficient allocation of resources in the process of financial intermediation. The regulatory focus in Pakistan has strived to prevent and mitigate the occurrence of these factors as the financial sector continues to evolve and progress. The silver lining from the GFC is the fact that the emerging markets are gaining more focus. The contribution of BRIC and other emerging economies in world economic growth is on the rise. The relatively less sophistication of their financial markets has been a blessing in disguise, as they did not face the brunt of the GFC and the growth continued at an even faster pace. It will be unfortunate if Pakistan is unable to take advantage of this shift in the growth paradigm. We are facing several domestic issues that limit our ability to fully attain our potential. Our financial institutions and businesses must become more competitive and innovative, regulators like SBP and SECP must actively facilitate financial markets, and the Government should step up its function of providing infrastructure for growth, most crucially to meet the Energy demand of productive sectors. As is true in most cases, the challenges provide opportunities as well. As banking regulator, the big challenge arises from a two-pronged dilemma. We want our banks to be sound, profitable and efficient users of their funds, yet we also want them to increase financial service penetration into unbanked segments of the economy. Interestingly this challenge is the biggest stimulus for technological innovation. There is a huge surge among the banks to upgrade their technology and on-line banking services. The ATM network has been expanding and on June 2011 there were approximately 5200 ATMs operating throughout the country. Progress in creating automated or on-line branches of banks has been significant so far and it is expected that almost all the bank branches will be on-line or automated. Utility bills payment and remittances would be handled through ATMs, kiosks or personal computers reducing both time and cost. The country’s payment system infrastructure has been strengthened to provide convenience in transfer of payments to the customers. The concept of branchless banking has opened a new avenue for efficient channeling of funds. It has the potential of changing lives of those people who are still unbanked and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 without any financial services and opened new vistas for the entrepreneurs and households of those areas; particularly with the increasing ease of mobile phone usages, it is a preferred channel of choice for those customers for transfer of funds. Keeping in view its importance, the State Bank took the lead and introduced Branchless Banking Regulations in 2008. These were the first of its kind regulatory initiative and since then other jurisdictions have replicated them for development of the branchless banking. Since 2008, Branchless Banking has expanded steadily with increased participation of stronger as well as new players. At present, the agent network under the umbrella of branchless banking exceeds 20,000 that facilitate around 53 million transactions amounting to Rs196 billion (Sep-11). Notwithstanding this progress, overall financial penetration in Pakistan remains quite low. The number of borrowers of 3.8 million constituted only 2.3% of the population on December 2010. Recognizing the overwhelming size and intensity of financial exclusion in Pakistan, SBP is pursuing the second generation reforms for the financial services industry and has placed high priority on developing and implementing an effective strategy for financial inclusion. Enabling regulatory environment has been provided for lending to SME, Agricultural and microfinance; thus banks and financial institutions are encouraged and enabled to expand their scope of lending and customer outreach. Licensing and prudential norms for micro finance institutions have been designed with particular emphasis on facilitating growth of these institutions and expanding their outreach to the poor and vulnerable segments of the population. In 2010 & 11 Consecutively, Pakistan has been ranked First in a sample of 55 countries in the category of “overall regulatory framework and practices for Microfinance” by The Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) of The Economist Magazine. The customer base of MFBs (Microfinance banks) has crossed 700,000 whereas that of MFIs has exceeded 1,300,000 in June 2011. At present 8 MFBs are operating in Pakistan, with total assets of Rs21.4 billion. Moreover, SBP is engaged in collaborative efforts with civil society institutions, especially involving large NGOs and RSPs in providing complementary services, such as social intermediation and capacity building. The regulatory regime adopted by SBP for the microfinance sector is that of a facilitator, guide and problem solver. We do not prescribe for Micro Finance Banks the same onerous regulations that prevail for other financial institutions. We have a Consultative Group drawn from the representatives of stakeholders, who guide us in the development of our regulations and prudential norms. The access of small and medium entrepreneurs to credit has been a major constraint to expansion of their business and up gradation of their technology. There exists strong evidence that SME expansion boosts employment more than Large Firm growth because SMEs are more labor intensive. We realize the fundamental importance of the SME sector in the economic development of the country. While SME prudential regulations have been in place for years, we are in the process of reviewing and revising the same to make them more conducive for this sector. The economic slowdown has hit them particularly hard. The advances to SME sector declined from Rs.383 billion in Dec 2008 to Rs.292.5 billion in June 2011. The loan infection ratio of SME sector has also risen and is around 16.8 percent. Clearly we need to come up with sound solutions for revival of this sector. In March 2010, SBP came up with the Credit Guarantee scheme for small and rural enterprises with the assistance of GOP and donor agencies that aims to motivate the banks to lend to borrowers, who otherwise would not have access to credit under normal circumstances. Several other initiatives are also underway. Pakistan introduced the Islamic banking system in 2003 to operate in parallel with the conventional banking, providing a choice to the consumers. A large number of Pakistanis have remained withdrawn from commercial banking because of their strong belief against riba-based banking. These individuals and firms now have the opportunity to invest in trade and businesses by availing of loans from Islamic banks and thus expand economic activity 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches and employment. The total Islamic banking assets stand at Rs.560 billion (June 2011) which is 7.3% of total assets of the banking sector. More importantly, this sector has shown more accelerated growth as compared to other segments. Deposits grew by 15.9 percent while the overall deposit growth was 9.4 percent (June 2011 data). We are very optimistic about the prospects of IB system. Now I would like to touch upon the role and importance of Capital markets that mainly consists of Stock (equity) and Debt markets. The capital market provides an avenue for raising long-term financing needs of businesses through equity and long term debt by attracting investors with a long term investment horizon. Both the banks as well as capital markets are vital in ensuring the desired level of liquidity in the system, facilitating efficient price discovery and allocation of credit and diversifying risks in the economy. However at present the level of development varies considerably in each market. While banks take the lion’s share of the overall financial sector as dominant players in money and foreign exchange markets, the capital market has yet to develop and still requires nurturing to reach its true potential. Even within capital market, the corporate debt market is truly at nascent stage. While equity markets typically tend to develop earlier than the debt markets in most developing countries, Pakistan’s economy and financial sector are now at a stage where they can support and benefit from a vibrant and efficient debt market. The size of Private debt, or Term Finance Certificates (TFCs) in Pakistan, remained around Rs. 74 billion (0.5% of GDP) which is paltry compared to the outstanding domestic government debt of PKR 4.64 trillion (31.4% of GDP). There is clearly underexploited capacity available to support economic growth. Banks continue to be the main provider of debt in the system. In the absence of an active capital markets, the commercial entities fail to procure long term debt financing, and rely on short and medium term loans from banks. Consequently banks carry sizable maturity mismatches on their balance sheets as they fund their advances through short term deposits. Since banks tend to lend to only larger borrowers, their portfolio is highly skewed towards large sized loan. In recent years, with rising NPLs, and increased borrowing by the government, the growth in private sector credit has become stagnant. Banks are trying to limit their credit risk and it has become more challenging to raise private debt for a business. While some credit uptake may take place in the future, it is unlikely that banks will be keen to finance new long term projects anytime soon. There is a need for coordinated efforts and support of the Government as well as of regulators (SBP & SECP) and banks for the development of a fixed income market that is necessary to diversify the financial sector which in turn would enhance its role in supporting economic growth. Future priorities for the banking sector The future is obviously not isolated from the progress made so far. We have unambiguously designated our future path that includes three main priorities (a) to make our banking sector more resilient against exogenous shocks through our macro (systemic) and micro prudential framework, (b) actively encourage technological solutions for financial access and an efficient payment system, and (c) address the development needs of the financial markets and broaden the array of product and services as well as outreach. We would like to see our banks operating at world class standards and synergistically reinforcing the real economy. We are actively working at a pace to achieve this goal, and despite the current economic challenges, we are confident that we will succeed.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Sayuri Shirai: Recent gobal economic developments and monetary policy in Japan – growing uncertainty over the European sovereign debt issues Speech by Ms Sayuri Shirai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Yamanashi, 2 November 2011. *      *      * I. Global economic and financial developments The world currently faces two pressing macroeconomic issues: one is a slowdown in global economic growth, and the other is increased instability in international financial markets triggered largely by fiscal and financial problems in Europe. A. Outlook for the global economy Let me start with the outlook for emerging economies. These economies continue to be the main engine for global economic growth, although the pace of growth has slowed somewhat in recent months. Their sources of economic strength arise mainly from (1) robust domestic demand reflecting rising incomes and employment generation – phenomena commonly observed in developing countries, (2) considerable leeway for expansionary fiscal policies thanks to their relatively sound public finances, (3) abundant labor forces, and (4) the potential for high labor productivity growth as part of the process of technological catch-up. At the same time, some emerging economies are experiencing inflationary pressures, which have been placing them in the dilemma of containing inflation or decelerating the pace of economic growth when making a monetary policy decision. By contrast, the pace of economic growth in advanced countries remains moderate. In the case of the United States, economic growth so far has been slower than originally expected, as exemplified by substantial downward revisions made by a number of international organizations and think tanks – including the International Monetary Fund (IMF) – to their projections for 2011 and 2012. U.S. economic growth declined sharply in the first half of 2011, due mainly to (a) a decline in automobile production caused by supply-chain disruptions following the Great East Japan Earthquake and (b) a drop in real household incomes reflecting the hike in gasoline prices. On the bright side, corporate profits have been substantially strong, and production, business fixed investment, and exports have continued to rise. Although some economic indicators suggest a deterioration in business sentiment in recent months, the pessimism suggested by sentiment indicators appears to be greater than actual corporate business conditions warrant. Overall, the pace of economic recovery in the United States has remained modest, because the deleveraging process or the adverse impact of the burst housing bubble on household balance sheets persists. As housing loans and other debts remain excessive, debt servicing exerts a huge burden on households, particularly since employment generation and income growth have been sluggish. Moreover, given that about 30 percent of household financial assets have been invested in stocks, the negative wealth effect caused by the recent downturn in stock prices is likely to be considerable. Against this background, President Obama in September 2011 proposed a jobs package worth 447 billion U.S. dollars – about 3 percent of GDP, although it is not clear whether the proposal will gain approval in Congress. If not, fiscal stimulus to the economy in the coming year may be limited.  B. Instability in international financial markets Not only has the pace of global economic growth been decelerating, in international markets investors have been increasingly risk averse. This reflects growing concerns over the 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches economic performance of the United States as well as the worsening fiscal and financial problems in Europe, which I will touch upon later. Strains in international financial markets have intensified since the middle of 2011, in part due to the prolonged debate in the U.S. Congress over the fiscal debt ceiling and deficit reduction, and the resulting downgrading of the credit rating for U.S. Treasuries. Moreover, high-level meetings of the European Union (EU), the Group of Seven (G-7) countries, and the Group of Twenty (G-20) countries all failed to come up with a decisive solution to the fiscal and financial problems in Europe. This series of events prompted global investors to become even more risk averse. As a result, international financial markets have become highly volatile: the prices of stocks – perceived as riskier assets – fell substantially around the globe, while the prices of government bonds of major advanced economies – perceived as safer assets – rose (or yields declined). Since October this year, however, stock prices have recovered somewhat and yields on government bonds have risen. Regarding corporate bond markets, credit spreads have widened, particularly in the United States and Europe, and issuing conditions for low-rated corporate bonds have continued to remain unfavorable. The number of initial public offerings (IPOs) also dropped sharply around the globe. What is more, since September the price of gold – generally perceived as a safe asset – as well as the prices of other commodities have declined as well. In the foreign exchange market, meanwhile, the yen, together with the U.S. dollar, has appreciated against a wide range of currencies of emerging and commodity-exporting economies on the basis of the perception that it is a relatively safe international currency. Moreover, in some emerging economies, cross-border capital flows have reversed, leading to a decline in stock and bond prices as well as foreign exchange rates. The main reason that instability in international financial markets has increased is a lack of confidence in measures undertaken by the EU to resolve the fiscal and financial problems in Europe. As I will explain in the next section, the problems in Europe are unlikely to be resolved in the short term. Therefore, international financial markets are expected to face continued strains for a while. II. The fiscal and financial problems in Europe So far, I have presented an overview of the outlook for global economic and financial developments. Now, I would like to take a closer look at the fiscal and financial problems in Europe, which have become the epicenter of the growing strains in international financial markets.1 Before I go into details, I would first like to make sure that the difference between the EU and the euro area is well understood. The EU is an economic partnership between 27 countries and constitutes the world’s largest economic zone. It has a population of about 500 million and accounts for more than 20 percent of global GDP. People and money can move without restrictions in the region. The euro area, on the other hand, is presently comprised of the 17 EU member states that have adopted the single currency called the euro. Countries with large economies, such as Germany, France, Italy, and Spain, are among the members of the euro area. The area has a population of about 330 million and accounts for about 15 percent of global GDP. It is an economic zone almost as large as the United States. I will follow the standard practice of distinguishing between “core countries” (such as Germany, France, the Netherlands, and Belgium) and “peripheral countries” (such as Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and Italy).                                                  1 This speech is based on information available as of October 31, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 A. The three problems faced by the euro area The fiscal problems in the euro area have now reached a critical stage. Looking back, the fiscal problems of Greece surfaced in spring 2010, followed by those of Ireland in fall 2010 and Portugal in early 2011. As these countries – with large fiscal deficits and/or government debts – faced a sharp increase in the cost of funding, they had no choice but to ask the EU and the IMF to provide them with financial support. With regard to Greece, it became clear from the middle of 2011 that its fiscal consolidation and economic reform program, to which it had internationally committed itself, was far behind schedule. As a result, the Greek debt crisis resurfaced.  In addition, market concerns over the fiscal position of peripheral countries intensified. This, in turn, adversely affected the creditworthiness of European financial institutions with large holdings of government bonds of these countries. As a result, these institutions faced a sharp increase in their funding costs as well. In response, the EU announced a comprehensive set of measures to address the sovereign debt and financial problems at the end of October. This may be considered a step forward. The measures appear to have won some support from financial markets. Nevertheless, more time is needed to see whether they will help restore stability in international financial markets by reviving the risk-taking appetite of investors in general. The euro area is not only a large economic zone, but, like the United States, it is also home to the headquarters of many large, globally active financial institutions. Given Europe’s close economic and financial linkages with other regions, the possible effects of volatile developments in the euro area on the global economy and international financial markets are a matter of great concern. I would next like to talk about the three main problems confronting the euro area. 1. Fiscal consolidation and economic reform in Greece The first problem is the loss of market confidence in the ability of the Greek government to pursue the fiscal consolidation and economic reform program, which triggered the problems that the euro area is facing now. Greece had a high level of government debt even before joining the euro. Moreover, in the latter half of 2009 it emerged that the Greek government had understated the scale of its fiscal deficit by falsifying official statistics. The discovery of such an act has given rise to skepticism toward the Greek government’s capacity to properly manage its economic and fiscal affairs, resulting in the successive downgrading by rating agencies of its government bonds. The downgradings in turn brought about a hike in bond yields, making it difficult for the government to raise funds from the market, and forced it to ask the EU and the IMF for financial assistance in May 2010. The financial assistance has been provided in installments on condition that the program is monitored by the IMF and the EU through quarterly reviews and makes progress on schedule. The disbursement of the sixth tranche was due to be approved in September 2011; however, the approval was suspended following findings that Greece would be unable to achieve its budget deficit target for both 2011 and 2012. The Greek economy is in the middle of a severe recession, and there is a strong likelihood that after facing four successive years of contraction it will continue to shrink. As a result, tax revenues have not grown despite increases in tax rates, thus undermining the government’s fiscal reconstruction efforts. Additionally, it has been pointed out that, partly because of problems associated with the government’s capacity to collect taxes, it is difficult to devise effective measures to raise tax revenues. Against this background, financial markets are conscious of the possibility that the program of fiscal consolidation and economic reform could stall unless the government conducts more drastic expenditure cuts and takes decisive measures to raise revenues through, for example, the privatization of government enterprises. The sixth tranche is likely to be disbursed during the first half of November, following the passage in late October of a bill by the Greek Parliament that provides for further reductions in the fiscal deficit, including layoffs of public employees. Yet, how things develop remains to be seen. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches When it was agreed in May 2010 to provide financial assistance to Greece, it was expected that from 2012 Greece would be in a position to raise funds from the market on the assumption that steady progress would be made in fiscal consolidation and economic reform. This scenario looks increasingly unlikely now with Greek government bond yields remaining at prohibitively high levels. The EU, the IMF, and Greece, therefore, agreed on a second bailout package for  Greece – separate from the financial assistance mentioned so far – to provide funds from 2012 onward. In addition, it was agreed that given the sheer size of the government debt, the provision of financial assistance alone was not enough to bring the Greek government debt position to a sustainable level. Therefore, through the intermediation of the Institute of International Finance (IIF), a global association of financial institutions, financial institutions – private-sector creditors – with large holdings of Greek government bonds were asked to bear a part of the burden on a voluntary basis. More specifically, holders of Greek government bonds due to mature by 2020 were asked to exchange most of their holdings into new bonds at a discount of some 20 percent of the present value; in other words, the debt was to be cut by roughly 20 percent. In turn, the principal of the new bonds would be guaranteed and it is reported that a large number of the bond holders represented by the IIF agreed. More recently, however, some EU member countries voiced the view that, with Greece’s fiscal situation deteriorating more rapidly than had been anticipated, a steeper write-down of Greek government bonds was necessary. In other words, it became increasingly clear that reducing Greek debt by some 20 percent of the present value would be insufficient to sustain the Greek government’s ability to repay its debts. In view of this, meetings were held at the end of October between the EU and the IIF, and it was agreed in principle that creditors would write off 50 percent of their Greek bonds. At the same time, it was agreed that Greece should implement further fiscal consolidation measures. In order to meet its international commitments, Greece, with the economy already in a prolonged recession, was thus required to introduce additional restrictive fiscal measures, which may intensify the vicious cycle of economic contraction. Policies for the reduction of national debt are unavoidable, but what the Greek economy needs more than anything else to break out of its vicious cycle is to press ahead with growth-generating economic reforms and build a path toward credible fiscal consolidation to regain market confidence. 2. Mechanisms to stop the Greek fiscal crisis from spreading The second problem concerns mechanisms to stop the crisis in Greece from spreading to other euro area member states. In response to the financial turmoil triggered by the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008, European countries introduced various measures to help boost the economy and rescue banks. Such measures inevitably led to increases in fiscal deficits and government debts. It is in this context that the crisis in Greece spread to some peripheral European countries, such as Ireland and Portugal, which were perceived to have relatively greater difficulties in proceeding with fiscal consolidation and/or economic reforms.  In order to prevent the current fiscal and financial problems in the region from triggering a chain reaction, the EU created the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) in 2010. The EFSF can raise funds through the issuance of bonds, the proceeds of which can then be used to provide loans at below-market interest rates to financially troubled euro area countries. These bonds are effectively guaranteed by euro area member states that remain financially healthy. So far, loans in this form have been extended to Ireland and Portugal, which requested financial assistance, and the second bailout package for Greece is due to use funds from the EFSF. Subsequently, at the Meeting of Heads of State or Government of the Euro Area, it was agreed to increase the size of guarantees for EFSF bonds, thereby raising the ceiling of the facility’s lending capacity. The EFSF is now able to purchase government bonds from the market and to inject more funds into the banking system by, for example, recapitalizing financial institutions. The agreement was ratified in October 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 In financial markets, however, concerns emerged about possible contagion of the crisis to other euro area member states such as Spain and Italy. These countries have much larger economies, and therefore the lending capacity of the facility already agreed at the Meeting of Heads of State or Government of the Euro Area was perceived to be insufficient to fend off a further spread of the crisis. However, an additional increase in the lending capacity was difficult due to strong opposition led by Germany. At the Euro Summit, a meeting of EU and euro area leaders held at the end of October, it was therefore agreed to leverage the resources of the EFSF to enhance its ability to deal with critical situations.2 It will probably take a while for the leverage plan to actually take effect, as details have to be worked out in November and then need to be approved by each member state. Needless to say, building mechanisms to prevent the fiscal crisis from spreading to the euro area as a whole is extremely important for the stability of international financial markets. What matters is whether the mechanism succeeds in gaining the confidence of the market.3 3. Fiscal problems leading to problems in the financial system The third problem is that the fiscal problems in Europe are threatening the stability of the financial system. What started out as a fiscal problem in Greece, coupled with concerns over its ability to consolidate its finances and carry out economic reforms, has spread to other European countries, with doubts arising regarding their creditworthiness. This, in turn, raised concerns about the balance sheets of European financial institutions holding large volumes of government bonds of peripheral countries. Consequently, European financial institutions, including financial institutions from France and Belgium – core countries – began to find it difficult to raise funds from markets. The fiscal problems in Europe have thus begun to seriously undermine the stability of the financial system in the region. In July 2011, the results of a stress test for financial institutions performed by the EU confirmed that progress was being made in strengthening their capital bases. However, the results did not mitigate investors’ concerns over the soundness of the financial system. In fact, the IMF has stressed the need for European financial institutions to make a substantial capital enhancement based on its estimate of potential losses of 200 billion euros that European financial institutions could suffer in the event of a collapse in the prices of government bonds of peripheral countries such as Greece. However, given the current weakness in stock markets, it is not easy for financial institutions to increase capital on their own. As a result, concerns about counterparty risk have increased, causing some financial institutions to reduce interbank market trading activities. In addition, uncollateralized interbank trading, particularly of term instruments, has been declining, leading to an increase in funding costs for European financial institutions, mainly for longer-term and U.S. dollar-denominated funds. In a comprehensive set of additional measures agreed at the end of October, the EU decided to require European financial institutions to attain a Core Tier 1 capital ratio of 9 percent by end-June 2012, after accounting for market valuation of sovereign debt exposures. It was also decided that when financial institutions are unable to increase capital by themselves, national governments should provide support or, if they are unable to do so, the EFSF should do so.  It would have been easier to come up with a solution if the problem had been contained to fiscal deficits, as was the case for Greece at the beginning. The appropriate response would                                                  2 Leverage here refers to, for example, “guarantees” to be provided by the EFSF, which could amount to many times over what the facility can directly lend. If approved, the EFSF could be given more flexibility over the measure to prevent a crisis from spreading to major euro area member states. 3 In addition, it has already been decided to make the EFSF a permanent institution and set up in mid-2013 the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) with the aim of facilitating a smooth restructuring of government debt issued by countries in financial difficulties. It has also been reported that discussions are underway to bring forward the starting date of the ESM by a year. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches have been to increase government revenue and reduce expenditure in the short term, while pushing through a wide range of economic reforms in the medium to long term aiming to achieve sustainable growth. However, when it comes to measures to stabilize the financial system, things become much more difficult, because the impact on international financial markets cannot be ignored. A major factor currently destabilizing international markets lies in the daunting situation of having to deal with two crucial issues simultaneously – fiscal imbalances and instability in the financial system. B. Effects on economic activity in Europe The problems in Europe have started to affect activity in the real sector of the economy (such as production, business investment, and consumption), setting off a downward spiral among the economy, the fiscal situation, and the financial system. Keeping this in mind, I will now touch upon the current situation of and outlook for economic activity in Europe.  At present, the recovery in the European economy seems to be stalling due to the slowdown in the domestic and global economies. Growth in exports, which had been the main engine of economic growth, has slowed sharply, while growth in production and consumption has also decelerated. Furthermore, corporate and consumer sentiment has worsened. Nevertheless, the economies of core countries, particularly Germany with a strong manufacturing sector, remain relatively robust on the back of firm business fixed investment. The employment and income situation in Germany has also been improving, with the unemployment rate declining to about 7 percent. In contrast, peripheral countries, such as Greece and Portugal, have been suffering from short-term downward pressure on the economy due to additional austerity measures following the downgrade of their sovereign debt ratings. Their international competitiveness has long been weak, so that it will be a challenge for them to achieve economic growth, and – as we have already seen – the market remains deeply concerned about the sustainability of government finances in these countries. With regard to the economic outlook for Europe, a very moderate recovery is expected on the whole. Although private consumption is unlikely to grow because household incomes remain under severe pressure, exports are expected to increase gradually based on steady growth in emerging economies. In addition, business fixed investment in core countries is expected to remain firm. Nevertheless, restoring fiscal health is a challenge faced by all euro area countries. The government-debt-to-GDP ratio for the euro area as a whole was 85.4 percent in 2010, well above the euro convergence criterion of 60 percent. This wide gap highlights the need for continued efforts to reduce fiscal deficits and the limited scope for expansionary fiscal measures for the euro area as a whole. As for monetary policy, the policy interest rate is already low at 1.5 percent, leaving little room for further reductions. In view of the limited room for fiscal and monetary policy, it is necessary to be aware of the possibility of economic instability continuing for a while.  III. Japan’s economy and the Bank of Japan’s policy measures Based on the developments in the global economy and international financial markets described so far, I will now talk about the current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy and measures taken by the Bank. For details, please refer to Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices released by the Bank on October 28, 2011. A. Japan’s economy Following the earthquake on March 11, 2011, Japan’s economy contracted sharply. This was due to the following factors: (1) production activity fell significantly nationwide due to the physical damage caused by the earthquake and tsunami to production facilities and the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 distribution infrastructure as well as the disruption of supply chains in the manufacturing sector, especially in the automobile industry; (2) the nuclear power plant accident led to electricity shortages, which affected both manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries; and (3) consumer sentiment weakened as a result of voluntary restraint following the disaster and the problem of radiation due to the nuclear power plant accident. 1. The current situation Japan’s economic activity has been picking up steadily as the supply-side constraints caused by the disaster have been gradually resolved. Supply-chain disruptions, for example, have been easing at a faster pace than expected thanks to the efforts made by those involved. Production and real exports have returned to their pre-quake levels, although their rates of growth have moderated recently. While exports, particularly of automobiles, have increased, those of iron and steel products as well as digital cameras have declined. Business fixed investment has been increasing moderately and the results of the September 2011 Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) showed that business fixed investment plans, including those of small firms, were relatively firm. While the overall damage caused by the flooding in Thailand is not clear at this stage, the impact on supply chains warrants careful attention, given that Japanese firms, especially in automobile-related industries, have expanded their overseas production facilities for finished goods and parts and components, including in Thailand, in recent years. Meanwhile, although private consumption has almost returned to its pre-quake level, weakness remains in some areas as indicated by, for example, the fact that restaurant sales have not returned to their pre-quake levels. Also, the number of foreigners visiting Japan has remained below pre-quake levels. 2. Outlook for economic activity and prices Although adverse effects from the slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen may continue for the time being, Japan’s economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path as reconstruction demand following the disaster gradually materializes. Business fixed investment is likely to expand, provided that corporate profits improve, domestic and overseas demand recovers, and government economic policies are effective. Private consumption is also expected to gradually become firmer against the backdrop of a gradual recovery in the employment and income environment. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) has recently been around 0 percent, partly due to the change in the base year for the CPI in August 2011. As for the outlook, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to remain at around 0 percent for the time being, with a factor in addition to the base-year change being that the positive contribution from the rise in the tobacco tax and in charges for accident insurance has dissipated since October 2011. Surveys of households, firms, and economists suggest that medium- to long-term inflation expectations remain stable; however, future developments warrant continued attention. 3. Risks to the outlook While there are many uncertainties regarding the outlook for economic activity and prices, the three risks that I think warrant the most attention are the following: (1) the risk that if the fiscal and financial problems in Europe intensify they may affect Japan’s economy through various channels; (2) downside risks with regard to overseas economies other than those of Europe; and (3) the possibility that firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term growth expectations may decline in the longer run. As for the first risk, there are two main channels through which Japan’s economy could be affected: an international financial markets channel and an international trade channel. Let us start by considering the international financial markets channel. Japan’s financial markets have remained stable as a whole despite the instability in overseas markets. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches Moreover, so far Japanese financial institutions’ funding costs have not been affected by developments overseas, because their exposure to Greece, Portugal, and Ireland in the form of investment and lending is relatively limited. However, given the growing international linkages in financial markets, if global investors’ appetite for safe assets intensifies further, prices of riskier assets (such as stocks) could decline globally. With global financial markets being increasingly integrated, stock prices in Japan could fall as a result of developments in other markets, and the foreign exchange rate of the yen – which is seen as a relatively safe currency – against the U.S. dollar and the currencies of commodity-exporting and emerging countries might rise further. Thus, there is a risk that, as a result, business and consumer sentiment may deteriorate, pushing down economic growth. In fact, the diffusion index for overseas supply and demand conditions in the September 2011 Tankan suggests that there is a growing perception of excess supply. With regard to the export channel, as I have already stated, there is a possibility that Japan’s exports to Europe might be directly affected if economic activity in Europe decelerates as a result of the worsening of fiscal and financial problems in the area. It is important to bear in mind that in this case the impact could be substantial, since Europe accounts for about 10 percent of Japan’s exports. Moreover, there is the risk that Japan’s exports might be indirectly affected through a decrease in exports to Europe from Asian economies. As for the second risk, there is concern that the slowdown in the U.S. economy could continue given the weaker-than-expected employment situation and sluggish activity in the housing market due to the persistent downward pressure on housing prices as seen in the increasing number of home foreclosures. On the other hand, emerging and commodity-exporting economies, despite declining demand from the United States and Europe, are likely to continue to grow thanks to potentially large domestic demand; however, with inflationary pressures remaining strong, whether they can achieve a soft landing, that is, achieve both price stability and economic growth at the same time, requires continued attention. Attention also needs to be paid to a possible economic slowdown in emerging and commodity-exporting economies as a result of capital outflows from these economies if investors’ risk aversion intensifies further due to contagion of the fiscal and financial problems in Europe. With regard to the third risk concerning firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term growth expectations, Japan’s economy has long been facing the challenge of a decline in the growth rate due, among other things, to the shrinking and aging of the population. In addition, Japan is now confronted with new challenges, such as uncertainty regarding the supply and demand of electric power and the reconstruction effort needed following the earthquake. I am of course anxious about the uncertainty regarding reconstruction-related demand, but what concerns me more is the uncertainty surrounding electricity supply. Electricity supply during this past summer, which was a cause of great concern, turned out not to impose considerable constraints on the economy, not only because this summer was cooler than the extremely hot summer last year, but also because of efforts by firms and households to save electricity. In the longer run, however, the resumption of operations at nuclear power plants that are or will be under regular inspection is still unclear. Given this and the possibility that we might have an extremely cold winter or a heat wave next summer, uncertainty regarding the supply of electricity therefore remains, and as long as this uncertainty lingers, corporate activity could be restrained. In addition, attention needs to be paid to the possibility that a further appreciation of the yen could exert downward pressure on corporate profits, employment, and income, or accelerate the shift to overseas production, which could in turn lead to a decline in firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term growth expectations and increase the downside risks to the economy. B. The bank’s conduct of monetary policy and responses to the earthquake Taking into account the situation mentioned above – economic conditions abroad and in Japan, the outlook for Japan’s economy, and the various risk factors – the Policy Board of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 the Bank, consisting of nine members including myself, at the Monetary Policy Meeting on October 27, 2011 decided to enhance monetary easing. I will now explain the policy measures currently implemented by the Bank as well as the background of the decision.  1. Enhancement of the comprehensive monetary easing policy The first of the measures is a strengthening of the comprehensive monetary easing policy that the Bank has been implementing in order to pursue powerful monetary easing and underpin Japan’s economy from the financial side. As part of the comprehensive monetary easing, the Bank has set its policy interest rate at an extremely low level of around 0 to 0.1 percent, and made a commitment that it would basically continue with the low policy interest rate until it judged that price stability was in sight. Moreover, in October 2010, the Bank established the Asset Purchase Program (hereafter the Program), a new framework through which the Bank purchases various risk assets, such as government securities, commercial paper (CP), corporate bonds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) in order to encourage a decline in longer-term interest rates and various risk premiums. The Bank increased the total size of the Program by about 5 trillion yen to about 40 trillion yen in March 2011, immediately after the earthquake, and by about 10 trillion yen to about 50 trillion yen in total in August in light of various risks, such as the effects of uncertainty regarding overseas economies and of the rapid appreciation of the yen on business sentiment as well as on economic activity.  In addition, at the end of October 2011, the Bank decided to increase the total size of the Program by about 5 trillion yen to about 55 trillion yen reflecting the fact that some more time would be needed to confirm that price stability was in sight and that due attention was needed to be paid to the risk that the economic and price outlook would further deteriorate depending on developments in global financial markets and in overseas economies. Such asset purchases will continue to be made through the end of 2012, and since further monetary easing is still in progress, the effects of monetary easing will continue to appear hereafter. 2. Ensuring stability in financial markets Second, the Bank has been making efforts to ensure stability in financial markets in order to maintain the smooth conduct of economic and financial activities in Japan. Immediately after the earthquake, the Bank provided ample funds to meet demand in financial markets for several successive days to preempt concerns about potential liquidity shortages in the interbank money market. Thus, on March 14 – the first business day after the earthquake – the Bank conducted funds-supplying operations totaling 21.8 trillion yen. As a result of measures such as this, money market rates, which had temporarily risen immediately after the earthquake, soon regained stability. Since then, with the Bank continuing to provide ample funds and Japan’s financial system relatively sound, financial markets in Japan have remained relatively stable despite the heightened strains in European financial markets.  3. Providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth Third, as part of the efforts to strengthen the foundations for economic growth – a more medium- to long-term challenge – the Bank has introduced the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth, which aims to act as a catalyst for firms and financial institutions working toward this end. Under this measure, the Bank provides loans at a low interest rate of 0.1 percent for, if rolled over, up to four years to financial institutions for financing of and investment in projects that help to strengthen the medium- to long-term growth potential of Japan’s economy. The Bank has been working on new initiatives such as the establishment in June 2011 of a new line of credit, which expanded the range of eligible investments and loans to encompass loans without real estate collateral or guarantees (including asset-based lending, or ABL).  
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches 4. Funds-supplying operation to support financial institutions in disaster areas Fourth, following the earthquake and tsunami, the Bank introduced the funds-supplying operation to support financial institutions in disaster areas in April 2011 with the aim of supporting financial institutions in these areas in their initial response efforts to meet the demand for funds for restoration and rebuilding. Although there has been some demand for credit for rebuilding in disaster areas, it is still subdued. However, as the six loan disbursements that have been carried out by the Bank show, there is sufficient credit demand and the operation is having some effect, since around 490 billion yen of the total of 1 trillion yen initially set by the Bank has been disbursed. The Bank has been closely monitoring the funding situation of financial institutions in disaster areas, which has made some progress reflecting the inflow of funds to support disaster areas and of insurance payments. The deadline for new applications for loans under this scheme had originally been set for the end of October 2011, but on October 7 the Bank announced the extension of the deadline to April 30, 2012 in order to continue to support financial institutions in disaster areas in their efforts to meet demand for funds for restoration and rebuilding. 5. U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral Fifth and finally, given the turmoil in international financial markets, the Bank established a framework to supply U.S. dollar funds in emergency situations with the aim of providing reassurance to market participants and, in coordination with major central banks abroad, has been conducting U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral on a regular basis, with one-week funds being supplied weekly and three-month funds, in principle, monthly. As I mentioned when discussing the fiscal and financial problems in Europe, European financial institutions have seen their U.S. dollar funding costs rise. However, U.S. dollar funding conditions for Japanese financial institutions do not appear to have tightened substantively when compared with their counterparts overseas. Nevertheless, given the growing interconnectedness among financial markets worldwide, there is a risk that volatility in global financial markets could spill over to Japan in a short period of time. From this perspective, the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral is also important in that it functions as a safety net for Japanese banks conducting business abroad. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 K C Chakrabarty: Empowering MSMEs for financial inclusion and growth – issues and strategies Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Central Bank of India SME Conclave, Mumbai, 20 December 2011. *      *      * Assistance provided by Smt L Vadera in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. Shri M. V. Tanksale, Chairman and Managing Director, Central Bank of India (CBI),  Smt V. R. Iyer, Executive Director, Central Bank of India, Shri Chadrakant Salunkhe, President SME Chamber of India, Shri A. Ramesh Kumar, MD & CEO – Asia Pragati Capfin Pvt Ltd, SME entrepreneurs, staff members of CBI, distinguished guests, members of the print and electronic media, ladies and gentlemen. It is my pleasure to be here at this Conclave on the eve of the conclusion of Centenary Year Celebrations of Central Bank of India. As you all may be aware, Central Bank of India, which was established way back in 1911, has a glorious past and would be celebrating its Foundation Day on December 21, 2011. I take this opportunity to congratulate Shri Tanksale, CMD, Smt Iyer, ED, all employees and customers of the bank and all the other stakeholders on completing a remarkable hundred years of exemplary service to the nation. The bank was the realization of the dream of Shri Sorabji Pochkhanawala, a visionary, a philanthropist and a rare breed of people who richly deserve our tributes. It was the first commercial bank which was wholly owned and managed by Indians. Central Bank of India, over the years, has won the trust and confidence of its clients and it comes as no surprise then that it has become one of the most prominent banks in India. But more importantly, the bank had a rich tradition of promoting small and medium entrepreneurship and played a sterling role in the industrial development of the Bombay Presidency region. However, over a period of time, this zeal of promoting entrepreneurship development appeared to have dimmed a bit and, therefore, I am extremely happy that as their Centenary Year draws to a close, Central Bank of India is bringing the limelight back to SMEs and rededicating themselves to the cause. I congratulate Shri Tanksale for organizing this Conclave on “Empowering SMEs for Inclusive Growth- Strategies and Initiatives” in collaboration with a predominant industry association – the Small and Medium Business Development Chamber of India. A. Importance of the MSME sector Now, there is no need for me to overemphasize the role and importance of the micro, small and medium enterprises You are all aware that in a developing economy, the MSMEs play a vital role and if India were to have a growth rate of 8–10 percent for the next couple of decades, it needs a strong micro, small and medium sector and for that micro entrepreneurs need to be nurtured. As per available statistics (4th Census of MSME Sector), this sector employs an estimated 59.7 million persons spread over 26.1 million enterprises. It is estimated that in terms of value, MSME sector accounts for about 45% of the manufacturing output and around 40% of the total export of the country. The MSMEs are the best vehicle for inclusive growth, to create local demand and consumption and also to fight with the global meltdown. Public policy has rightly accorded high priority to this sector in order to achieve balanced, sustainable, more equitable and inclusive growth in the country. A micro enterprise of today will be a big enterprise of tomorrow, and might well become a multinational enterprise eventually, if given the support in finance and capacity building. It is also an opportune time for putting more emphasis on MSMEs due to recession in many countries of the globe and rupee depreciation. The recession, while slowing down the global demand for goods and services, should not impact the sector, so adversely, as there is a huge demand 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches in the local markets which could be tapped and the depreciation of the rupee has improved their price competitiveness of exporting firms in the sector. Sizeable growth in credit – yet MSMEs feel not enough is being done The MSMEs primarily rely on bank finance for their operations and as such ensuring timely and adequate flow of credit to the sector has been an overriding public policy objective. Advances extended to the micro and small enterprises sector are treated as priority sector advances. Over the years there has been a significant increase in credit extended to this sector by the banks. As at the end of March 2011, the total outstanding credit provided by all Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) to the MSE sector stood at Rs.4,575 billion as against Rs.3,622 billion in March 2010 registering an increase of 26.3%. Despite the increase in credit outstanding to the sector, the MSME borrowers feel that the lenders are not doing enough for the MSMEs and are catering more to the needs of the large corporate. Let me now focus on the major problems / challenges / issues faced by the MSMEs and, more specifically, the Micro and Small sector. B. Major problems / challenges / issues faced by the sector Access to credit Notwithstanding the increase in credit outstanding to the sector, access to adequate and timely credit at a reasonable cost is a critical problem faced by this sector. The statistics compiled in the Fourth Census of MSME sector September 2009, revealed that only 5.18% of the units (both registered and unregistered) had availed of finance through institutional sources, 2.05% had finance from non-institutional sources; the majority of units i.e. 92.77% had no finance or depended on self-finance. Thus, the extent of financial exclusion in the sector is very high. But, this is not entirely unexpected because if one looks at the financial exclusion in our country in general, then MSMEs cannot remain unaffected by it. But there is a need to bridge this gap through enabling policies and the Government of India (GoI) needs to play a catalytic role to cater to the needs of this sector.  First time entrepreneurs The MSE borrowers, especially new generation entrepreneurs, do not have collaterals to offer to avail of bank finance. It is generally observed that collateral security provides comfort to the lenders as it ensures commitment of the borrower to the project and is also available to them for recovery in the event of failure of the enterprise. Infrastructure In the present global environment, the MSMEs and more specifically the micro and small enterprises (MSEs) have to be competitive to survive and thrive. To ensure competitiveness of the MSEs, it is essential that the availability of infrastructure, technology and skilled manpower are in tune with the global trends. MSEs are either located in industrial estates set up many decades ago, or have come up in an unorganized manner in rural areas. The state of infrastructure including power, water, roads, etc. in such areas is inadequate and unreliable. Further, the MSE sector in India, with some exceptions, is characterized by low technology levels, which acts as a handicap in the emerging global market. Although India has the advantage of a large pool of human resources, the industry continues to face deficit in manpower with the right skill sets for specific areas like, manufacturing, service, marketing, etc. The HR problem is further exacerbated by the low retention rate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Access to alternate sources of capital The ability of MSMEs (especially those involving innovations and new technologies) to access alternative sources of capital like angel funds/risk capital needs to be enhanced considerably. For this purpose, removing fiscal/regulatory impediments to use such funds by the MSMEs should be considered on priority. Access to equity capital is a genuine problem. At present, there is almost negligible flow of equity capital into this sector. Absence of equity capital may pose a serious challenge to development of knowledge-based industries, particularly those that are sought to be promoted by the first-generation entrepreneurs with the requisite expertise and knowledge. There is a demand for a dedicated Exchange for MSMEs. Delayed realization of receivables Considerable delay in settlement of dues/payment of bills by the large-scale buyers to the MSMEs units adversely affected the recycling of funds and business operation of MSME units. Though the Government has enacted the Delayed Payments Act, 1998 many of the MSME units are reluctant to pursue cases against major buyers. After the enactment of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act 2006, the existing provisions of the Interest on Delayed Payment Act, 1998 to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings, have been strengthened. The banks have been advised to sanction separate sub-limits within the overall limits sanctioned to the corporate borrowers for meeting payment obligations in respect of purchases from MSME sector. Necessary instructions have been issued by banks to their branches to monitor the position of payment by corporates to MSME and wherever found necessary, persuade the corporate to release the same on priority basis. Sickness of units Growing incidence of sickness of the sector is yet another area of concern. When the sickness prolongs it leads to the closure of units and unemployment. The mortality of the MSE units is high. This has wider implications including locking of funds of the lending institutions, loss of scarce material resources and loss of employment. As on March 2011, the number of units identified as potentially viable as a percentage to total sick MSE units is around 8. The units placed under nursing as a proportion to the total number of sick units stood at 5.22%.The causes of sickness are both internal and external. The major causes are limited financial resources, lack of organisational, financial and management skills and expertise, non-availability of power supply shortage of raw materials, marketing difficulties, delayed and inadequate credit, obsolete technology, inadequate infrastructure, etc. Exit policy for MSMEs An exit route for non-viable units is necessary to manage sickness. Worldwide, MSMEs are credited with high level of innovation and creativity, which also leads to higher level of failures. Keeping this in view, most of the countries have put in place mechanisms to handle insolvencies and bankruptcies. The present mechanism available in India for MSMEs is archaic. Business failure in India is viewed as a stigma, which adversely impacts individual creativity and development in the country. The existing legislations may have to be toned up so as to provide for efficient liquidation of non-viable businesses.  C. Initiatives by government of India / Reserve Bank of India Recognizing the important role played by MSMEs in economic development and its sizeable contribution to employment and GDP, and realizing that financial access is critical for MSMEs growth and development, Government and Reserve Bank of India are taking the 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches lead in supporting initiatives that improve access to finance. While at the broader level, financial inclusion makes growth broad based and sustainable by progressively encompassing the hitherto excluded population, and has become a national priority, at the more narrower level, since the level of financial exclusion is very high in this sector, drive to universal financial access, including SME finance, is no longer a policy choice but a compulsion. The Reserve Bank of India has intensified a number of measures and endorsed quantitative access targets over the last year to further financial inclusion. Let me very briefly touch upon a few of them. With an objective of ensuring uniform progress in provision of banking services in all parts of the country, banks were advised to draw up a roadmap to provide banking services through a banking outlet in every unbanked village having a population of over 2,000 by March 2012. The Reserve Bank advised banks that such banking services need not necessarily be extended through a brick and mortar branch but could be provided also through any of the various forms of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) – based models, including Business Correspondents (BCs). A total of about 74,000 such unbanked villages have been identified and allotted to various banks through State Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs). As at the end of September 2011, as reported by the State Level Bankers’ Committees of various states/Union Territories, banking outlets have been opened in 42,079 villages across the various States in the country. This comprises of 1127 branches, 39998 business correspondents and 954 other modes like rural ATMs, mobile vans etc. To ensure enhanced credit flow to the sector, in terms of the recommendations of the Prime Minister’s Task Force on Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) (Chairman: Shri T.K.A.Nair, Principal Secretary, Government of India) constituted by the Government of India, banks were advised to achieve a 20 per cent year-on-year growth in credit to micro and small enterprises; the allocation of 60% of the MSE advances to the micro enterprises is to be achieved in stages viz. 50% in the year 2010–11, 55% in the year 2011–12 and 60% in the year 2012–13 and achieve a 10% annual growth in number of micro enterprise accounts. The Reserve Bank is closely monitoring the achievement of targets by banks on a quarterly basis. The matter is followed up with the laggard banks to know their constraints and impress upon them the need to devise strategies to gear up the credit mechanism for the sector.  Further, based on the recommendations of the Working Group (Chairman: Shri V.K. Sharma, Executive Director, RBI) constituted by the Reserve Bank of India to review the Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS) of the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE), the limit for collateral free loans to the MSE has been increased from the present level of Rs. 5 lakh to Rs.10 lakh and it has been made mandatory for banks. The Working Group has also made recommendations regarding increase in the extent of guarantee cover, absorption of guarantee fees for the collateral free loans by CGTMSE subject to certain conditions, simplification of procedure for filing claims with CGTMSE and increasing awareness about the scheme. CGTMSE, which is implementing agency for Credit Guarantee Scheme, has been advised to expedite implementation of the recommendations. The implementation of the Recommendations of the Working Group should result in enhanced usage of the Guarantee Scheme and facilitate increase in quality and quantity of credit to the presently included, as well as excluded, MSEs, leading eventually to sustainable inclusive growth. All Scheduled Commercial Banks have also been advised on May 4, 2009, to review and put in place MSE Loan policy, Restructuring / rehabilitation policy and Non-discretionary One Time Settlement Scheme for recovery of non-performing loans duly approved by their Board of Directors. Banks were advised in December 2009 to give wide publicity to the Non-discretionary One Time Settlement Scheme for recovery of non-performing loans for the MSE sector by placing it on their bank’s web-site and through other possible modes of dissemination.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 On the issue of alternate sources of credit, dedicated Exchange for MSMEs, marketing, technology up-gradation and infrastructure, the PM’s Task Force has examined the issues and has made several recommendations to address the bottlenecks. The implementation of the recommendations in a time bound manner are being monitored by the GOI.  D. Role of banks and industry associations in empowering MSMEs Role of banks There has been a burst of entrepreneurship across the country, spanning rural, semi-urban and urban areas. This has to be nurtured and financed. It is only through growth of enterprises across all sizes that competition will be fostered. As I mentioned in the beginning, a micro entrepreneur of today will become a small entrepreneur and then a big entrepreneur of tomorrow, and might eventually well become a multinational enterprise if given the comfort of financial support and capacity building. There will be failures and successes. Despite the risk, financing of first time entrepreneurs is a must for financial inclusion and growth. Banks will therefore, have to tone up their risk assessment and risk management capacities and provide for these failures as part of their risk management.  Banks have to recognise the vast potential that exists in responsible lending to the MSE segment. The banks must deliver on their voluntary commitments enshrined in their Code of Commitment to their MSE borrowers. Banks have, no doubt, through the Code of Bank’s Commitment to MSEs, voluntarily committed to their MSE customers to provide easy, speedy and transparent access to banking services in their day-to-day operation. In the last Standing Advisory Committee meeting held on July 5, 2011, it was decided that the SCBs should understand the problem of the sector and devise strategies to gear up their credit mechanism structure so as to achieve the prescribed target of lending to the sector by the PM’s Task Force. Sensitivity on the issue to be developed at various hierarchical levels, such as, discussion of the issue in the Board meetings, management level meetings once in three months. Branch manager’s conference on financing to the micro sector to be held and the local NGOs, KVIC could be involved so as to appreciate the problems of the sector and flagging major issues to remove constraints/ bottlenecks in financing. The performance of branch managers in dealing with the sector should be made a criterion in their performance appraisal. With increasing competition, introduction of new products and stringent regulatory environment, the role of banks needs to change from mere lenders to partners in business. There is a need for greater participation of banks in the affairs of their constituents by convergence of credit services and non credit services. The bank’s staff should be trained and sensitised through customised training programmes to meet the diverse needs of MSEs such as knowledge of markets, both domestic and global, use of technology, etc. Banks should be actively providing advisory and planning services and in fact hand-holding their clients through the setting-up stage and such services should be extended to all regardless of the size of their turnover. The banks should not only provide differentiated products for MSMEs, but also provide counseling & guidance to new and established businesses, marketing support etc. In short, all banks, in fact, may develop innovative mechanism to provide not only finance and banking services to their MSME customers but also non credit related services to them under one roof at reasonable charges.  For creating transparency and wider dissemination of services provided by banks for their MSME clients, it was decided in the 12th Standing Advisory Committee on MSMEs that all SCBs should set up a SME Portal on their website, where they could put in all information/products of their bank for their MSE clients, as well as information on awareness programs etc organized by them. I am sure Central Bank of India and other banks would have taken a step in that direction.  
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches In order to expedite sanction and disbursement of loan to MSMEs a single window concept could be provided by Central Bank of India, if not already done. Loan facility to small units, say Micro enterprises, should be sanctioned at the level of the branch. A Centralised Credit Processing Cell (CPC) for MSMEs could be introduced. These Cells may be utilized for single point appraisal, sanction, documentation, renewal and enhancement. The arrangement is expected to help in reduction in delay and multiple queries, utilization of the available talent in an optimal fashion besides building reliable MIS, developing fair practices and easier tracking. Initially, the CPCs may be set up at each Regional Office of the banks and subsequently in the recognized clusters. In case of micro and small enterprises simplified procedure of loan application/ sanction should be followed, score based lending be done up to Rs 2 crores, working capital limits be given by projected turnover method, and term loans be sanctioned as recommended above to prevent the burden of data collection, project report/ projections preparation for MSMEs. The disposal of applications should be done in a time bound manner, which should be within the overall time limit prescribed by RBI. All banks should tap the available technology and set up Central Registration of Loan Applications. The same set up can be used by the borrower for tracking of the status of application on the internet on the basis of the receipt issued to him. The borrower may also be provided option of tracking his application over telephone on the toll-free helpline. The same technological setup may also be used for making online applications. Online applications may be popularized and publicized by all branches.  Lack of adequate capacity is the key feature, as regards micro, small and medium enterprises are concerned. In order to equip the MSMEs with the capacity to manage their businesses effectively and efficiently comprehensive guidance and training on setting up new units as well as providing continuous education on different aspects of successful management of existing business enterprises must be provided. While the Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs) are working in this direction there is a need to examine the impact of RSETIs. A scheme for utilizing NGOs to provide training services to tiny micro enterprises could be encouraged. Entrepreneurship development is important in view of its visible impact on wealth creation and employment generation. To facilitate and encourage this, skill building has been impressed upon by the Prime Minister’s Task Force for MSMEs. Enterprise Development Centres (EDC) should be set up by the Central/State Governments with incubators to provide training not just for setting up of new units but also to provide continuing education on different aspects like product design, packaging, technology upgradation, financial management and marketing.  Role of associations All SLBC Convenor banks have been to review their institutional arrangements for delivering credit to the MSME sector, especially in 388 clusters identified by United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO) spread over 21 states in various parts of the country. The Central Bank of India has presence in 47 clusters identified by UNIDO and these branches have been designated as Specialised MSME Branch. The MSME Associations/Chambers may bring to the notice of SLBC Convenor banks clusters were banking facilities are not available so that the same could be addressed. Specific issues concerning the sector were banks could play a role should also be brought to the notice of the SLBC Convenor bank and the Empowered Committee on MSMEs by the Industry Associations for appropriate measures to be taken to solve the issues.  As any other sickness, the need for timely treatment after identification of sickness cannot be overemphasized in MSMEs. For viable units, timely and effective rehabilitation by way of renegotiations of terms of loans, induction of fresh dose of funds, business restructuring, change of management etc. may become necessary. The process should not only be quick, efficient, cheap and fair to all stakeholders but also acceptable to and implementable by all, with necessary monitoring arrangements for implementation of the same. In case the unit is not found viable, recovery of the dues of lenders through a fair, efficient and swift legal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 mechanism should be the focus. The senior-level representatives of MSME Associations in each State are members of the Empowered Committee set up by RBI at each of its Regional Offices, of which the SLBC convenor, representatives of banks having predominant share in SME financing in the State, SIDBI, Director of Industries of the State Government etc. are also members. MSME Associations need to use this Forum not only for removing bottlenecks in the smooth flow of credit to the sector but also for reviewing the accessibility of bank finance to more and more MSMEs but also highlight gaps if any in the attitude and skills at the bank branch level. As it is observed that rehabilitation of sick micro, small and medium enterprises could not be taken up due to non-availability of promoters’ contribution in a large number of cases, we have recommended to the GOI to set up a Rehabilitation Fund for rehabilitation of sick MSME enterprises. The Industry Associations have often been often representing on the delayed payments from large corporates. While banks have been advised to allocate a sub-limit in respect of large borrower accounts, for making payments to the MSE units against purchases from them but it is not possible for banks to force the large buyers to utilize the limit for making payments. This problem could be institutionally tackled by factoring. In the recent meeting of the Standing Advisory Committee to review credit flow to this sector, it was urged upon the Industry Associations to bring forward exemplary cases where big corporates have defaulted in making payments to MSE suppliers so that appropriate action, under the Act, could be taken by the Government of India. The MSME Associations and Chambers of Commerce have an important role to play in stepping up credit to this segment. Asymmetry of information and lack of transparency and reliability of data has been a major concern for organizations dealing with MSMEs world over. The Association need to therefore, proactively engage themselves in organising workshops and training programmes for their members to enlighten them about cash flow cycles, various financial products, accounting practices, etc. In this regard, I would urge upon the other MSME Associations, Chambers of Commerce etc. to collaborate, in the same manner with banks, NIBM or any other training institute in the area of banking and finance, basic accountancy and information technology for MSMEs.  Role of MSMEs MSEs too, on their part, should understand that banks are responsible to their depositors and shareholders and, therefore, they, i.e. the MSEs, as customers of bank credit, have certain obligations to fulfill by way of repaying bank loans, maintaining proper books of accounts, submitting information correctly and more importantly sharing information about financial problems when these arise so that they can work together with the bank in resolving these. On the cost of credit, while interest rates have been deregulated by Reserve Bank of India, my message to the MSME sector is that as interest costs are a very small fraction of their operating costs, only approximately 4%, do not ask for low interest rates from the banking sector, and instead ask for credit at competitive rates. Credit has to be self-liquidating on a viable project and has a cost. In fact, what the small entrepreneurs need to focus on are four typical mistakes entrepreneurs make as rightly pointed out by Peter F. Drucker in his book “Managing in the Next Society”. Many new businesses start out with high promise but suddenly run into trouble after a year or two. There are typical mistakes entrepreneurs make and all are foreseeable and avoidable. Firstly, majority of successful new inventions or products do not succeed in the market for which they were originally designed. So one has to keep options open and not be dogmatic about pushing a product in a market for which initially designed or targeted. Success may lie elsewhere. Secondly, entrepreneurs believe that profit is what matters most in a new enterprise. But profit is secondary. It is the cash flow that matters. A business that grows fast devours cash. Constant investments have to be made to just keep even. Thirdly, when a business grows, it is necessary to create a management team. Young entrepreneurs often cannot afford to bring in an external management team. So, it is necessary to identify 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches the core competencies of the people working with you. This planning should take place well in advance. Lastly, when the business is a success the entrepreneur needs to ask what the business needs at this stage and whether he is concentrating on the right things. As successful entrepreneurs, they have gained experience and wisdom from their mistakes and going forward, it is necessary to ensure that the same mistakes are not repeated. E. Need for financial infrastructure Establishing a solid financial infrastructure (credit registries/ bureaus, collateral, and insolvency regimes) should be a priority in the financial development agenda, as it can lower the costs and risks to financial institutions of serving MSMEs. Bankruptcy regimes regulate the efficient exiting of the market, and make the resolution of multiple creditors’ conflicting claims more orderly, resulting in more extensive opportunities for recovery by both the bankrupt entity and its creditors. Stronger creditor rights improve access to finance. Stronger creditor rights tend to have a higher number of loan accounts per adult population and also higher rates of private credit to GDP. There is a need for adequate and reliable credit information mechanism, such as an MSME credit bureau, that serves the needs of both the MSMEs’ and the potential lenders’. Transparency shall facilitate them in obtaining finances, getting favourable contracts and improving their business prospects. A World Bank report stated that a good credit information infrastructure can contribute significantly towards assisting MSMEs’ access to capital. The report further highlighted that small firms with access to credit bureaus have a 40% chance of obtaining a loan, whereas firms without access to credit bureaus have only a 28% chance of receiving a loan. Therefore, significant opportunities exist to increase lending activities to MSMEs with the establishment of MSME credit bureaus. A sound financial information infrastructure should improve transparency and disclosure for MSMEs in a cost-effective way, and help MSMEs build a credit history, which is critical in helping to address both challenges of information asymmetry and cost to serve. Setting of Credit Information Companies has already been approved by Reserve Bank of India. F. Conclusion The recent past has been a challenging time for the banking sector in India. You, along with the entrepreneurs, have coped well with these challenges and have emerged stronger from a difficult phase. While the banking sector has responded well so far, there are several challenges that lie ahead. Our banking system needs to equip itself to deal with emerging challenges and be prepared to cash in on the opportunities unleashed by higher growth. In dealing with the needs of small and medium enterprises, banks have to look for new delivery mechanisms. They must economise on transaction costs and provide better access to the currently under-served. To serve new rural credit needs, innovative channels for credit delivery will have to be found. The proud history of your bank should inspire you to seek greater heights of professional glory. In the end, I once again congratulate Central Bank of India and the SME Chamber in jointly organizing this Conclave. I also convey my best wishes to every employee and entrepreneur customer of your bank on the eve of the conclusion of your Centenary Year, to your customers and well-wishers, and wish you a great future of growth and development. You have had a glorious hundred years. You now have a great opportunity. May the next hundred be even better!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Duvvuri Subbarao: Challenges to the accounting profession – some reflections Inaugural address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 26th Regional Conference of the Western India Regional Council of the Institute of Chartered Accounts of India (ICAI), Mumbai, 16 December 2011. *      *      * 1. Thank you for inviting me to speak at this conference of the Western India Regional Council of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI). 2. When I got invited to speak at this conference, at first I was a bit surprised. I wondered why you might be wasting valuable conference time listening to the Reserve Bank when there is not much in common between the Reserve Bank and the accounting profession, except possibly the fact that we both lose sleep when numbers go wrong. I then spoke to my staff and realized how wrong I was. We share considerable professional space and have several mutual concerns. I will address some of those shared concerns. 3. Before doing so though, I must acknowledge another link between the Reserve Bank and the accounting profession through Shri Y.H. Malegam, who has been a Director on the Central Board of the Reserve Bank almost continuously since 1994 except for a brief interlude of a few days. Shri Malegam is, by wide acknowledgement, one of the foremost Chartered Accountants in India who has set very exacting standards of professional competence, and more importantly, of professional conduct. The Reserve Bank has benefited enormously from his vast knowledge of accounting, his understanding of the financial sector and his judgement of the larger public interest. As a profession, you can all be proud of colleagues like Shri Malegam who enhance public respect for the accounting profession. The accounting profession 4. The development of the accounting profession owes its origin to the emergence of the joint stock company and the consequent separation of ownership from management. This arrangement triggered the need for an independent and informed opinion on the accounting of the owners’ funds entrusted to the management for their stewardship. The “raison d’être” of the profession is consequently based on the confidence which the profession enjoys with the investing public, and its continued relevance is essentially tied up with retaining this confidence. While initially the profession provided this confidence only to the shareholders of joint stock companies, today it provides this assurance to a wider base of stakeholders including the government, the banking system, regulators and society itself. 5. At the Reserve Bank, we depend on the accounting profession for at least two reasons. You audit the Reserve Bank’s balance sheet of course, and you also audit the balance sheets of commercial banks which we regulate and supervise. Reserve bank’s balance sheets 6. Let me make a brief comment here on the Reserve Bank’s balance sheet. The balance sheet of the Reserve Bank is different from that of commercial organizations in some important respects. Uniquely, the Reserve Bank is statutorily mandated to have two balance sheets – one for the Issue Department and the other for the Banking Department. The Issue Department handles the task of issue, exchange and withdrawal of currency notes. The Banking Department maintains the deposit accounts of banks and of governments. The rationale for building a firewall around the balance sheet of the Issue Department is to maintain the integrity of the asset backing for the currency that we issue. The firewall 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches ensures that the explicit promise that every currency note carries, which is to pay the bearer the sum mentioned therein, is honoured in the full accounting sense. Our other balance sheet, that of the Banking Department, reflects the transactions we perform in our role as banker to banks and to the Central and state governments. 7. In the Reserve Bank, we are deeply conscious of our responsibility for maintaining the integrity of our balance sheets. The Reserve Bank’s balance sheets are analyzed by a wide array of stakeholders to study the underlying monetary and macro economic trends so as to make informed decisions. We have an obligation, therefore, to maintain the highest standards of clarity, transparency and disclosure, and we try our best to meet this obligation. RBI and the accounting profession  8. While the financial statements of the Reserve Bank are subject to audit by your profession, as the regulator and supervisor of the banking system, the Reserve Bank is a major stakeholder in commercial banks whose financial statements are audited by you. In our view, auditors are the “eyes and ears” of RBI, and we trust them to alert us to early warning signals to assist us in our supervisory process. We also encourage auditors to discuss any regulatory issues with RBI before finalizing the accounts. Further, during the process of “Annual Financial Inspection” of banks, the inspection team interacts with the auditors to discuss issues of regulatory concern.  Challenges for the accounting profession 9. As several stakeholders depend upon the accounting profession, the profession too has to recognize that it has to continue to inspire the trust and confidence of the stakeholders if it has to remain relevant and value adding. In recent years, several challenges have emerged, both at domestic and global levels which, if not effectively addressed, could erode that confidence. Let me address what, in my view, are some of the key challenges. Competence  10. First, the challenge of competence. With the growing complexity of the financial sector and the emergence of new and sophisticated financial instruments, the knowledge base of the profession needs to keep pace with these emerging practices and innovations. This requires, not just a continual review of its curriculum, but more importantly, an active, well diversified and constantly updated programme of continuing professional education for its members. Continuing professional education cannot be a mere “tick in the box” or determined by participation in number of hours of education or training, but should be evaluated by way of outcomes – upgradation of relevant knowledge and skill sets.  11. Towards improving the skill set of the accounting profession, with particular reference to auditing banks, the Reserve Bank has taken some initiatives. We have established a practice of an annual Statutory Auditors’ Conference to apprise the statutory auditors of banks on the critical issues in the area of banking regulation and supervision. The conference also provides a forum for auditors to give us their feedback on current concerns and to suggest any changes to our supervisory and regulatory policies. We have found this to be an effective forum for mutual exchange of views, and I hope you likewise have found it to be value adding. I am open to suggestions on improving this engagement.  12. I am also happy to note in this context that as a result of your Institute’s initiative, India is embarking on convergence with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), which would then result in our financial accounting and reporting getting to be world class. As you are no doubt aware, IFRSs are largely broad principles rather than detailed rules. Their application requires judgment and possibly even lateral thinking, especially in the area of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 determining the fair value of financial assets and liabilities. The auditing profession needs to improve its skill endowment to facilitate a smooth and efficient convergence with IFRS. Globalization 13. The second challenge the profession needs to reckon with is globalization. Globalization implies that countries can no longer afford to remain isolated in so far as their operating and legal systems are concerned. For the profession, this gets reflected not merely in international accounting and auditing standards but also in a number of other areas like education, ethics, etc. I gather the ICAI, with its 180,000 members, is the second largest accounting institution in the world. It is not sufficient that the Institute merely responds to and adopts global standards. It should, in fact, go further and actively participate in the formulation of these standards.  14. I am happy to learn that the President of ICAI has recently been elected as a member of the board of the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) and that there is an Indian member on the IASB. I also want to commend the Institute for its active participation and involvement in several international committees and projects aimed at improving accounting systems and processes. I would only urge that going forward, ICAI should proactively take the lead in the formulation of accounting standards in areas where we have specific concerns as an Emerging Market Economy (EME).  15. Another task the profession needs to address in regard to managing globalization is how it will select, from within its membership, persons of the requisite competence to participate in the global forums, and how it will provide them both financial and professional support to make this participation rewarding to them individually and to the profession more broadly. Needless to say, the process of selection of persons for representing the Institute in international forums should be strictly meritocratic and transparent.  Information Technology (IT) 16. Next on my list is the challenge of Information Technology. In the past, one of the main objectives of audit was ensuring the arithmetical accuracy of financial statements. With the advent of IT, this task has now been taken over by machines. This has both nudged and facilitated the profession to move up the value chain. The main task of the profession has now shifted to judgments of value, and to discharge this task, auditors have to demonstrate much higher levels of maturity, integrity, independence and balanced judgment. The development of these qualities will be a major challenge in the future. 17. Let me make a comment with regard to IT in banking. Over the past decade, most commercial banks have successfully implemented core banking solutions. This has created both opportunities and challenges for auditors. Challenges come by way of lack of visible evidence, risk of undetected system errors and bugs and frauds hidden in a labyrinth of data. Retrieving information in the computerized environment and assessing the implementation of computer related processes will also be critical to the audit process. Opportunities come by way of increasing use of Computer Assisted Audit Tools (CAATs) to access databases beneath the accounting software to create queries, write reports and develop audit trails. While the profession has risen to the challenge of auditing banks in an IT environment, we need to explore further on how audit can overcome the challenges and exploit the opportunities of the IT environment to make audit of banks more effective and meaningful. Opportunities  18. I am told one of the issues agitating all of you is expansion of opportunities for the accounting profession especially in view of the growing membership of the Institute. So far, 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches you have enjoyed a monopoly position in respect of certain areas of work, for example, the audit of financial statements. The easy way out to seek and expand opportunities would be to agitate for continuation of this monopoly position. I believe this will be a mistake. Rather, the profession needs to identify emerging opportunities in the market place and develop the skill needed to exploit them. 19. Let me cite an example. With concepts like core banking and centralized record keeping, the relevance of the audit of branches of Public Sector Banks (PSBs) has significantly declined. These banks have represented to RBI that the audit of bank’s branches should be reduced. There is merit in this suggestion, since currently the cost of audit of PSBs is significantly higher than the cost of audit of comparable private sector banks. However, the Institute has been resisting this because it would mean a reduction in work for its members.  20. I believe the Institute’s efforts in this regard are ill advised. In fact, it makes much more sense for the profession to sharpen its skills in the area of concurrent audit for which a need exists than to agitate for retention of work which does not add value. Similarly, the profession has shied away from the responsibility for prevention and early detection of fraud. The need for such a service exists and if the profession does not fulfill that need, other agencies which can provide this service will displace auditors and deprive them of a potentially expanding opportunity. Independence  21. Let me now turn to the challenge of “independence”. The growth of large international firms of accountants has created an opportunity for the provision of a multiplicity of services. Clients benefit from such umbrella services and attach value to it. However, this also raises the vexed question of the extent to which provision of these multiple services erodes the concept of independence.  22. The case of Enron, which took down along with it the audit firm Arthur Andersen, comes to mind in this context. The sudden collapse of Enron, an energy trading and distributing company, ranked seventh in the Fortune 500, raised a number of questions about the accounting and auditing practices followed by the company. The company used creative accounting to shift losses and debts off the company’s balance sheet into special purpose entities (SPEs) thereby concealing the extent of its indebtedness. The company was also reported to have withheld information about SPEs which could have led auditors to insist on their consolidation in the balance sheet. Enron’s accounting transgressions misled investors to believe that the company was more profitable and less leveraged than it really was.  23.  Andersen audited Enron for all sixteen years since the company’s formation. On top of pure audit, it also sold internal-audit and consulting services. Despite this privileged insight, Andersen did not discover that Enron was publishing incorrect financial statements leading to the term “Enronisation of financial statements”. This raises an important question of conflict of interest. Is it the case that the extensive consultancy work done by Arthur Andersen for Enron compromised its independence leading to its failure to detect erosion of accounting standards? It also subsequently came to light that some members of the Audit Committee faced financial conflicts of interest, generated in part by the company’s donations to charities to which they were connected. Could this conflict have been prevented?  24. Accounting and auditing practices were also called into question in the collapse of Parmalat, the largest dairy company in Europe, in one of the biggest accounting frauds in corporate history. Like Enron, Parmalat too undertook elaborate derivative deals, often using complex offshore structures that involved some of its many subsidiaries. Investors and bankers struggled to understand the balance sheet or gauge the true extent of its liabilities. By the time it collapsed, Parmalat had established dozens of arrangements involving offshore companies, which did not form part of the company’s consolidated financial statements.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 25. Instances such as these reaffirm the need for systemic reforms in two areas. The first is the regulation of auditors. The profession has argued for years that self-regulation and peer review are the right way to maintain standards. But the conduct of Enron, Parmalat etc. under the very nose of auditors has raised question about the effectiveness of soft regulation. The profession has to find a way of remedying this if it wants to prevent the imposition of an external regulator. 26. The second reform is the need to eliminate conflict of interest in accounting firms.  Should there be a ban on auditors selling consulting services to those they audit? One view is that there is no real conflict of interest and that better audits would be the best way to assure regulators that such a ban is unnecessary. Yet if confidence in auditing is to be regained, perception is equally important. Regulators are likely to demand some meaningful change on the issue of such conflict of interest. Overall, this is a complex issue which needs to be addressed dispassionately.  Inter-disciplinary approach  27. Inter-disciplinary approach is the next challenge on my list. In a complex world, no single profession can meet all the requirements of market participants. Neither is it possible for individual professions to operate in silos catering to specialized needs. Inter-disciplinary interaction is therefore not only unavoidable, but in fact desirable. But this creates its own problems, particularly in the area of disciplinary jurisdiction as professional standards in different governing bodies – if such a body exists – may be different and members of such bodies may be differently regulated. 28. The recent global financial crisis illustrates the problems that can arise from divergence of views across disciplines – in this case between the accounting profession and prudential banking regulators. There is widespread criticism that the accounting standards, more so fair value accounting insisted on by accountants, failed to reckon with illiquid markets and distressed sales, and thereby contributed to the crisis, or at the very least exacerbated the severity of the crisis.  29. Post-crisis, there is convergence in the views of prudential regulators and accounting standard setters on the desirability of forward looking expected loss approach to loan loss provisioning. The IASB, FASB as well as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) are actively engaged in finding a commonly agreed solution to this complex problem. 30. While discussing the issue of loan loss provisioning, I would like to highlight the Reserve Bank’s concern on the issue of divergence in identification of Non Performing Assets (NPAs) and provisioning as certified by statutory auditors vis-a-vis the findings of the supervisory inspection conducted by RBI. In the Reserve Bank’s view, in certain cases, the statutory auditors have underestimated the extent of NPAs and the required provisioning. Since RBI, as the supervisor of the banking system, relies and leverages on the work done by auditors, the profession should effectively address this issue. Ultimately, it is the statutory auditors’ certification that is taken as the “true and fair” statement of the accounts of a bank and is disclosed to all stakeholders. It is therefore of prime importance that there is no underestimation of provisioning requirements while finalising financial statements of banks. Value systems 31. Finally, let me turn to the sensitive and important issue of a value system. Recent months have witnessed an agitation across the country about erosion of values in the public domain. The norms of a society are determined by the dominant sections of that society, and the accounting profession is certainly a dominant section of society. The value system you 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches practise in your professional conduct influences the value system of the society. Sadly, we see several transgressions. 32. Take the case of Worldcom. Worldcom indulged in major accounting misstatements which hid the precarious financial position of the company. Investigations revealed that more than three billion dollars worth of costs were wrongly classified as capital expenses over a five quarter period. This boosted the reported profits, which were in fact fictitious. 33. The case of Satyam Computer Services here in India was similar. The company’s chairman confessed to more than a billion dollar fraud on its balance sheet which was hidden from the company’s board, its senior managers and of course the auditors for several years. The truth followed a now familiar pattern – overstating profits, understating liabilities, and overstating cash causing a big hole in the balance sheet. 34. With so much accounting misconduct in big corporations, stakeholders wonder why books are not being reviewed on the default assumption that there could be fraud afoot. Accounting experts explain that the kind of forensic auditing that reconstructs fraud is so time-consuming and expensive that it could bring an honest business to its knees. However, I strongly believe that a robust system of audits, a corporate culture in which ethical conduct is encouraged and exemplified and an active and independent Board of Directors can make such frauds harder to perpetrate, easier to detect and help restore public confidence in published results. 35. What has been RBI’s contribution in this regard? Recognising the importance of the internal audit and inspection function as an effective management tool, in April 1994, the Reserve Bank advised all banks to set up an Audit Committee of the Board (ACB) of Directors. Needless to say, we need to have skilled and qualified persons on the ACBs to make them truly effective. Accordingly, in September 1995, we advised banks to ensure that there is at least one non-executive director who should be a Chartered Accountant on the ACB. ACBs have since been contributing immensely by providing direction and also by overseeing the internal control function in the bank. We have kept the CEO of the bank outside the ACB to keep it independent. However, the second in command, the Executive Director concerned is a member of the ACB to bring the insider perspective to bear on the Committee’s deliberations. However, the presence of an executive director may be seen on compromising the independence of the ACB. I will be interested in your views on this.  36. Returning to the larger issue of a value system, the challenge before the profession is therefore to demonstrate by its own conduct, its concern for upholding a value system within itself and consequently within its clientele as also to initiate programmes which create sensitivity to the need for greater ethical conduct. In this context I would only like to reiterate that you have a significant role as the conscience-keeper of the business world.  Conclusion 37. Let me now sum up. I have started with briefly identifying the shared professional domain of the auditing profession and the Reserve Bank. I have alluded to the uniqueness of the Reserve Bank’s balance sheet, or indeed balance sheets. I then went on to indicate, what in my view, are some of the key challenges that the profession has to address in order to remain effective and to add value to the real sector. Where relevant, I have given contextual references and illustrations from the Reserve Bank, particularly stemming from its role as the regulator and supervisor of the banking system. 38. I wish your deliberations over the next two days all success. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Christian Noyer: The euro area sovereign debt crisis Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Bank of France / Toulouse School of Economics Conference “The euro area sovereign debt crisis”, Paris, 19 December 2011. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a great pleasure for me to give the introductory address to this stimulating conference that the Banque de France is very pleased to organize jointly with Toulouse School of Economics. Obviously, finding a more topical subject would be difficult, now that euro area’s sovereign debt markets are caught in the vortex of the financial turmoil that has been plaguing the world economy for the last four years. This topic is also the one we have chosen for our next Financial Stability Review, to be released next March, with a significant number of contributions stemming from today’s presentations. The current crisis is indeed extremely challenging. Many complex factors are currently interacting, making policy decision-making particularly difficult. In such a context, academics have a critical role to play to help us clarify the tradeoffs and available options, so that we are better able to make the right choices in real time.  This very fact that intellectual inputs from research are a precious resource in times of stress and multi-faceted uncertainty confirms me in my view that central banks’ investment in economic research, be it in-house or through partnerships with academia, is a very valuable asset. Therefore, I also warmly welcome this conference as being one brilliant illustration of the benefits brought by our three years long partnership with Toulouse School of Economics (TSE). Note however that, while the organization of high-level academic conferences has been an important achievement within this partnership, it is not the only one. Indeed, many avenues of fruitful collaboration have developed. Two series of regular joint seminars, one on monetary economics, the other on financial stability, and several workshops have notably contributed to strengthen the links between Banque-de-France and TSE researchers and stimulate the scientific and policy debates. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank Jean Tirole for his personal involvement in the exchanges with Banque de France. Last but not least, let me also advertise the new Banque de France – TSE Senior and Junior Prizes in Monetary Economics and Finance which purpose is to distinguish outstanding contributions by academics. The first prizes will be awarded for the first time on 16 March 2012.  In the remaining of this address, I will first discuss the sovereign nature of the current crisis, its origins, implications and the associated challenges. Then, I will focus on the response of the Eurosystem to this crisis. 1. The euro-area sovereign debt crisis: some thoughts on its origins, its implications, and the challenges ahead The origins of the euro-area sovereign debt crisis are twofold: the real cost of the overall financial crisis and the excesses of the pre-crisis period have jointly contributed to the gravity of the current situation. While this is not specific to the euro area, the consequences have turned out to be particularly harmful here. Indeed, by not internalizing the policy requirements associated with the participation in a monetary union, several euro-area countries entered the global financial crisis in a particularly vulnerable position. One of these policy requirements is fiscal discipline. Within the Stability and Growth Pact, fiscal discipline was associated with pre-agreed quantitative ceilings for the deficit and debt-to-GDP ratios. In practice, many euro-area countries did not take advantage of expansionary periods to reduce the probability of reaching these limits in recessionary phases. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Unfortunately, an exceptionally hard recession, by all historical standards, hit the euro area in 2009, as a consequence of the financial turmoil initiated in the US in 2007–2008. The tax revenue went down and the large fiscal stimulus packages that were then required to contain the real consequences of the crisis and to avoid major disruptions in the financing of the economy also resulted in swift increases in public debts across the board. The fact that both public and private indebtedness had followed an unsustainable pace of growth over the previous decade then makes area-wide adjustments both necessary and painful. Among the factors that contributed to the excess of the pre-crisis period stands in my view the misleading belief that sophisticated financial engineering was able to achieve close-to-perfect risk diversification and market completeness led in fact to excessive risk-taking by banks. This is in sharp contrast with the current situation, in which investors have doubts about even the risk-freeness of sovereign bonds of developed economies.  Restoring market confidence is a difficult and potentially lengthy task. That said, all actions that are consistent with the commitment of governments to address national fiscal imbalances and structural impediments to real growth are likely to accelerate this process. Besides, it is clear that nominal long-term anchors are also of the essence to reduce uncertainty and facilitate such reforms. The primary mandate and the best possible contribution of the Eurosystem is precisely to ensure price stability in the medium run. Then, to the extent that dysfunctional financial-markets are likely to jeopardize our ability to maintain stable prices in the medium run, the Eurosystem must intervene. This analysis has motivated our decisions in the past and will continue to motivate future ones. This brings me to the second part of my talk today. 2. Measures taken by the Eurosystem to fight against the financial crisis Our analysis of the recent situation suggests that the weak outlook for economic activity in the euro area is weighing downward on costs, wages and prices. Accordingly, the Governing council decided twice to lower the key ECB interest rate by 25 basis points, in its early November and early December Meetings. Changes in the ECB rates ultimately affect inflation through changes in bank lending rates, monetary and financial conditions and aggregate demand. Under normal financial-market conditions, monetary-policy transmission mechanisms work properly and non-standard measures are unnecessary. But when transmission mechanisms are impaired, standard policy is likely to be less effective. In such exceptional circumstances, extraordinary, or non-standard, measures must be implemented. It is in that spirit that the Eurosystem has constantly and reactively updated its set of non-standard measures, keeping pace with the crisis’ developments. On December 8, we have announced extensive measures to contain the refinancing risks of Euro area banks. The Eurosystem has announced in particular two longer-term refinancing operations with a maturity of 36 months which will be conducted as fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment as well as the extension of the collateral it considers eligible to borrow its liquidity. We also have reduced the rate of reserve requirements from 2% to 1%, which is also contributing to stem collateral constraints of parts of the euro area banking system.  I would like to recall again that, in the euro area, banks are the main channel for mobilizing domestic savings and financing investment. This explains why ECB’s non-standard measures have primarily aimed at enhancing access of the banking sector to liquidity and at facilitating the functioning of the euro-area money market. Given the topic of the current conference, I would like to take the opportunity to elaborate on one of these non-standard measures, namely the Securities Market Programme, or SMP. Sovereign yields are central in the transmission of monetary policy, in particular because government bonds provide a floor to the private-sector funding costs. This is the reason why we launched the SMP.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 I insist that, through the implementation of all its non-conventional measures – including the SMP – the Eurosystem has fully played its expected role as a lender of last resort (LLR), by which I mean that we have and we will intervene to stem liquidity crises that threaten the stability of the banking system.  Having said that, it is clear that engaging in large-scale asset purchases of sovereign bonds is well beyond what should be expected of a central bank’s role as a LLR. Moreover, large-scale asset purchases are not without risks. While they may help to alleviate upward pressures on long-term interest rates in the short run, they could also affect price and financial stability in the medium-run, by endangering the value of the central-bank money. Such risks do not necessarily materialize, but when they do, the repercussions are dramatic.  Altogether, considering the different tools are potentially at the disposal of policy-makers, it is crucial to gauge the short- to long-run benefits, limits and risks associated with each of them. I do not think that confidence would really benefit from measures that are known to carry non-negligible long-run risks, even if some short-term relief is expected from them. As a way of conclusion, let me shortly consider the progress that has already been made to solve this crisis and list some of the remaining challenges ahead. First, it seems important to welcome the significance of the fiscal stabilization programs many euro-area governments have committed to. As mentioned earlier, this is a necessary step to restore confidence in a sustainable way. Although this is a difficult task, the timely delivery of the promised reforms is necessary. Second, beyond individual policy actions, the recent progress obtained in the design of a common fiscal governance in the euro area is of the essence. Indeed, many important decisions have been taken in that direction: The creation of the EFSF and the ESM or the agreement on fiscal rules and surveillance mechanisms during the Brussels EU Summit on December the 8th and 9th are historical steps in the right direction. Obviously, most of these newly established institutions, rules and processes would have been unthinkable four years ago. This makes me really optimistic about our prospects for restoring stability and growth in the euro area. Thus, significant progress has been achieved. However, the future may still add to the extraordinary challenges we are now confronted with. I rely on the academic community to help the policymakers in the decisive decisions they will have to take. Thank you for your attention. I wish you all a fruitful and stimulating conference.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Lars Nyberg: Monetary policy and financial crises – some reflections Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at Danske Bank, Stockholm, 21 December 2011. *      *      * On the first of January 1999, thirteen years ago, Sweden gained a new central bank act. Six people were given the privilege of independently deciding on something that interests almost everyone in Sweden, namely the interest rate. These six people were forbidden to take instructions from anyone – that is, politicians – and it was also forbidden for outsiders to give them instructions. I had the privilege of being one of the six who started in 1999, and I have thus been here ever since. This means that I have been a member of the Executive Board more than twice as long as any of the other current members and more than four years longer than any other person who has been on the Board. Whether this longer experience is then reflected in a correspondingly greater wisdom on central bank-related matters is of course less certain. In any case, I shall leave this to others to decide. An eventful period  But there is no doubt that these thirteen years have been eventful. There have been the usual cyclical ups and downs, but also a number of crises in various parts of the world and, of course, the global financial crisis and the ensuring sovereign debt crisis that we are currently in the midst of.  The way we conduct monetary policy has also changed over the past thirteen years. The inflation-targeting policy introduced in 1993 has of course always been the nucleus, but it has developed in various ways. Work in my particular field of interest, financial stability, has also been refined in many ways. For obvious reasons, this is an area that has come under particular focus in recent years. One might say that if the task of maintaining financial stability had previously tended to be overshadowed by the usually more attention-grabbing task of maintaining price stability, the situation has almost been reversed during the crisis. The financial stability work has in any case gained a more prominent position and become more on a par with monetary policy.  Now I do not intend to devote my last speech as member of the Executive Board to outlining my central bank memoirs. I have always been more interested in looking ahead than looking back, and I intend to do so today. More specifically, I intend to take up some areas that I believe will feature in the discussions on central banks and their activities in the coming years. They are all connected with the financial crisis in one way or another; it is difficult to avoid it in this context. In brief, I will talk about two themes: The importance of indebtedness not becoming too high and the importance of having crisis management mechanisms in place before the event. The most important lesson: Don’t allow too much debt to build up! Of course, the financial crisis was due to many factors acting together. But one of the most important lessons was that one should beware of allowing debts to grow too much. This applies equally to households, companies and governments. This is neither a particularly surprising nor especially new lesson; over several hundred years, financial crises have often been preceded by periods when the attitude to credit granting and lending has been too carefree. But it seems as though this is a lesson that we must experience again and again – at least once a generation, and perhaps even more often.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches A rapid and substantial credit expansion can cause many different problems. If the expansion is characterised by an exaggerated optimism and an underestimation and underpricing of risk, large loan losses may arise in the banks when the sentiment changes. This can lead to banks failing and ultimately to a financial crisis. We experienced this in the 1990s, and Spain and Ireland are experiencing it now. Once the economy has entered a recession after a period of rapidly-increasing indebtedness and rising asset prices, the recovery from this level may be very slow. The reason is that the economy then often enters what is known as a balance sheet recession.1 Put briefly, what this means is that the economic agents need time to adjust their balance sheets if, for example, property prices have fallen. Their incomes will for some time to come be used for amortisation rather than consumption and investment. Monetary policy stimulation has less effect than normal and developments in the economy as a whole are weak. Studies show that this type of mechanism largely explains why the recovery in the United States has been, and still is, so slow.2 A financial crisis may also have other consequences. For instance, one can claim that the sovereign debt crisis we are currently in the midst of is in many ways a consequence of the financial crisis, and thus of the credit expansion that preceded it. Bank crises and sovereign debt crises are often connected. Public finances in many countries have weakened substantially because demand has fallen and in some cases also because they have needed to support a precarious banking system. Moreover, in many countries the credit expansion concealed the need for structural reforms in the labour market and in public administration, which meant they were ill-equipped when the recession came. So, all in all, there are many good reasons to try to avoid a situation where credit and lending accelerate out of control. Various perceptions of the link between monetary policy and financial stability policy So what should we do to prevent, or at least reduce the risk of, this type of development in the future? Opinion is currently divided on this question. The role central banks should play has been debated a lot, and in particular whether rate-setting should be used to subdue credit expansion.  At one end of the spectrum are those who say that the crisis has meant that the dividing line between monetary policy and financial stability policy has in many ways been erased, or at least become less evident. If the central bank does not already have the clear and express task of maintaining financial stability, it should be given this – in addition to the natural task of acting as “lender of last resort” in a crisis. Monetary policy should be regarded as a legitimate tool in the financial stability toolbox.3  At the other end of the spectrum we find those who say that monetary policy and financial stability policy are distinct policies that should not be confused with one another. They claim that monetary policy and financial stability policy differ in the same way that monetary policy and fiscal policy differ, and they have different targets and methods. The policy rate should therefore not be regarded as an instrument for financial stability policy. Both types of policy should react to one another, but they should not be coordinated and conducted together as                                                  1 The concept “balance sheet recession” was introduced a few years ago as an explanation for developments in Japan and its “lost decade”; see Koo, R.C., Balance Sheet Recession: Japan’s Struggle with Unchartered Economics and its Global Implications, Wiley, 2003. 2 See, for instance, Eggertsson, G. and P. Krugman, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Working Paper, February 2011 and Mian, A., K. Rao and A. Sufi, “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump”, Chicago Booth Working paper, November 2011.  3 See, for instance, Eichengreen, B., R. Rajan and E. Prasad, “Central banks need a bigger and bolder mandate”, Financial Times, 24 October 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 there is then a risk that both will become unclear. The outcome may also be poorer and it may be more difficult to hold policymakers accountable.4 The problems are exaggerated by those who believe that both types of policy must be coordinated…  I can understand both points of view, but I believe that both have exaggerated their arguments somewhat. Those who say that monetary policy and financial stability policy should be integrated to a greater extent sometimes give the impression that they believe the central bank should at every monetary policy meeting both determine the policy rate and activate a number of macroprudential supervisory levers to find a policy mix that is appropriate for both monetary policy and financial stability.  I do not believe that this is the way things will be done – I believe that this way of thinking is too coloured by recent events. After all, it is not as though problems arise from over-generous credit granting during every economic cycle. Most cycles are ”normal”, with no financial imbalances or balance-sheet problems. Of course, one must remain vigilant and constantly assess the risks – and try to reduce them when necessary. But it is probably quite rare that one will actually need to use macroprudential tools, or the policy rate, to subdue a credit boom and thus reduce the risk of a crisis. Growth in lending is normally something positive. It is, of course, difficult to say how often problems may arise, but one can conclude, for instance, that we in Sweden have experienced two financial crises with not quite twenty years between them, and this is regarded as unusually often. For the great majority of the time the central bank will thus be able to conduct its monetary policy in a normal way. Monetary policy and financial stability policy have, so to say, slightly different time dimensions. …and by those who say they should be entirely separate But I also believe that the problems are exaggerated by those who warn against integrating monetary policy and financial stability policy. For example, I believe that one can decide on both the policy rate and macroprudential supervisory measures at the same time and in a coordinated way, without either monetary policy or financial stability policy being perceived as less clear. I believe, for instance, that it would be fully possible for the Riksbank to explain, together with Finansinspektionen (the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority), that the mortgage ceiling is being lowered to counteract excessive credit expansion and rising prices in the housing market, at the same time as the Riksbank holds the policy rate unchanged because this is justified by events in the economy as a whole. Of course, this makes considerable demands on the authorities’ communication, but I believe that it is fully possible to put this message across and gain understanding.  I can also imagine that under certain circumstances it might be difficult in a purely practical manner to avoid some amount of coordination between monetary policy and financial stability policy. Some countries have chosen to place the main responsibility for maintaining financial stability with the central bank. Other countries have created some form of cooperation between the central bank and the supervisory authority and I believe that this would be a good model for Sweden, too. Macroprudential supervision entails to a large extent using traditional supervision instruments with the focus on the entire financial system instead of individual financial institutions.                                                  4 See, for instance, Svensson, L., “Monetary policy after the crisis”, speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 29 November 2011, Sveriges Riksbank. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches In any case, the central bank becomes deeply involved also in macroprudential supervision. I believe that it may be difficult in practice to make the monetary policy decisions on the assumption that the financial stability policy is regarded as given, and vice versa.5 Let me also say, in this context, a few words in general about whether monetary policy and financial stability policy should be regarded as different types of policy with different goals and means. When regarded as principles and concepts it is of course the case that financial stability is quite different from stability in the inflation rate and the real economy, that is, what central banks with flexible inflation targeting strive to achieve. Logically, one could thus argue that monetary policy and financial stability policy are two different types of policy that should be conducted quite separately. But I am not sure how meaningful this distinction is in practice. Personally, I have not regarded financial stability as merely a goal, but just as much a means, or a condition, for attaining a stable real economy and stable inflation. Assessments of developments in the financial sector must, as far as possible, be included in the macroeconomic assessments. Financial unrest and instability often lead to demand in the economy being too low and inflation undershooting the target. If one considers that there are both ”normal” economic cycles and less frequent credit and debt cycles, the upturns in both cycles are not necessarily synchronised. However, it is often the case that a rapid fall in a credit and debt cycle entails a corresponding fall in the normal economic cycle – and not uncommonly a balance-sheet recession.6 Monitoring the credit and debt cycle thus becomes a way of stabilising the normal economic cycle. With this view, it is less obvious that financial stability policy and monetary policy should be conducted separately. But, once again, it is probably quite rare that there will be reasons to coordinate them. The policy rate will probably need to support financial stability policy With regard to the question of the role of the policy rate in financial stability policy, it is my personal opinion that one must always be prepared to use it to slow down an excessive expansion in credit, or to “lean against the wind” as it is usually called. Hopefully, it will be possible to find a set of macroprudential tools that are efficient enough so we do not need to use the policy rate for this purpose. Hopefully it will also be possible to find appropriate forms as to when they shall be used and by whom.  But my feeling is that even when we have a proper framework for macroprudential supervision, situations may arise where support is needed from monetary policy “leaning against the wind”. One reason is that experience shows that it is difficult to construct regulations that can never be circumvented. The policy rate is a blunt instrument, as it has a broad impact on the economy. But at the same time, this may be a strength compared with the macroprudential tools, simply because it is difficult to “avoid” a policy rate increase.  I am also convinced that quite regardless of what formal responsibility the central bank bears for financial stability, it will always receive a large share of the blame if a financial crisis arises. When all is said and done, the interest rate is the price of credit and as the central bank controls this price, at least regarding shorter maturities, I believe that the general public will hardly absolve the central bank of blame if a financial crisis arises after a period of                                                  5 The comparison with fiscal policy, which is regarded as a foregone conclusion in monetary policy discussions, falters somewhat, as I see it. Fiscal policy is formulated by politicians with varying goals and we are probably wise to regard it as a foregone conclusion. However, regarding the relationship between monetary policy and macroprudential supervision in a similar way may function as a conceptual model, but would not work in practice. 6 For a recently-published study of the importance of credit and debt for the economic cycle, see Jordà, Ò, M. Schularick and A.M. Taylor, “When Credit Bites Back: Leverage, Business Cycles, and Crises”, NBER Working Paper No. 17621.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 cheaper credit. It will probably therefore be difficult in practice to conduct a monetary policy that does not take into account financial stability. We should continue to develop flexible inflation targeting  So, what conclusions should one draw from developments in recent years? How much do we need to reconsider and how much must we modify the monetary policy framework? I would reply: Somewhat, but perhaps less than one sometimes might think. I am fairly convinced that the flexible inflation-targeting policy conducted in many parts of the world has essentially been the right path to take, although it has not solved all of the problems. It appears to solve the problems it is intended to solve, without any serious side effects. I think that it is difficult, particularly with regard to Sweden, to overestimate the role played by inflation targeting in attaining better macroeconomic stability – together, of course, with far-reaching changes especially in the fiscal policy area. Economic policy is now more disciplined and we were able to benefit from the stability and credibility this has provided in the most recent crisis.  But it is also clear that the financial crisis highlighted some weaknesses and that the work on further developing the inflation-targeting policy must continue, both in the academic field and in central banks. For example, it is evident that there is reason to try to get to grips with and model the interaction between financial markets and the macro economy in a better way than before. Financial factors, and in particular credits and indebtedness, should play a larger role than before in our models and our thinking. Given the impressive amount of studies produced every month in these areas since the financial crisis broke out, I am fairly hopeful that it will be possible to gradually incorporate these aspects in a fruitful manner into practical inflation-targeting policy.7 But there clearly remains a lot to do. But what is important is that this is all about continuing to develop the inflation-targeting policy. The financial crisis should not be regarded, as some would appear to claim, as a sign that the inflation-targeting policy has been an unsuccessful monetary policy “experiment” and a blind alley – this is not the case.  Important to plan crisis management in advance, but this is rarely the case I have so far mainly talked about preventing crises and in particular what role monetary policy should play. Let me now go on to focus on the challenges with regard to managing the situation once a crisis has occurred. How one manages cross-border financial crises – or not – is a question that is very topical right now and will probably remain so for a long time to come. My first thesis here is that when one allows a financial system to grow and the dependence between the financial agents in different countries increases, one should carefully consider what regulations and institutions are needed to manage different crisis situations. As well as making it easier to resolve the crisis itself, clarity in this respect also affects how banks and other financial institutions develop their operations and also how supervision of them can best be shaped. Instead of thinking in terms of the sequence integration – supervision – crisis management, one should see it in the other direction, that is, crisis management – supervision – integration (Figure 1). My second thesis is that it is unfortunately very rare that this is done in practice.                                                   7 For an example of a theoretical analysis of how consideration for financial stability can be built into a model for inflation targeting, see Woodford, M., “Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability”, forthcoming in Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Figure 1 Bank regulation should be based on reverse induction  SupervisionCrisismanagementIntegrationTiming ofeventsLogicofincentiveanalysisSupervisionIntegrationCrisismanagement Inadequate planning for crisis management in the monetary union  This reasoning can also be applied to nations, not just to their financial systems. During the autumn, we have seen yields on government bonds soar in a number of euro area countries, particularly those with sovereign debt problems. It is quite clear that the euro area lacks the necessary institutions to manage such a crisis situation. In the United Kingdom, on the other hand, yields have not risen in the same way, despite weak public finances there too (Figure 2). There may be several explanations for this, for instance, that investors have confidence that the United Kingdom will manage to consolidate its budget successfully. But I believe that it is mainly because the euro area countries lack the defence mechanism that the United Kingdom has.8 The reasoning is as follows: When investors in, for instance, Italian government bonds are concerned over Italy’s creditworthiness they sell their bonds and buy something else, such as German government bonds. Then the Italian bond yields rise at the same time as liquidity leaves the country. Other investors become worried that the yields will rise further – which is the same as the value of their bonds falling – and therefore sell their holdings, which means that yields continue to rise. This becomes a spiral of falling liquidity and rising yields, which is difficult to stop. The Italian central bank is unable to do very much, as it cannot create liquidity in euro. Only the European Central Bank, ECB, in Frankfurt can do this. The Italians can ask for help, but they cannot do very much themselves – at least not in the short term. And the investors are aware of this, of course.                                                  8 See, for instance, De Grauwe, P., “The Governance of a Fragile Eurozone”, CEPS Working Document No. 346, May 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 Figure 2 Government bond yields, 10-year maturity Per cent 01234567801234567808091011ItalyUK Source: Reuters EcoWin. This situation is very similar to the one experienced by Argentina, for instance, when they had a “currency board” that firmly tied their domestic currency to the US dollar. In the event of a crisis there has been no central bank that could create currency – in other countries with similar problems the physical currency has run out and the only solution has been to fly in dollar bills from the Federal Reserve. Now, of course, the fundamental problem is that Italy, like Argentina, has lost competitiveness, had a deficit on its current account and built up debt until the market has gradually lost confidence and demanded higher and higher interest rates. Competiveness then needs to be restored through some form of internal devaluation. This is unavoidable, but it takes a long time and does not help the acute liquidity crisis. The situation is different in the United Kingdom. If investors are concerned over the British credit worthiness they will sell their government bonds as in the example above. They will then receive British pounds and they may also sell these too if they wish to get rid of the British credit risk. But liquidity in the UK is not affected in the same way as in Italy – there are just as many pounds in the UK as there were before. What happens is that the pound declines in value in relation to other currencies until the UK government bonds are once again regarded as worth their price. Moreover, the Bank of England can create liquidity by buying UK government bonds if this should prove necessary. There is no risk of a spiral of falling liquidity and rising interest rates in the same way as in the Italian example. In addition, British competitiveness will be helped by the weaker pound. And investors know this too. So UK bond yields will not rise in the same way as the Italian ones. On the basis of these examples, one might conclude that it is easier to manage a financial crisis if one is not involved in a monetary union. This is true, but fairly trivial and one should beware of making the related conclusion that currency unions are harmful. The euro cooperation has offered major benefits to its members, although these are not mentioned so much now. However, when it comes to crisis management in a currency union there are some important conclusions to draw. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches The first is that one must of course have regulations in a monetary union that enable one to avoid a crisis of the proportions we are seeing now. This was what the creators of the union were thinking when they initiated the Stability and Growth Pact. However, the pact did not work very well and intensive discussions are therefore underway as to how it can be supplemented with new regulations that will guarantee that no members have excessive budget deficits or can build up excessive debt burdens. Hopefully these discussions will bear fruit. However, it is far from certain that the developments we are seeing now could have been avoided even if the Stability and Growth Pact had been upheld. Low interest rates have meant that not only governments, but also companies and households have built up their debt. But an efficient regulatory system would probably have made the crisis more manageable. A second conclusion is that when one refrains from the crisis resolution mechanism inherent in a national currency, one must replace it with something else. Because crises that entail concern over a member state’s creditworthiness are always a risk. One must have an institutional framework to manage the investors’ concerns regarding rising bond yields in, for instance, Italy now that there is no Italian currency that can depreciate and the Banca d’Italia cannot create the necessary liquidity. If there is an institutional framework that is credible from the start, it will not need to be used in most cases. It is to some extent this type of framework that the European Financial Stability Facility, EFSF, is meant to become. It will be able to buy government securities issued by euro area countries. However, it is difficult to restore market confidence when it is already seriously damaged. The institutional framework must be in place and have credibility before the crisis breaks out. This makes the crisis easier to manage and one might even prevent it arising at all. It is probably the case here that politicians in the EU have helped increase market distrust because of the way they have handled the crisis. For example, it is understandable from a political point of view that they have wanted to force private lenders to write off their loans to Greece. But from an economic perspective – and in the longer run also political – this is not such a good idea. This has meant that Italy and Spain have had to pay much higher interest rates than before – not primarily because one perceives a risk that Italy and Spain will be unable to service their debts, but because the market has become uncertain as to whether the politicians intend to take similar coercive measures here. If one suffers an acute crisis, whether one has created it oneself or not, one must consider carefully how it should be managed. If one has not created a credible crisis resolution mechanism in good time and does not manage to do so during the crisis, there is finally only one last resort, and that is the ECB. The ECB is the monetary union’s central bank and can do in a crisis what the union’s national central banks are unable to do. It can always create liquidity and buy securities as needed and therefore in principle it can also attain the same credibility as the Bank of England has in the United Kingdom. The problem is that the ECB does not have an indisputable mandate to do this, and that the EU member states have differing views as to whether it should be given such a mandate. The ECB should not save countries from making necessary adjustments in legislation and public finances, many quite rightly point out. But this also risks having the consequence that one refrains from the only remaining mechanism that can manage an acute crisis.  Obstacles to setting up crisis management mechanisms One reason why it appears difficult to set up clear frameworks for managing a crisis in advance is, as I mentioned earlier, that crises occur so rarely. “There will be no more crises during my mandate period,” a politician said to me after the Swedish crisis in the early 1990s, when we were to discuss new crisis legislation. And he was right, of course. It took almost 20 years until the next crisis occurred, and by then he had left politics long ago.  There is another important reason, particularly when several countries are involved. If one is to create a framework to manage crises, one will unavoidably face the question of how the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 costs are to be divided, and it is almost, if not completely, impossible to agree on this in advance. All crises are different. It may be possible to agree on how to act when the problem arises, for instance, who should negotiate and how. One can thus decide on “ex ante preparations for ex post burden-sharing”, but not on “ex ante burden-sharing”. Given this, it is interesting to note that with regard to the ECB there is actually a crisis resolution mechanism in the form of an implied agreement on “ex ante burden-sharing”. It is written into the Treaty on European Union exactly how the national central banks should recapitalise the ECB if this were necessary. If the securities the ECB purchased were to fall in value so that the ECB needed more capital, it is thus clearly stipulated to what extent the different countries shall contribute. It may be because of this that some countries do not want to allow the ECB to buy government bonds, while others think it is an excellent idea. So, paradoxically, it may be the actual crisis resolution mechanism that in this case leads to a deadlock that risks aggravating the crisis. Crisis management mechanisms equally important in the banking system Let me now change focus from countries to banking systems. But both of the theses I mentioned earlier are the same: When cross-border integration progresses it is important – and profitable from society’s point of view – to create credible crisis resolution mechanisms in advance. But this is rarely or never done. One sometimes talks of Europe’s “financial trilemma”.9 We in Europe want to achieve a continued financial integration and increased financial stability, but at the same time we want to retain each country's national sovereignty. The problem is that it is possible to attain two of the goals, but very difficult to attain all three. If we want to combine financial integration with continued national sovereignty over, for instance, supervision and crisis management, as we have done so far, it will be difficult to achieve meaningful financial stability – the crisis we are currently going through provides a good example of this (Figure 3).  Figure 3         If, on the other hand, we want to prevent cross-border crises and at the same time maintain national sovereignty, we must accept reduced financial integration – for example, stricter regulations as to how banks can move financial assets between countries (Figure 4). One can see clear tendencies in this direction in the current discussions. If one wishes, as a third alternative, to retain integration but at the same time reduce the risk of crises spreading across national borders, one must consider letting go of national sovereignty and allowing                                                  9 Schoenmaker, D., “The Financial Trilemma”, Economics Letters 111, 2011, pp. 57–59.  Financial stability National sovereignty Financial integration 
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches more supervision and crisis management at European level (Figure 5). However, this is not a path that is considered politically viable at present.   Figure 4 Figure 5        The Larosière group, which was given the task after the financial crisis of proposing how the financial system in Europe should be managed, tried to suggest a compromise: Continued integration, but slightly less national sovereignty and slightly more joint responsibility for supervision work. This led to the earlier “level 3” committees on banking, insurance and market supervision being transformed into authorities. The idea was to give them as much power as possible without changing the Treaty on European Union. At the same time, the European Systemic Risk Board, ESRB, was created. This can give warnings or recommendations when members – central bank governors and supervisory heads – assess that financial risks are building up in Europe. It is possible in both to vote in the authorities and the ESRB and the majority opinion applies.10 This has proved important in preventing the deadlocks that the otherwise common method of a consensus decision can entail. Both the force and speed of action has increased substantially. But all of this concerns how one can avoid crises, not how they should be managed once they occur. Nor did the Larosière group discuss, other than marginally, crisis management or winding up insolvent banks. However, the European Commission’s newly-published proposal does deal with this, and so do new UK and US legislation that have arisen since the crisis. This is, of course, an important step in the right direction. Greater clarity with regard to how banks should be wound up will to a great extent affect both how the supervision is designed and how the banks act. As I said, it is wise to begin at the other end.11 …but difficult with cross-border agreements However, the focus in the legislation, naturally enough in the UK and US legislation, but also the European proposal, is on how to manage national banks in distress. The cross-border problems are avoided to a great extent, even in the Commission’s report. The fact that an integrated financial system in Europe also requires methods to resolve cross-border crises remains to be discussed. And of course this is connected to what I mentioned earlier, namely that it is much too sensitive an issue to discuss how the costs should be divided.                                                  10 The supervisory heads do not have the right to vote in the ESRB. A 2/3 majority is required for recommendations and decisions on publishing warnings and recommendations. 11 The crisis legislation also relates to another topical question, namely how much venture capital a bank is considered to need. If both authorities and banks know what will happen in a crisis, this should also affect the need for risk-bearing capital in the banks. The desire to be able to manage uncertainty in a crisis is an important motive behind the increased capital requirements in the Basel III Accord. If uncertainty is reduced, the capital need will decline. But the Basel Committee has not made this connection. Financial stability National sovereignty Financial integration Financial stability National sovereignty Financial integration 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 But if one is unable to manage even the preparations and procedures surrounding the distribution of costs in a crisis – what is known as ex ante preparations for ex post burden sharing – this will also have consequences. If nothing is discussed in advance, the natural consequence – what is known as the default option – will be that a cross-border bank in distress will be divided along national boundaries, regardless of how it is organised. The branch network in one country may, for instance, suddenly find itself entirely without IT systems and other central administrative functions, which are very costly to build up. The fact that this becomes irrational and can substantially increase the total cost of winding up the bank becomes a problem that cannot be resolved. Fortis and Dexia, at the most recent reconstruction in the autumn, can be said to be good examples of this from the recent crisis. They were both divided up according to national boundaries, and at least with regard to Fortis most appear to be agreed that this was not a good solution. In any case, it was a solution that cost the tax-payers an unnecessary large amount of money. What conclusions can be drawn from this? I believe that if one cannot agree between different nations on how to manage cross-border banks in distress, it is probably just as well to realise that the most likely event is that a bank will be divided up along national boundaries in the event of a crisis. This insight will affect the thinking with regard to supervision, which should in turn affect the demands made of the banks. Perhaps one should ultimately require that each bank is organised so that the national units can operate entirely independent of one another? Of course, this is not in line with what has been agreed on up to now in Europe with regard to the banks’ possibility to operate over national boundaries, but it is a natural consequence of not being able to discuss more rational solutions in advance. This reasoning is of course highly relevant to us in Sweden, too. We have a number of banks in the Nordic and Baltic countries that have significant and important cross-border operations. I believe that one can require from both authorities and politicians – in all of the countries concerned – that they should be able to agree on a slightly better way of winding up a bank in distress than cutting it up along national boundaries. But if this becomes an overly heavy political burden we must expect the countries concerned to quite simply take over the part of the bank that is in their own country – even if this solution will be much more expensive in total for the tax-payers. Now, however, there is hope. Just a few weeks ago the Financial Stability Board, which consists of ministries of finance, central banks and financial supervisory authorities in the G20 countries, published new norms for managing crises in cross-border banks. For instance, they discussed how to make bondholders bear their share of the costs in the event of a crash. When all of this has been translated into legislation that is applied by all of the countries, we will have managed important problems faced in winding up large, cross-border banks. But it still remains to be seen whether one can actually find princples for how the costs should be allocated between the different countries. In the current debate on how much capital the banks need, it may also be worth remembering that the better legislation one has for winding up banks in distress, the less capital they will need to hold. The capital can be regarded as the buffer necessary to avoid tax-payers having to bear the costs in a crisis. If one has regulated how various lenders should contribute, the need for a buffer is reduced. With these reflections, it is time for me to wind up. Not just my speech here today, but in a few days my time as a member of the Executive Board of the Riksbank. As I said, it has been thirteen very eventful years. At present the international debate is intensive and there are many tricky questions to be resolved – not least in crisis management and supervision of the financial markets. The job is still interesting. But there is a time for everything, and we all know that it is best to stop when you are still having fun. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 K C Chakrabarty: Ten Commandments for a successful banking career Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the ICICI Bank Probationary Officer Convocation 2011, ICICI Manipal Academy, Bangalore, 13 December 2011. *      *      * Assistance provided by Ms.Rakhe Balachandran in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. Ms Chanda Kochhar, MD and CEO, ICICI Bank, Shri T. V. Mohandas Pai, Chairman, Manipal Global Education Services, Dr K. Ramnarayan, Vice Chancellor, Manipal University, Shri Rajiv Sabharwal, Executive Director, ICICI Bank, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, and my young friends. It is indeed a pleasure to be here in your midst today. Young people infuse energy and vigour into any gathering but bright, young bankers like you also make it a learning experience. Convocations are always a very special occasion as they signify both an end and a beginning. An end – to a formal learning process and, hence, a moment of great satisfaction and joy for everyone involved. And a beginning – as it marks the threshold of the next stage for applying practically the knowledge and skills acquired through the formal learning process, thereby, acquiring real world learning and experience. I congratulate all the graduates of the ninth to eleventh batch of the ICICI Manipal Academy and especially thank Ms. Chanda Kochhar for giving me the opportunity to address these young budding bankers. The ICICI Bank Probationary Officer Programme, I am sure, is an effort to “Catch Them Young” and create the bankers of tomorrow – a set of new generation managers for banking in newer times. Nowadays, when the financial sector the world over is undergoing a period of most rapid acceleration and change, the greatest challenge before all organizations in this sector is to build up an institutional architecture that enables and sustains intellectual capital. This is especially important as in times of “creative destruction” – to use Joseph Schumpeter’s classic phrase in his theory of economic innovation – new ideas, new constructs and new expectations emerge. And this, in turn, makes the role of new generation managers in these institutions more demanding than that of bankers of yesteryears. The term “generation” refers to a common identity arising from common experience. Thus, the identity of Gen Y Managers, that all of you perhaps are, would also arise from the common experience of a changing world around us, a product of the wider historical context.  As you know, financial sector reforms since the year 1991 have heralded a dramatic shift in the way banks function and operate in India. The changed environment and the internal compulsions arising from greater competition and the need to improve their market share and profitability have given rise to the quest for greater efficiency and the need to reposition themselves given the realities of the environment and their internal strengths and weaknesses. But at the same time, the compulsions of business must not take away from the basic tenets of good banking. Understanding and inculcating certain qualities will help ensure each one of you becomes a successful banker in the years ahead and this, incidentally, would be the theme of my address today. But, before I delve into that, and knowing fully well that you would have studied about it during your graduation, let me start by explaining banking and its importance to the society. What is banking? Banking, conventionally, is defined as the acceptance of deposits of money from the public for the purpose of lending or investment. These deposits are repayable on demand or otherwise and withdrawable by cheque, draft, order or otherwise. Deposits are accepted from 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches individuals as well as from firms. In sum, the nature of banking business can be summarised in two words, i.e., “financial intermediation”, which needs to be carried out efficiently (both operational and allocational) for stimulating the real sectors of the economy. Another essential characteristic of Banks is that they are highly leveraged and, hence, special and need to be regulated for protecting the interest of depositors. As banks are institutions with legal backing and as there is a banking regulator to oversee their financial solvency and soundness, it enables the banks to earn the trust and confidence of the public. You are also aware that banking in India, as elsewhere, takes diverse forms viz., banks formed under special statutes, companies registered under the Companies Act, 1956 or foreign companies and co-operative societies registered under the Co-operative Societies Act. Banks are classified based on their ownership pattern such as public sector banks, private sector banks and foreign banks. Some specialized institutions such as ICICI have morphed to banks. Yet other institutions such as EXIM bank, SIDBI and NABARD specialize in trade, small industries and agriculture, respectively. Apart from basic banking business, banks also undertake other services such as safe custody of valuables, granting and issuance of letters of credit to facilitate international trade, buying and selling in foreign exchange and collections of bills, among others. Banks also act as agent of the Government and other entities to undertake agency business. Extending loans and advances to the needy sectors of the economy on a priority basis is a very crucial function of the banking sector. Keeping in view needs of the Indian economy, banks are mandated to extend 40 per cent of their Net Bank Credit to the priority sectors of the economy. The priority sectors of the economy include, inter alia, agriculture, weaker sections, small scale industries, education and micro finance. These norms ensure adequate flow of funds to the most important and needy sectors of the economy.  But as you are also aware, over the years, banking has transformed. It is no longer the  “3-6-3” banking. Banking sector has become more liberalized, more competitive, more stable, more customer oriented, more technologically advanced and also more profitable. The prudential norms were implemented, interest rates were deregulated, asset quality improved, entry barriers were liberated, new products were introduced, capital was infused and risk management was improved. There was also a decline in the concentration of the banking business in a few banks. Financial industry is moving towards expanded activities driven by customer needs, financial innovations, technological change, consolidation, convergence, global competition and financial inclusion. Many challenges lie ahead such as stiff competition, stringent regulatory norms, shareholders demanding higher returns, and also challenges of globalization and financial inclusion. Thus, as prospective successful bankers of future, each one of you should have a fairly good understanding of these opportunities and challenges to accomplish your job in an efficient way.  Importance of banking In the older days when banking was not prevalent, people were forced to borrow money from money lenders at very high interest rates. Even today, in the rural unbanked areas of the country, people are dependent on money lenders for credit. Moreover, when people had to save, they used to hoard money in their houses despite the risk of robbery. The existence of a bank, with its legal sanctity, was a solution to both these issues. Banks extended loans and advances at affordable interest rates for productive as well as consumption purposes and started accepting deposits from the public. The provision of loans at affordable interest rates helped people smoothen their income and expenditure fluctuations on the one hand and start remunerative economic activity on the other. Apart from the safety provided by banks to the money deposited by the public, the interest offered by banks on deposits of the public acted as an additional incentive for depositing money with the banking sector. This inculcated saving habits among the public. The savings of the people become a productive part of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 economy. This is one of the important reasons why the Reserve Bank encourages or nudges banks to expand the banking network to all unbanked villages in the country.  While from a social point of view, distribution of credit at affordable interest rates is the most important argument for the existence of banks, from an economic point of view, it is the channelisation of savings into investments. Higher savings and investments are important in stimulating economic growth. Banks are important conduits for monetary policy transmission and play an important role in the payment and settlement systems.  The recent technological advancements in the banking sector through ATMs, debit cards, credit cards and electronic transactions further made the transfer of money across the financial system easy and convenient for the public. The electronic cards and point-of-sale terminals facilitated day to day financial needs of customers without the need for carrying paper money. The internet banking facility offered by banks also help customers to manage their personal financial transactions without visiting their bank branch. Along with the technological advancements, the opening of specialised accounts designed for non-resident Indians further facilitated transfer of money from abroad, i.e., remittances.  Thus, in sum, banking affects all of us. Our lives are dependent on the banking sector in one way or another, directly or indirectly. It is the life-blood of the economy, a contamination of the same can affect any sector or region of the economy. Thus, as employees of the banking system, each one of you is taking up a big responsibility, not only towards the institution for which you are working but also towards the entire society. Having set out the context, what are the qualities that each one of you should inculcate to become a successful banker? Let me explain the Ten Commandments for a successful banking career: 1. Thou shalt manage the people with empathy  Banking is essentially an art of managing people, be it customers or staff. In a competitive environment, customers have to be treated as kings. Thus, delivering financial services to the satisfaction of customer, and prompt redressal of complaints of customers, if any, are very important. The complaints of customers should be heard with passion and remedial action should be taken promptly. The bankers should also take pro-active actions to increase customer awareness with regard to charges applicable to the financial services and the available redressal mechanisms.  Managing staff by providing them with a comfortable work environment is also germane to ensure the quality of banking services.  2. Thou shalt strive to become a knowledge worker  A knowledge worker is one who apart from knowing how to do a work and what he is doing also knows why is he doing what he is doing. We are transiting from an agrarian society, through an industrial society to a knowledge society. In the knowledge society, it is the knowledge institutions and knowledge workers who would thrive. Just because you have completed your studies and got into a job, you should not stop learning. Your career in the banking sector should be a learning experience. Now, while accomplishing your desk work in the bank, definitely you will go through a learning process. But that is not enough. You should develop and maintain reading habit to update your knowledge base. Because knowledge is the power of an employee and once you lose it, you are nowhere. Thus, there has to be a conscious effort from your side to keep your learning curve alive and be better than the rest. And do not restrict your knowledge base to developments in the banking sector only; rather all of you should develop a fairly good understanding of the economy over a period of time. Then only you can become a sensitive banker, i.e., a banker who is sensitive to the needs of a growing economy. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches 3. Thou shalt be accountable for all your work  This is the most important quality which a banker should have. There should be accountability towards the society because you are working in a public institution and dealing with public money. And whatever you do in the bank as part of accomplishing your responsibilities are subject to scrutiny. Many of the financial frauds have taken place with the help of bank employees in the past. Thus, if the employees of a bank are sincere and committed to their institution and to the society as a whole, chances of financial frauds can be minimized. Further, try to know more about your customers and their occupations. This will also help in reducing financial frauds as well as financing of terrorism using bank funds. Thus, a vigilant and accountable bank employee is an asset to the banking sector. So, try to become an asset rather than a liability. 4. Thou shalt do hard work  All of you should remember always that hard work is the “mantra” of success. Nothing can substitute your hard work. And those who do hard work during the initial years of their career, will be the ultimate winners in the system. Thus, try to have a positive attitude towards work and try to have a good understanding about the challenges ahead. Prepare yourself for meeting those challenges and meeting the expectations of your institution. At the end of the day you will be rewarded in one way or another. So, do not hesitate to take more responsibilities in the initial part of your career. Be pro-active and do more work; this will improve your understanding of the subject. 5. Thou shalt develop the right attitude  At times, the attitude of the bank staff also keeps rural illiterate customers away from the banking system. So, as new entrants to the banking industry, try to build up friendly customer relationships. Do not discriminate customers based on their caste, sex, education and also by financial background. Try to extend fair services to all customers of the bank irrespective of their background. You all should take extra efforts to bring financially illiterate customers to the bank. This is because a good bank should not confine it’s operations to metropolitan areas, it should be willing and innovative enough to expand its services to under banked rural and semi-urban areas. Thus, as employees of the banking sector you have an important role to play in furthering financial inclusion, dealing with underprivileged sections of society and ensuring adequate flow of credit to activities associated with such people. 6. Thou shalt attempt to become a pioneer  Globalization opens up lot of opportunities for the banking sector from across the globe. However, to take advantage of these opportunities, banks have to prepare themselves. Banks will have to work in a multi-cultural and multi-linguistic environment to compete with the globally active banks. A group of efficient, young and well educated employees is a sine qua non for achieving this competitiveness. So, as employees of the banking sector, try to improve your communication skills, try to learn about the developments in the global banking sector and try to learn about the emerging opportunities. Be innovative in taking advantage of the emerging opportunities. Because, a pioneer has always an advantage over followers. So, try to be pioneers rather than followers in your career. 7. Thou shalt develop a professional approach  Do your job with your brain, not your heart. You can be passionate about the needs and grievances of customers, but do not compromise on your logic. During the course of your careers, you might, at times, be faced with various pressures which seek to influence your decisions. Develop the ability to objectively evaluate situations, regardless of external pressures, and take the right decision – always. Do 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 not allow your personal problems and relationships to influence your decision making process. Be objective and be efficient. One cannot become a true professional in any area unless he/ she remains committed to the core principles of the profession even under the most adverse circumstances. 8. Thou shalt be analytical  Banking business, essentially, involves managing risk. This job of managing risk cannot be done efficiently without having sharp analytical capability. As employees of the banking sector you have an important role to play in shaping the financial soundness of the banking sector. While doing the banking business, try to analyse the financial background and economic activity of the customer thoroughly. This will help in limiting the growth of non-performing loans, efficient utilization of capital and higher profitability. Financial soundness is an important aspect of a good bank, especially because banking business involves public money. Further, failure of one banking institution may also trigger contagion effect across the banking sector as financial institutions are highly inter-linked. 9. Thou shalt be information literate  Technological advancements have transformed class banking into mass banking. With cost effective technologies banks were able to change the face of banking. ATMs, debit cards, credit cards, internet banking and phone banking have enabled customers to do banking without visiting the bank branch. Further, the Business correspondent model and mobile banking also depend on the latest technology to expand the banking network. The electronic transactions through NEFT, ECS and RTGS have increased the speed of fund transfer considerably. A good banker should continuously innovate and update themselves with the latest technological advancements to make banking further easier and convenient to customers. Thus, try to develop a good understanding of the latest technological developments. A bank can implement latest technology safely only with a strong in-house technical expertise. In this milieu, you must “be information literate”, i.e. third generation literate. It is not enough to be a first generation literate, i.e. you know how to read and write, or to be second generation literate, i.e. to be computer literate, but to achieve information literacy. When transiting to a knowledge society and to be a successful banker, it is critical to be information literate. 10. Thou shalt avoid complacency during good times and not lose hope during bad times  This is a very important commandment of a good banker because complacency hampers progress and may lead to sharp downfall and loss. Complacency can affect anybody but is all the more relevant to the financial sector. We cannot afford to be complacent even for a moment. You are particularly advised to avoid complacency during good times as otherwise downturn may come any time. It is always advisable to conserve your energies during good times to be used during bad times. You should not only be satisfied with your victories but also try to achieve something better than whatever you have already achieved. Lastly, life is not easy; it is difficult, whether of an individual or an institution. Bad times sometimes will come, and sometimes, all bad things may come together. In such times, do not become desperate. Wait and Hope. Do not lose hope, but lie low and pray to God because good times will return soon. This is my last commandment not only for banking but for any career. Concluding thoughts All of you are growing up in an age of unprecedented opportunity. But with opportunity comes responsibility. To do things well and be responsible, one needs to cultivate a deep 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches understanding of oneself – not only the strengths and weaknesses but also how one learns, how one works with others, what his or her values are and where he or she can make the greatest contribution. You can achieve excellence only if you understand, work on and operate from your areas of strength. As you pick up the traits of modern trade like leadership skills, the ability to multi-task and manage competing imperatives, please do not let go of the age-old and time-tested qualities of a desire to learn, a strong sense of professional ethics, an enquiring mind, a strategic view, the qualities of humility and empathy, a willingness to embrace practical experience and an eagerness to adapt to evolving experiences. These are exciting times and as you stand on the threshold of a new life and a career in banking, I trust you will continue to cherish the ideals and dreams of youth, after all they are what make life worthwhile. I wish all of you – tomorrow’s titans – every success in all your future endeavours. Let me conclude by wishing each one of you a very bright, promising and challenging career in the banking sector.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Peter Praet: The state of the global economy Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the 4th World Policy Conference, Vienna, 9 December 2011. *      *      * I would like to thank for John Hutchinson and Arnaud Mehl for their contributions in the preparation of this speech. Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a real pleasure to be here in Vienna to exchange views on the future of global governance. Vienna is certainly a city with a long tradition of discussing issues with a global dimension. Following my invitation to speak at this conference, I remembered that, almost 200 years ago, it was here that the famous Congress of Vienna attempted to forge what came to be known as the “Concert of Europe”. This marked the creation of a new global order and a major turning point in world history. The global economy today is also at a turning point. What we have been observing since the unprecedented financial market tensions in mid-2007, is not merely the unfolding of a global financial and economic crisis. We have been observing the emergence of a new global order, which is occurring at a faster pace than was anticipated prior to the crisis. The exact form this new world will take is unclear. But the need for sound global governance, which we will discuss today and tomorrow, is becoming ever more apparent. On the economic front, several important changes have already occurred. The G20 has replaced the G7 as prime forum for international economic cooperation. The Financial Stability Board has been established to address vulnerabilities and develop regulatory and supervisory policies conducive to global financial stability. Bodies based at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel, which are of keen interest to the central banking community, have also been reformed and their membership enlarged to relevant emerging market players. In assessing the state of the global economy today, I would like to emphasise that we are at a crossroads. In this respect, I would like to make three specific points. Firstly, I will describe the outlook and risks for the global economy and euro area. I will then discuss the interplay between the current prospects and key policy challenges: namely global real and financial imbalances as well as liquidity and capital flow volatility. Finally, I will briefly comment on major governance challenges in the Eurozone. * Let me commence by depicting how I see the outlook and key risks for the global economy and euro area at this juncture. Against a background of heightened uncertainty and rising stresses in financial markets, global sentiment has further deteriorated in recent months. It now appears that some of the downside risks which had been previously identified have materialised. Looking ahead, short-term indicators as well as the latest survey data suggest that global growth is expected to remain sluggish. However, looking at the global economy as a whole masks the considerable degree of heterogeneity which prevails. Indeed, a key characteristic of the global economy relates to the divergence in global growth patterns not only between advanced and emerging economies but also within these country groupings. In advanced economies, growth sapping headwinds persist with annual GDP growth expected below potential. In particular, these headwinds relate to the continued need for public and private sector deleveraging as well as the persistent weaknesses in labour and housing markets in some advanced economies. These factors, combined with the ongoing tensions in financial markets, are expected to restrain global growth over the medium term.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Conversely, in emerging economies, growth has remained relatively robust. While growth has recently experienced some moderation, largely on account of weaker external demand., this should assist in alleviating some of the overheating pressures. The resilience of emerging economies throughout the crisis has been impressive. However, emerging economies are not immune to developments in other parts of the globe. More than four years after the beginning of the financial crisis, uncertainty continues to remain high, with substantial downside risk to the economic outlook notably for the euro area. Downside risks in particular relate to a further intensification of tensions in euro area financial markets and their potential spillover into the real economy. Additional downside risks also relate to the global economy, which may turn out to be weaker than expected, as well as protectionist pressures and the possibility of a disorderly correction of global imbalances.  * I would like to focus now on key global policy challenges confronting the global economy.  The first of these challenges is the persistence of large real and financial imbalances at the global level, which is a key source of vulnerability in the medium term. A few figures are worth recalling. Combined together, the current account deficits and surpluses of the main systemic economies are projected to stand at roughly 2% of world GDP over the next five years. This is less than before the crisis (3% of world GDP in 2007), but twice as much as in the late 1990s. A large share of the adjustment in external imbalances since the crisis has been cyclical, not structural According to the IMF, the US current account deficit is projected to reach about 3% of GDP in 2011, against surpluses of roughly 5% and 9% of GDP for China and oil exporters respectively. They are a source of tensions that could ultimately lead to protectionist pressures. However, the euro area as a whole has a balanced current account position. Global fiscal imbalances remain significant, with a marked degree of heterogeneity between advanced and emerging economies. Consolidation efforts required to bring public finances to a sustainable path are a key priority for advanced countries. Efforts made to adjust these imbalances remain clearly insufficient. This raises the risk, which I referred to earlier, of a disorderly unwinding down the line, with significant potential fallouts for global financial markets and the global economy. At their Cannes Summit on 3–4 November 2011, G20 Leaders agreed on an Action Plan to lay the foundations for strong, sustainable and balanced global growth in the medium-term. This is welcomed. All G20 members made commitments, but they are sometimes imprecise. It is often unclear as to how these commitments can genuinely contribute to a rebalancing of global demand patterns. For instance, only a few of the G20 members explicitly reaffirmed their support to the solemn pledge by their Leaders in Toronto last year to halve fiscal deficits by 2013 and stabilise public debt ratios by 2016. Large emerging markets have announced that they would enhance the flexibility of their exchange rate regime, but without indicating a specific time-frame when this would occur. Europe is doing its share in committing to accelerate and further deepen the Single Market. More decisive policy measures to rebalance global demand patterns are still required, in particular to raise savings in deficit economies and increase domestic demand in surplus economies. All systemic economies could benefit from effective multilateral surveillance along with their international responsibilities. Now is not the time to lose sight of the need to correct imbalances globally although our attention is – for good reasons – more focused on immediate challenges! * The second and related key global policy challenge relates to how best to address global liquidity conditions and volatile capital flow constellations. Ample global liquidity conditions 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 have the potential to push volatile capital flows into emerging economies. If they respond by accumulating reserves to cap exchange rate appreciation, this widens global imbalances. While this is an issue which was already discussed before the crisis, some argue it might have been exacerbated as a result of policy responses to the crisis. Indeed, some of the policy responses have been sub-optimal from a global vantage point. Many countries have continued to accumulate large reserve holdings to limit currency appreciation. For instance, China’s reserve holdings now exceed USD 3 trillion; those of Russia USD 400 billion; those of Brazil, Korea or Taiwan USD 300 billion. Others have adopted capital flow management measures, including higher reserve requirements and  – sometimes – outright controls on capital inflows. Some observers have claimed that “currency wars” might break out. This is why the efforts from the international community to better understand global liquidity developments, as well as how to deal with global liquidity shortages, in particular during crises, by the G20, the IMF and by the central banking community at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel are valuable undertakings. The agreement by G20 Leaders on actions and principles that could help reaffirm the benefits from financial integration and increase resilience against volatile capital flows is commendable. This agreement provides coherent conclusions to guide countries in the management of capital flows. The first line of defence against excessive capital flow volatility should comprise sound domestic macroeconomic policy frameworks and institutions as well as appropriate exchange rate regimes, financial regulation and supervision. Capital control measures should be temporary in nature and only used as a last resort, given that they may delay the necessary domestic policy implementation and distort the distribution of capital flows across countries. * Ladies and gentlemen, When delegates to the Congress of Vienna first met in 1814, the new world that was about to emerge and which would last for almost another century was only barely discernible. The outbreak of the global economic and financial crisis is putting us in a similar situation today. Throughout the world, citizens call upon policy-makers to act decisively to resolve the crisis and help the global economy turn a corner. All relevant authorities have to take their responsibilities. To ensure that this crisis can be fully addressed will require an ambitious strengthening of economic governance. Significant reforms in this direction are taking place in Europe. The EU Council and European Parliament have agreed on a legislative package that significantly limits the discretion of national authorities. This includes a framework for monitoring a wide range of macroeconomic imbalances, also backed by sanctions. Countries are expected to anchor fiscal prudence in national rules. All these measures were unthinkable four years ago. Today, Euro area Heads of States or Government agreed in Brussels to move towards a stronger economic union. This implies measures in two directions, namely: a new fiscal compact and strengthened economic policy coordination and the development of the euro area stabilisation tools to face short term challenges. In the view of the ECB’s Governing Council, a new fiscal compact comprising a fundamental restatement of the fiscal rules, together with the fiscal commitments that euro area governments have made, is the most important precondition for restoring the normal functioning of financial markets. To accompany fiscal consolidation, bold and ambitious structural reforms are essential. They should be immediately carried out to help the euro area countries improve competitiveness, increase the flexibility of their economies and enhance their longer-term growth potential. We at the ECB take our responsibilities. Monetary policy in the euro area will remain dedicated to our mandate, which is to maintain price stability over the medium term. The policy measures taken by the ECB have resulted in the Governing Council’s outstanding 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches record during the past 13 years in terms of price stability and anchoring of inflation expectations.  The ECB will continue to remain an anchor of confidence and stability, in a global economy characterised by marked uncertainties. This is the central contribution we can make to foster sustainable growth, job creation and financial stability in the euro area as whole. Thank you for your attention and I wish you all a fruitful and enriching conference.  
