BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Barry Whiteside: Leading Fiji to economic success Welcome address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the 12th Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) Pacific Islands Working Group meeting, Denarau, 24 March 2014. *      *      * Salutations Mr Gane Simbe, Deputy Governor Central Bank of Solomon Islands and Chairman of the Pacific Islands Working Group (PIWG) The G20 Presidency – Australia Distinguished Deputy Governors and Delegates Representatives from the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI), Asian Development Bank, World Bank, International Finance Corporation, UN Capital Development Fund and the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme Ladies and Gentlemen. Ni Sa Bula and a very good morning to you all. Introductory remarks It gives me great pleasure to be here with you this morning. Let me say how honoured we at the Reserve Bank of Fiji are to host the Alliance for Financial Inclusion 12th Pacific Islands Working Group meeting and I take this opportunity to welcome each one of you. For our visitors from abroad, I hope you all had a pleasant flight into Fiji and that you will enjoy your stay here with us in the coming days. At the outset I wish to commend each one of you for your continued dedication, hard work and passion towards driving financial inclusion in your respective countries. This is evident through your presence here this morning. It is always a proud moment when our Pacific region is singled out and used as a focal point when it comes to discussions pertaining to financial inclusion. As a regional group we have made a lot of inroads since we started in 2009 and we must continue our bond in order to stay ahead. As a group, the way we work together can only be characterised as the Pacific way. I urge you all to continue our collaborative efforts and benefit from this peer learning experience. Financial inclusion – catalyst for financial and economic stability There is a growing body of evidence that supports the maxim of building inclusive financial sectors. Financial inclusion supports development, contributes to an efficient financial system and enables all members of the community, especially the marginalised and the poor, to improve their livelihoods and thus empowering them to effectively contribute to the economy. All this supports the UN Millennium Development goals of halving, by 2015, the portion of the world population that live in extreme poverty. It is clear that we are also seeing changes in the landscape of central banking in recent years. Whilst many Central Banks have traditionally focused on such core policy objectives of price stability and sufficient foreign reserves, more and more have now taken additional lead roles in advocating financial inclusion initiatives in their respective countries; building towards an inclusive financial system that recognises and makes available different types of financial services and products that are affordable, accessible and appropriate for all citizens.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  As a Group we learn from each other’s experiences, but we also tailor our programs and initiatives to suit our own unique country situations. The environment in which we operate constantly evolves and we need to embrace the innovations in technology to facilitate the provisions of an inclusive financial system. What’s next for PIWG? Fellow colleagues, let us take a moment to reflect on the vision and mission of our Working Group. Our vision is that “Financial services are widely accessed by all Pacific Islanders”. To get there we have a mission statement that urges us “To create conditions that lead to the financial empowerment of Pacific Islanders in the short to medium term”. As a region we have established and achieved a number of outcomes and we must take pride in our achievements to date. In the last five years, some of us took bold steps and established specific departments or units within our Central Banks to drive financial inclusion related matters. We have set policies and guidelines to enable other stakeholders in our countries to contribute and be a part of the financial inclusion cause. Some of us have set up a National Financial Inclusion Taskforce to guide and spearhead the development work and initiatives in this area. With this in mind it was pleasing to note, at last year’s AFI Global Policy Forum in Malaysia, that the Bank of Papua New Guinea and Central Bank of Samoa formally pledged their commitments under the Maya Declaration. They thus joined the Reserve Bank of Vanuatu, Central Bank of Solomon Islands and Reserve Bank of Fiji, who had made their commitments earlier. I am hopeful that our friends from the Banco Central de Timor-Leste and National Reserve Bank of Tonga will also make commitments in due course. Colleagues, over the last few years we have witnessed the introduction of innovative products and services in our countries such as mobile financial services and micro insurance, as well as the opening up of a lot more bank accounts. As a group we have undertaken a comprehensive data project where we have our very own PIWG Core Plus indicators. We are all working on providing an enabling regulatory framework to support innovation in these areas. The introduction of Financial Literacy and Education programmes for school children and adults alike has also been at the forefront of our work. However, whilst we may want to give ourselves a pat on the back, let us not get complacent. Rather, let us be inspired to further push the boundaries and produce more tangible results in our countries and across the region. Financial inclusion is about thinking outside the box, because what is required is beyond the norm. What is required is innovative thinking. I therefore invite us to put on our collective thinking caps in this regard. Allow me to suggest a few issues for possible deliberation over the next two days. Financial inclusion usage The financial inclusion monitoring framework, according to international standards, looks at access, usage and quality indicators. Financial access points are just the building blocks. What is important is getting our people to understand and use these financial products and services. For example, even though remitting funds through mobile phones is perhaps the cheapest of the channels, we still see other alternative expensive mediums being used. We ask the question, why is this so? As a Working Group, we need to see the translation to active usage of all these positive developments. It is promising to note that we are beginning to gain ground on the financial access points being now visible in our countries, but this must simultaneously be accompanied by active usage. This will provide economies of scale for the provider and, therefore, the sustainability of a particular product or service. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Diagnostic exercises – surveys During the next two days, I think it would be timely if we can deliberate on why there is low uptake for certain financial products and services, for instance mobile financial services. I know answers to some of these questions can only be determined by asking the very people on the ground, the intended customers. To this end we need to work towards a National Demand Survey in our respective countries. PIWG may also explore the idea of a Progress out of Poverty Index (PPI). The Index measures, assesses and tracks the poverty level over time and is a tool that is statistically sound, yet simple in its implementation. Remittances and MSMEs Remittances are another important area for us. What can be done to improve remittance flows, as they can play a pivotal role in advancing financial inclusion in our countries? Similarly the encouragement of micro, small and medium enterprises is another crucial area in the Financial Inclusion sphere. What do we need to do to further develop and grow these sectors in our economy? Developments in Fiji Ladies and Gentlemen, please allow me to give you a quick update on developments in Fiji after our last meeting in September, 2013. I understand we have a session for country updates later today, so I will keep this brief. In the last two quarters, we have been able to accomplish a number of initiatives. The National Financial Literacy Strategy for Fiji has been endorsed by the Government for implementation; we hosted the inaugural National Microfinance Awards during the Pacific Microfinance Week, which a number of you witnessed first-hand; and we finalised the Consumer Protection Pre-Disclosure (CPPD) template, which will be implemented by our Licensed Financial Institutions in the coming quarter. Colleagues, it gives me immense pride and joy to inform all of you that on the 28th February 2014, we successfully achieved our target of reaching 150,000 unbanked Fijians. This is a target we had initially set in November 2009 following our first stakeholder workshop and one which we made a part of our Maya Declaration in Cancun in 2011. This goal would not have been achieved without the collaborative effort of all the stakeholders in Fiji and we are sincerely grateful to them. While we have had some success, this does not in any way mean that the work has finished. In fact, this is only the first step in the longer journey that we committed to undertake. This is a great platform from which we will chart the next phase of development for financial inclusion in Fiji. I would therefore like to announce that the Bank, together with the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce, is taking stock of all the financial inclusion initiatives undertaken in the country to date and we will use this information over the coming nine months to develop a new Financial Inclusion Strategy for Fiji that will run from 2015 to 2020. Concluding remarks In closing, I thank you again for making it to Denarau this week. I urge you to keep your focus on the goals you have set out to achieve. This meeting provides a great platform to take stock, share experiences, discuss issues concerning the region and challenges encountered, and identify opportunities to pursue to take our goals to another level. In a few days we will also be welcoming delegates from different parts of the world for the AFI Strategy Peer Learning Working Group Meeting. Let our small Pacific countries be a good financial inclusion example of firm collaboration and achievement. Last year when the 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Reserve Bank of Fiji was awarded the inaugural Maya Declaration Award, I could see the immense pride among all Pacific member countries present and such achievements bring us closer together as a region. Thank you for your continuous support and we hope to see PIWG stay ahead of game. I am certain that at the end of two days of fruitful discussion, we will reiterate the commitment we made as a region in overcoming barriers and building bridges to deliver quality financial services to all our citizens. Lastly, I encourage you all to take advantage of our Fijian hospitality. Please enjoy the array of goods, services and attractions that we have to offer and, most of all enjoy your experience with us. Thank you for your kind attention Vinaka vakalevu 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Ignazio Visco: The exit from the sovereign debt crisis: national policies, European reforms and monetary policy Lectio magistralis by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Almo Collegio Borromeo, Pavia, 25 March 2014. *      *      * The road to European integration is a long and arduous one; it is not linear: we often advance step by tiny step, but at times by vigorous leaps. The introduction of the euro was one such leap; it was a definite advance but it certainly did not complete the journey. The euro is a currency without a State; this is the lack it suffers from. The divergences, sometimes the diffidence, that still mark the relations between the member states weaken the Economic and Monetary Union in the eyes of the international community and in those of its citizens. This incompleteness, together with the weaknesses of some member countries, has fueled the sovereign debt crisis of the euro area. If the weaknesses have engendered doubts about the sustainability of national public debts, the incompleteness has raised fears for the integrity of the union, allowed the risk of redenomination of the area’s financial assets and liabilities in national currencies to gather strength, and reintroduced exchange rate risk within a monetary union, thus further weakening the position of the countries in difficulty. Without political union, European economic governance has been founded upon budget rules and the ban on rescues between member countries; it has relied on the pressure of the single market for economic convergence. However, in many cases the budget rules have not been respected and the macroeconomic conditions have remained divergent, also structurally. The convergence of interest rates towards the low levels of the most “virtuous” countries allowed other countries to put off the necessary adjustments. For years the financial markets did not consider the possibility of an increase in sovereign risks. Before the crisis, the spreads between the yields on euro-area government securities had fallen to virtually nil. The tensions in the euro area came to a head in an environment already fragile as a result of the global financial crisis and the consequent recession of 2008–09. Initially they involved Greece in view of the state of its public finances, Ireland owing to its real-estate bubble and consequent banking crisis, and Portugal as a result of its macroeconomic imbalances. In the summer of 2011 the announcement of the involvement of private-sector investors in the restructuring of the Greek public debt clearly revealed the implications of the ban on the financial rescue of a Member State imposed by the Maastricht Treaty and of the lack of a protocol for handling sovereign crises. The tensions became systemic; the countries that suffered the most were Spain, above all owing to its banking system’s excessive exposure to the property market, and Italy, which was vulnerable because of its high public debt and the loss of competitiveness and growth capability in connection with the country’s pronounced slowness to adjust to the major political, commercial, demographic and technological changes of the last twenty years. The yield spreads between the euro-area’s sovereign securities increased rapidly. For some countries, including Italy, they rose far above the level justified by the economic fundamentals. The spread between ten-year BTPs and German Bunds, still less than 200 basis points in the first half of 2011, reached 550 basis points at the end of that year. After narrowing in the early months of 2012, it returned above 500 basis points in July. We estimated then − and explained in technical analyses and public interventions − that less than half of this amount was due to the weaknesses of our economy; the rest reflected the fears of the single currency breaking up. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  National policies and European reforms To achieve a given number of objectives, economic policy must have at least an equal number of independent instruments at its disposal. And in fact the European strategy in response to the crisis did identify two instruments with which to pursue two objectives: national policies to remove the fragilities present in individual economies and a strengthening of the union to dispel the fears for the integrity of the single currency. In this case, however, since the fears of euro reversibility and those for member countries’ debt sustainability fueled each other, the instruments were not independent. The reform of European governance thus necessarily hinged on the tightening of the budget rules and the introduction of new procedures for the control of other macroeconomic imbalances. The considerable time needed to implement this strategy conflicted, however, with the persistent market uncertainties and the lack of an instrument, such as a common budget, that would make it possible to combat the recession that had followed the financial crisis, offsetting the adverse short-term effects of the necessary national budgetary adjustments with expansionary unitary policies. The succession of conventional and unconventional monetary policy measures helped to make market conditions easier and, as far as possible, to counter the fall in demand. At the same time, in the worst-hit countries the aggravation of the social and economic consequences of the crisis made it harder to implement the necessary structural reforms, which, if they help to restore an economy’s growth potential, carry undeniable short-term costs. The immediate visibility of the results of budgetary policies has been obscured. In Italy, despite the reduction in the budget deficit from 5.5 to 3 per cent of GDP, between 2009 and 2013 the ratio of the public debt to GDP rose by more than 16 percentage points to 132.6 per cent, reflecting above all the brusque slowdown of the economy. One contributory factor, counting for nearly 4 percentage points, was Italy’s direct and indirect support to the financial adjustment of other euro-area countries. The fragmentation of the financial markets produced by the inception of a vicious circle between the situation of sovereign borrowers and that of the corresponding banking systems interfered with the transmission of monetary policy, making the conditions of financing to the economy severely dishomogeneous among the euro-area countries and holding back the expansionary impulses in the economies that most needed them. The gap between the cost of new loans to firms in Italy and Germany widened progressively from virtually nil in the summer of 2011 to one percentage point at the end of that year. With the three-year refinancing operations decided in December 2011 the Governing Council of the ECB countered the consequences of the fragmentation and prevented a much worse contraction in credit than actually occurred. In emergency conditions and with a good deal of uncertainty, national and European policies have nonetheless moved in the right direction overall. The state of the public finances of the countries most exposed to the crisis has improved, albeit at very high social costs in some countries. Reforms to support competiveness have been enacted and are being implemented. Above all, work has begun to rebuild trust among member states. At the outset of the crisis Europe had no instruments for financial assistance to sovereign issuers: the first measures in favour of Greece, and to a lesser extent Ireland, took the form of bilateral loans. With the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), a temporary arrangement set up in May 2010, and the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), a permanent institution with its own capital endowment inaugurated in October 2012, Europe secured a lending capacity of almost €700 billion. Between 2010 and 2013 over €320 billion in loans was disbursed to the countries in difficulty. Including the amount paid in towards the capital stock of the ESM, Italy’s contribution to this effort was in excess of €55 billion. The need to address the asymmetry between the single monetary policy and the multiplicity of national fiscal and structural polices has been recognized. The plan published by the European Commission in November 2012 and the report of the President of the European 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Council in June of the same year (updated the following December), plotted the stages of a further gradual strengthening of the Economic and Monetary Union. The first, Banking Union, is currently being implemented. Other, more difficult stages lie ahead: independent financial capacity for the euro area as a whole, a common budget and, in the future, political union. In advancing resolutely along this road, one important challenge remains: namely, a marked attenuation of the diffidence found today between governments and between national communities. To this end, Europe cannot confine itself to identifying the weaknesses of some, objective though they may be, and requiring adjustments, albeit necessary, with reference above all to the short-term results. We must look responsibly to the longer-term prospects, while also taking account of the sustainability of the sacrifices and the distribution of the benefits. Preparations for the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), composed of the ECB and the national authorities, are proceeding apace. This constitutes a complex feat of institutional engineering, at least as demanding as that preceding the introduction of the single currency. Building on the accumulated technical expertise of the national authorities, the SSM must represent a supranational vision based on best practices in supervisory methods, analytical models and banking risk assessment. The transition to the single supervisor will enable easier comparison of the intermediaries and systems of the various countries, helping to combat the tendency to segmentation of financial markets along national lines. The comprehensive assessment of the euro area’s leading banks, currently being carried out in preparation for the launch of the SSM, goes in the same direction. The recent agreement of the European Council, Commission and Parliament on the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), due to be approved by the latter in plenary session in April, marks a further step towards Banking Union, with the harmonization of the responsibilities for crisis resolution, following that of supervision. With respect to the agreement previously reached by the European Council, this has simplified the decision-making process and shortened the time it will take for the mechanism to become fully operational. The SRM will operate through a Single Bank Resolution Fund financed out of contributions from the participating banks and managed by a Board comprising permanent members, representatives of the national resolution authorities, the ECB and the European Commission, the latter with observer status. The Board, on the basis of the ECB’s assessments concerning the existence of troubled banks, will determine whether bankruptcy can be avoided and whether there is a public interest justifying the activation of the resolution instruments. If so, it will draw up a crisis resolution plan subject to the approval of the Commission and, through a tacit consent procedure, of the Council. Disbursements of up to €5 billion will be decided at an executive session of the Board, comprising the permanent members and the resolution authorities of the countries in which the intermediary operates; other decisions will be adopted in plenary session, at which all the national resolution authorities participate. The Fund will reach its full endowment of €55 billion in eight years. The banks’ contributions will be paid into national compartments, which will be progressively mutualized starting with a share of 40 per cent in the first year and a further 20 per cent in the second. The Fund may also borrow on the market on the basis of decisions made in plenary session. All the operational aspects must now be rapidly finalized to permit accurate assessment of its financial capacity and to prevent uncertainty from amplifying the national component of risk premiums, thereby perpetuating financial market fragmentation and the vicious circle between the conditions of sovereign borrowers and banks. Outright monetary transactions As I observed, national policies and European reforms have introduced changes that will take a long time to implement; the distortions remaining in the financial markets in the meantime can jeopardize the whole process. During the crisis, the ECB’s Governing Council 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  made decisive use of the instruments at its disposal, cutting official interest rates repeatedly and introducing new refinancing operations with a long maturity and full allotment. In August 2012 it announced Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT), a new way of intervening in the secondary market for government securities. The OMTs enabled the ECB to counter the effects of incorrect assessment of a sovereign borrower’s risk – in particular for the component linked to fears of the monetary union breaking up – by purchasing securities on the secondary market with no limits of time or quantity, forgoing the status of privileged creditor. As a result of the interdependence between fears of euro reversibility and fears for the sustainability of individual countries’ public debt, OMTs are conditional on precise public finance commitments and structural reforms within the framework of the ESM financial assistance programmes. The announcement brought success; even without actual intervention on the markets, it was instrumental in the drastic reduction of the part of the sovereign risk premium connected with fears for the euro’s survival: spreads have fallen to values closer to those consistent with the fundamentals, and markets are less fragmented. The yield spread between ten-year Italian and German government bonds has fallen back below 200 basis points. Bank of Italy estimates show that this improvement has been mainly due to the drastic reduction in the risk of the euro area breaking up. There have been signs of renewed interest in the Italian markets, including the government bond markets, reflected in a decline in the Bank of Italy’s debtor position in TARGET2, which fell to €190 billion at the end of February, almost €100 billion less than the peak registered in August 2012. These results would have been impossible without the start on resolving national imbalances and the reform of European governance. The single monetary policy cannot guarantee stability unless the economic fundamentals and the institutional architecture of the area are consistent with it. The risks are still present and tensions are ready to flare up again. In Italy the national component of the yield spread reflects high public debt and poor growth prospects; it needs to be reduced further: before the recession of 2008, for ten-year maturities this national component was less than 50 basis points. The reform of European governance has resulted in surrenders of sovereignty, albeit limited, on the part of all member states, in the areas of both fiscal and structural policy. Unconventional monetary policy measures were taken in response to the crisis. There is a legitimate need to examine the conformity of the solutions adopted with national constitutional law. Besides provoking a heated public debate, OMTs were scrutinized by the German Constitutional Court, which applied to the European Court of Justice for a judgment as to their legitimacy. The German Court argued that OMTs do not pursue a monetary policy goal in the strict sense, but since they have been used to safeguard the euro they have taken on a responsibility that properly lies with national governments; OMTs, it is held, overstep the ECB’s mandate, violating the ban on the monetary financing of budget deficits; they could also lead to a redistribution of resources among the countries of the area, thus achieving the same effect as a transfer system that is not envisaged by the European treaties. The aim of OMTs is to preserve monetary policy transmission in the euro area, which is jeopardized by distortions in the financial markets caused by the sovereign debt crisis. The goal is not to neutralize the spreads on the government bonds of specific euro-area member states in order to reduce their financial difficulties by interfering illegitimately with price formation in the market, but instead to reduce the components of spreads linked to factors independent of the financial sustainability of individual countries. Intervention does not aim to sustain the purchase of risky assets but to correct the misperception of that risk. The yield spreads between sovereign bonds observed at the moments of greatest tension were due only in part to market scepticism over the ability of individual member states to ensure the sustainability of their public finances and avoid a worsening of their credit risk. In large part, rather, they are explained by investors’ fears of euro reversibility. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Lastly, the OMTs do not allow the ECB to buy government bonds whenever the monetary policy transmission mechanism is interrupted, but only when the interruption does not reflect a member state’s sustainability conditions. OMTs are never supposed to be used to purchase the securities of a country with unsustainable public finances. As regards the argument concerning the risk of resources being redistributed as a result of OMTs, the risk that would be incurred by forgoing them would be far worse. The way out of the crisis Exit from the crisis in the euro area cannot be achieved by the isolated actions of individual economic policy authorities. In particular, monetary policy alone cannot guarantee the financial stability of the euro area if the problems underlying the sovereign debt crisis are not resolved at national as at European level. The fragility of the public finances in some countries is the result of protracted fiscal imprudence and a culpable underestimation of the consequences of broad and persistent losses of competitiveness. Budgetary policy must ensure debt sustainability and full access to the market. The rules agreed at European level are the means, not the end. The real budget constraint for our country is given by the need to guarantee the sustainability of the public debt and to maintain full access to the financial market. As I have pointed out on more than one occasion, our Treasury’s annual resort to the markets is on the order of €400 billion. In a context still fraught with tension, it takes very little to undermine investor confidence. This is what happened between the summer of 2011 and the spring of 2012, when the share of Italian government bonds in foreign hands plummeted. The agreements concluded in the last two years have put the earlier budget commitments into practice. The rule on public debt, which will apply to Italy for the first time in 2016, calls for an average annual reduction of about one twentieth of the excess over 60 per cent of GDP. In order to comply, it is not necessary to lower the nominal size of the debt. In “normal” conditions of close to 3 per cent nominal economic growth, all that is needed is structural budget balance. Contrary to what some commentators say, a correction of €40–50 billion a year will not be required, nor will it be necessary to maintain a restrictive budget policy permanently. Although the debt rule does allow some room for flexibility, we must continue to aim for real growth in the economy, and hence the recovery of investment – which is at once a supply factor and a fundamental demand component. As to price developments, inflation is still below the level consistent with the ECB’s definition of price stability, i.e. an annual price rise of below but close to 2 per cent in the medium term. Actually, consumer price inflation in the euro area and Italy has fallen consistently more than expected in recent months and has kept below 1 per cent since October last year. According to recent estimates by the ECB, euro-area inflation will average 1.0 per cent this year, 1.3 per cent in 2015 and 1.5 per cent in 2016. Our forecasts paint a similar picture for consumer prices in Italy. We are not in a situation of generalized price reduction, of deflation. But even a long period of excessively small price changes can have undesirable consequences: it hinders the correction of macroeconomic imbalances through the adjustment of relative prices; it can prompt consumers to postpone purchases, especially of durable goods; it can affect the cost of capital thus deterring capital formation; and it makes debt service more onerous. If such a situation lasts too long, it can cause inflation expectations to become dangerously detached from the monetary policy. The risk of long-term inflation expectations no longer being anchored to price stability must be resolutely countered. This risk is limited for the time being, but there are signs that should not be underestimated. The downward trend in inflation expectations has sharpened in recent months, spreading even to more distant time horizons: the yields on inflation swaps 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  indicate that the expected annual inflation rate is 1.2 per cent three years ahead and 1.6 per cent five years ahead. Professional forecasters surveyed by the ECB estimate a nearly 20 per cent probability that in two years’ time inflation will be 0.9 per cent or lower. The formation of expectations is a non-linear process; major changes can occur suddenly, almost without warning, making it more difficult to regain control. Against this background, the ECB’s Governing Council has reaffirmed its intention to maintain an accommodative monetary policy stance for as long as necessary and has firmly reiterated that policy rates will remain at present or lower levels for an extended period. In line with its mandate, the Council will use all the tools needed to maintain price stability. To accompany the reform efforts of individual countries, the ECB’s monetary policy commitment in its area of responsibility must be matched by the commitments of the other institutional actors. The debate on the euro area’s “fiscal capacity” launched by the Report of the President of the European Council and the Commission’s Plan was abruptly broken off after the Commission presented its plans for major economic reforms and for financial support to structural reforms in March last year. The delays in implementing structural reforms in many countries are responsible for the build-up of the macroeconomic imbalances that have fuelled the current crisis. The Commission’s proposals, expressly open to discussion in order to discover any scope for improvement, go in the right direction of identifying mechanisms to support the convergence needed to strengthen the Economic and Monetary Union. Italy must succeed in taking full advantage of all the opportunities offered by the Union. In the past, for example, we were not able to benefit fully from the European Structural Funds. Introducing structural reforms that help us to regain competitiveness is an essential step towards the country’s recovery. The measures that need to be taken have long since been identified. The process of European coordination could help to flesh out the details, but the ultimate responsibility for the reforms still lies with us. It is important to continue resolutely along the path to a fuller Union. The adoption of single mechanisms for banking supervision and resolution is a crucial step. The benefits of strengthening European integration far outweigh the alleged advantages of weakening it. Choices must be made responsibly. We cannot fear only the risks of action and disregard those of inertia. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Benoît Cœuré: The known unknowns of central clearing Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the meeting on global economy and financial system, hosted by the University of Chicago Booth School of Business Initiative on Global Markets, Coral Gables, 29 March 2014. *      *      * Accompanying slides can be found on the European Central Bank’s website I would like to thank Andreas Schönenberger for his contributions. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. Ladies and gentlemen, Today, I want to share some thoughts with you on central clearing. [slide 1] At the Pittsburgh Summit in 2009, G20 leaders committed to have all standardised OTC derivatives contracts cleared through central counterparties (CCPs). The mandatory use of central clearing as a regulatory tool for mitigating systemic risk is a fairly new feature in financial market regulation. Central clearing definitely has the capacity to promote financial stability, provided it is appropriately used and any potential side effects are well understood and effectively mitigated. In that context, there are still a number of questions that we need to look at. Let me call them the “known unknowns” of central clearing. [slide 2] I want to touch upon the following issues: • Systemic effects of mandatory clearing • Recovery versus resolution of central counterparties • Optimal design of loss allocation tools • Evolution of global clearing structures Systemic effects of mandatory clearing [slide 3] Let me start with the systemic effects of mandatory central clearing. Clearing houses have done their job very well in the crisis, contrary to other financial institutions, and successfully faced the challenges of a rapidly growing volume of transactions. We want to make sure that the same holds true in the new world of mandatory clearing. [slide 4] The systemic effects of central clearing are numerous and, although the overall balance is undoubtedly positive, some of them are ambiguous and should be addressed carefully. On the one hand, mandatory clearing reduces systemic risk very significantly as it • leads to the collateralisation of trades that might have remained uncollateralised otherwise, • enhances risk management by means of sophisticated margining methods, • allows for mutualisation of risk, which promotes the resilience of the financial system, especially in the event of catastrophic scenarios, 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  • offers multilateral netting so that less collateral is needed to manage risks, and • facilitates risk management as it helps to overcome information asymmetries that participants in non-centrally cleared markets face. On the other hand, some consequences of central clearing may increase systemic risk: • as a result of growing risk concentration in CCPs and in a limited number of large global dealers, which act as general clearing members as a gateway for other financial institutions to CCPs, • as a consequence of mutualisation, risks may spread among participants and markets more widely and the distribution of losses is more difficult to predict, • in order to avoid mandatory clearing, we might see migration of risk outside of the regulated universe through the artificial creation of bespoke (and hence risky) products that are not suitable for central clearing. Moreover, the systemic effect of clearing depends on whether risk is redistributed to those who are more able to deal with it, which is difficult to determine. Finally, the overall systemic effect depends on the incentives for risk-taking and central clearing that accompany risk redistribution. [slide 5] To promote central clearing and avoid regulatory arbitrage, a number of reforms have been adopted including: (i) mandatory clearing, (ii) margin requirements for non-centrally cleared trades, and (iii) higher capital requirements for non-centrally cleared trades. This highlights the crucial complementarity between the regulation of banks and the regulation of financial market infrastructures (FMIs), with the overall objective that regulation reduces overall risk, and does not shift it around the financial system. Cooperation between the Committee on Payments and Settlement Systems and the International Organisation of Securities Commissions (CPSS-IOSCO) on the one hand, and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) on the other hand, is key in this respect. A macroeconomic impact assessment led by the BIS focused on the effects of these reforms and found net benefits of 0.12% of GDP per year. These are estimates of the long-run consequences of the reforms and are expected to apply once those reforms have been fully implemented and produced their full economic effects. However, central clearing also involves risk redistribution and potentially the creation of new risks. The overall impact is therefore less certain: there are significant benefits which need to be balanced against potential new risks and uncertain risk redistribution effects. Ultimately, it seems to me that the success of central clearing as a tool for promoting financial stability critically depends on two factors: (i) the ability of CCPs to handle the risks they are concentrating and thus the design of their corporate governance, risk management and recovery frameworks and (ii) the ability of the official sector to address effectively any unintended side effects and “new” risks that may result from the push towards more central clearing. Recovery versus resolution of CCPs [slide 6] A second issue that I should like to highlight today concerns the relationship between recovery and resolution of CCPs. As central clearing involves risk concentration in what we may see as “super systemically relevant” institutions, it is crucial that such institutions can recover from severe shocks or be resolved if necessary. Now there are several questions that are typically raised in this context: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  • At what point in time does a CCP need to be resolved because it cannot recover? • Given that CCPs provide critical services and are required to cover any losses or liquidity shortfalls that may arise, is resolution of a CCP a realistic concept at all? Is it ever needed or appropriate? • What makes CCPs different from other financial institutions? Do these differences require different rules for their recovery and resolution? [slide 7] The CPSS-IOSCO Principles for financial market infrastructures (PFMIs) require CCPs to have a plan for allocating any losses and liquidity shortfalls that the regular “waterfall” – that is, a sequence of prefunded financial resources – does not cover. Alternatively, the respective CCP might have to be resolved. The CPSS-IOSCO and the Financial Stability Board (FSB) will provide guidance on the recovery and resolution of CCPs by mid-2014.1 The question is: should resolution only be performed if and when recovery has failed? Or could there be circumstances in which the resolution of a CCP is preferable to its recovery, even if recovery was still feasible? Let me first explore some features that make financial market infrastructures different from other financial institutions: • Service continuation (“critical services”) is more important in the case of FMIs. They are utilities at the heart of the financial system. Their smooth operation is essential for all other types of financial service. • In most cases, there are only a few, if any, substitutes or alternative providers. • Unlike banks, FMIs have ex ante loss allocation rules that they can draw on for the purpose of recovery. • Not all FMIs are exposed to credit risk (but they are still systemically important). • The size and composition of their balance sheets (e.g. rarely subordinated debt instruments) is different, which makes bail-in as a recovery or resolution tool difficult. • To the extent that the use of a CCP is mandatory, it is absolutely essential that the relevant clearing services are preserved regardless of the circumstances. In conclusion, the recovery of CCPs in order to maintain service continuation is much more important for CCPs than for other financial institutions. That’s why the PFMIs require CCPs to be able to allocate any losses that are not already covered by regular risk management. [slide 8] So if the recovery of CCPs is so vital, is there any scope for resolution at all? I think there is, for a number of reasons: First of all, the attempt to recover may simply fail: the ex-ante recovery plans may prove inadequate ex post. Recovery plans have fortunately not yet been tested, and it remains to be seen how they work in practice. Most importantly, however, recovery is not an end in itself, but a means to preserve financial stability. Entry into resolution should be possible if the recovery plan has failed to return the FMI to viability or if its implementation would otherwise compromise financial stability, for                                                 1 See Financial Stability Board. “Consultation Document: Application of the Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes to Non-Bank Financial Institutions”, 12 August 2013, and CPSS-IOSCO. “Consultative Report: Recovery of Financial Market Infrastructures”, 12 August 2013. See also P. Tucker. “Central counterparties in evolving capital markets: Safety, recovery and resolution”. Banque de France Financial Stability Review, No. 17, April 2013. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  example if the application of a particular loss allocation tool turns out to overexpose certain (groups of) participants. Moreover, resolution may also become necessary if participants do not want to use the CCP any longer and prefer to wind it down. In conclusion, the resolution authorities have the responsibility (and are in a better position than CCPs) to do what is systemically needed in a crisis situation, which may mean in extreme cases that the application of resolution procedures is preferable to the activation of a recovery plan. Of course, much will depend on authorities doing the right thing at the time of the crisis. This in turn assumes that authorities have enough information at any point in time to “connect the dots” of a complex network of CCPs and global dealers. Hence the critical importance of enforcing the new reporting requirements to trade repositories (TRs), and further to this, of being able to aggregate data collected by TRs across products, institutions, and jurisdictions, and conduct analytical work based on this data.2 Optimal design of loss allocation tools [slide 9] Let me now turn to the third known unknown, which is the subject of much debate: what is the optimal design and composition of a CCP’s recovery tools? [slide 10] In the field of recovery, we are entering new territory, which is why the authorities have wisely taken a very cautious approach to giving guidance to FMIs on the design of their recovery plans. Ideally, recovery tools should be comprehensive, effective and controllable; they should create appropriate incentives for risk management and minimise any negative impacts. However, the challenge is that no individual tool can equally meet all of these criteria because of trade-offs, for example: • Uncapped cash calls are comprehensive, but may create disincentives for central clearing. • Variation margin haircutting can be comprehensive and effective (as it reduces pay-outs rather than requiring additional pay-ins), but the loss allocation and hence the systemic effect is uncertain. • Initial margin haircutting may help achieve comprehensiveness, but increases the potential for contagion risk. The optimal choice of recovery tools is still evolving and remains a controversial issue. The regulatory approach by CPSS-IOSCO is therefore non-prescriptive and aims to provide guidance that should help FMIs to choose the appropriate (mix of) recovery tools. This approach, however, might need to be adapted over time. Evolution of global clearing structures [slide 11] Let me now turn to the fourth known unknown, which is the optimal design of the global clearing structure.                                                 2 See Financial Stability Board. “Consultation Paper: Feasibility Study on Approaches to Aggregate OTC Derivatives Data”, 4 February 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  [slide 12] Such a design depends on numerous factors and questions: • How many CCPs do we need at global level? • How many markets should a CCP serve? • What are the implications of competitive clearing where there are several CCPs serving the same trading venue? • Should CCPs be linked and how? Should links be limited to cash-market CCPs or also apply to derivatives and commodities CCPs? • What degree of tiering is optimal and how should participants get access to CCPs when needed? This question has gained in importance with the establishment of the clearing obligation. [slide 13] What we see today is a globalisation process that has triggered a trend towards global clearing with increasingly large global CCPs. Moreover, it appears that many banks prefer indirect access to clearing services so as to comply with the clearing obligation. Client clearing seems thus to be dominated by a few large global intermediaries. This concentration creates a higher degree of dependency on this small group of firms. The trend towards the globalisation of clearing has benefits and risks. On the one hand, there is greater scope for netting that allows for collateral savings, the lower cost of direct access and using CCPs, and an increase in transparency for both regulators and CCPs. On the other hand, there is a potential for systemic risks as CCPs may become too big to fail. Also, market power may push up clearing fees and restrict entry. This could create disincentives for central clearing and could undermine the efficiency gains reaped in the first place by eroding the pricing power of global dealers. There could also be cross-border regulatory frictions in the case of multiple (and inconsistent) national regulations, and last but not least the cross-border liquidity provision in several currencies becomes more complex. This leads me to the last and maybe most challenging “unknown”. Given CCPs’ role as financial market utilities that has been reinforced by mandatory clearing requirements, and their increasing systemic relevance, would the world be a safer place, if CCPs had been established as non-for-profit institutions? My tentative answer is no. I have outlined the importance of good risk management in CCPs, and the ability to adapt to a changing market environment in terms of counterparties, products, and technologies. I am convinced that this will be better done in a market environment. But this certainly requires strong supervision, effective cooperative oversight arrangements, and setting up the right incentive structure so that CCPs don’t lose sight of public interest, starting with the interest of their indirect members. Let me conclude. Central clearing will make the global financial system safer. However, it also has the potential to redistribute risk. Its overall systemic effect will thus depend on the incentives for risk-taking and central clearing that accompany risk redistribution. Hence the need for the official sector to provide the right incentive framework ex-ante, produce data that can help understand the distribution of risk, and tightly supervise CCPs in a spirit of cooperation across jurisdictions. Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Charles L Evans: Thoughts on accommodative monetary policy, inflation and financial instability Speech by Mr Charles L Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, at the Credit Suisse Asian Investment Conference, Hong Kong, 28 March 2014. *      *      * Introduction Thank you, Mr. Naqvi. It is truly a pleasure to be here today at the Credit Suisse Asian Investment Conference, and I thank the organizers for including me in this impressive program. Today, I would like to make three points concerning the U.S. economy and accommodative monetary policy. First, the U.S. economy continues to improve, and accommodative monetary policy will remain a strong support for this recovery for quite some time. Second, although highly accommodative monetary policy can lead to increasing inflation risks today, inflation in the United States is too low. And this is true throughout much of the world. Third, while low interest rates could lead to financial exuberance in principle, monetary policy is not the best tool to mitigate this risk. Instead, macroprudential policies are more appropriate tools to address the risk of financial instability. Before turning to the details of these three points, I need to note that, as always, the standard Fed disclaimer applies: I will be giving my personal perspective, and that is not necessarily shared by my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or in the Federal Reserve System. Recent Monetary Policy Actions As you all know, in response to the unusual economic circumstances generated by the financial crisis and the Great Recession, the FOMC lowered our traditional policy tool – the target federal funds rate – to near-zero levels in December 2008 and has kept it there since. With the fed funds rate constrained at this lower bound, and economic conditions requiring additional policy accommodation, the Committee also deployed nontraditional policy tools to stimulate activity. We embarked upon large-scale purchases of long-term Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities. We also used new communications tools to provide forward guidance about how long short-term interest rates will essentially remain at their lower bound of zero. While large-scale asset purchases and forward guidance are unconventional tools, their effect on interest rates and real economic activity is quite conventional. Both tools are aimed at stimulating economic activity through lower long-term interest rates. Through arbitrage and portfolio rebalancing, lower rates in one market are transmitted to other interest rates faced by investors, nonfinancial firms and consumers. Lower rates are also transmitted across the asset and maturity spectrum. There is significant evidence that the FOMC’s policies have been helpful in reducing financing costs rates paid by firms and consumers and, more generally, in supporting aggregate demand in the face of substantial economic headwinds over the past six years. It should be noted that economic activity picked up momentum in the second half of 2013. Overall, real gross domestic product (GDP) grew at a bit under a 3-1/2 percent rate in the second half, up from an average pace of growth of about 2 percent over the previous three years. Moreover, we’ve seen some more solid consumer spending, which should provide further impetus to overall growth this year. In the labor market, job growth has been solid and the unemployment rate is down to 6.7 percent. That is well below the 8.1 percent rate that 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  prevailed when we instituted the latest round of large-scale asset purchases in September 2012. However, we aren’t out of the woods yet. The harsh weather of this past winter – by which I mean the North American polar vortex – makes the recent data difficult to interpret. That said, some of them have been on the soft side. Balance sheet scars from the financial crisis are still weighing on the economy. Fiscal policy is a restraint on economic growth. And economic activity abroad is not robust. The good news is that all of these headwinds appear to be dissipating. But risks remain. And we still have large resource gaps. For example, the unemployment rate is still well above the 5-1/4 percent rate I think it should be in the long run. At the same time, inflation is only 1 percent – well below the FOMC’s longer-run target of 2 percent. Accordingly, monetary policy is highly accommodative, and needs to remain so for some time. Given these developments, the FOMC began adjusting the mix of its tools in December. The Committee, however, is maintaining the overall highly accommodative stance of policy. The Committee modestly reduced the pace of its monthly asset purchases from $85 billion to $55 billion in three separate $10 billion steps. In addition, with the unemployment rate approaching the 6-1/2 percent threshold that was established in December 2012, the Committee decided it was time to update its forward guidance on the future path of short-term interest rates. Our policy statement now emphasizes that when deciding how long short-term rates will remain at their current level, the Committee will use a wide range of information to assess the realized and expected progress toward our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. The statement also indicates that given the Committee’s current assessment of these factors, it likely will be appropriate to keep the fed funds rate at its current level for a considerable period after the asset purchase program ends. Furthermore, even after the economy lifts off and employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions likely will warrant keeping short-term rates below their typical long-run level for some time. The various asset purchases the Fed has undertaken since 2008 have expanded our balance sheet more than fourfold, to over $4 trillion dollars. Moreover, according to the FOMC’s projections and the latest market expectations, by the time the policy rate increases, it will have been near zero for about seven years. These are startling facts and should certainly get your attention! As prudent policymakers, we would be remiss if we failed to carefully assess potential risks that might arise from these unusual and extraordinary policies. As the FOMC’s communications indicate, the Committee has fully reviewed the potential costs of its policies and it reassesses them regularly. I think that the benefits of our policy choices continue to far outweigh the potential risks. However, we must repeatedly think long and hard about two risks that are mentioned often – namely, that our expanded balance sheet and the prolonged period of low rates raise 1) the risk of higher inflation; and 2) the risk of financial instability. What can go wrong? Do we have the appropriate infrastructure and tools to adequately assess and manage these risks? To address these questions, we must evaluate these risks within the context of the goals of monetary policy and the current state of the economy and financial markets. Inflation risks Let me start with the risk of high inflation. As far back as mid-2009, Fed critics warned that our near-zero policy rate and trillions of dollars in asset purchases risk generating very high inflation. On several occasions, to underscore this risk, I have been presented with a gift of a Zimbabwe 100 trillion dollar note. As someone who is subject to a 20 U.S. dollar limit on gifts, I can assure you it is within the guidelines to accept one of these notes. The monetary policy mandates of the Federal Reserve are clear: We must foster monetary and financial conditions that support maximum employment and price stability. Since January 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  2012, the Fed has set an explicit goal for inflation of 2 percent, as measured by the price index for total personal consumption expenditures, or PCE. So, how are we doing with respect to this 2 percent target and our Zimbabwean risks? Despite many earlier predictions of unacceptably high inflation, total PCE inflation has been hovering around just 1 percent since early 2013. Other inflation measures, notably, the well-known Consumer Price Index (CPI), are also well below their related benchmarks.1 Forecasters often look at core inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, because it is a better predictor of where overall prices are headed than is total inflation. Our progress toward the inflation target is not noticeably faster by this metric either. Core PCE inflation was just 1.1 percent over the past year and has been at this rate since last spring. Most private sector forecasts and survey measures of inflation expectations have remained well anchored and do not ring any alarms of high inflation. Expectations embedded in asset prices tell a similar story. Sophisticated models that extract inflation expectations from the yield curve show that investors’ inflation expectations at the three-year horizon are below 2 percent and will be below 2 percent for several years. All told, the risk of high inflation seems very low. In fact, I am concerned that inflation will not pick up quickly enough. As I noted, we have been stuck at 1 percent inflation since early 2013, and there is little indication of a pickup in the recent data. Low inflation is just as economically costly as high inflation. When we set an inflation target of 2 percent, we need to hit our target without too much delay. Simply put, we need to average 2 percent inflation over the medium term. Accordingly, the current 1 percent inflation situation calls for extended policy accommodation. If the Fed embarked prematurely on more restrictive monetary policy conditions, these adverse actions would work to reduce inflation to further unacceptably low levels. That’s going in the wrong direction.2  Financial stability and monetary policy It is easy and most natural for a Fed policymaker to talk about inflation. Price stability is one of the explicit goals of monetary policy as mandated by the U.S. Congress. Financial stability risks are more complicated. How does financial stability dovetail with the Fed’s dual mandate? There is clearly an interdependent relationship between them. A strong economy with low inflation provides a key stabilizing force for beneficial credit intermediation and robust financial market functioning. At the same time, stable and well-functioning financial markets are essential for achieving maximum employment and price stability. The global experience since 2008 reinforces this critical interplay between monetary and financial conditions. However, beyond these basic principles, what is the appropriate monetary policy stance for achieving both financial stability and the dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability? With inflation running well below our 2 percent longer-run target and the unemployment rate still well above its normal long-term level, appropriate monetary policy dictates that low real interest rates should prevail until the economy is further along a sustainable path to its potential level and inflation is closer to target. Nonetheless, it is common to hear the                                                 1  Because of some differences in product coverage and statistical methodologies, total CPI inflation tends to average 1/4 to 1/2 percentage points higher than total PCE inflation. Hence, the FOMC’s 2 percent target on total PCE inflation would translate to a 2.3 percent to 2.5 percent target for total CPI inflation. 2  I recently discussed the costs of too-low inflation and the implications of having a 2 percent inflation target in a January 15 speech; see Evans (2014). 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  argument that these highly accommodative monetary policies might sow the seeds of financial instability. The fear is that excessive and persistently low interest rates would lead to excessive risk-taking by some investors. For instance, some firms, such as life insurance companies and pension funds, are under pressure to meet a stream of fixed liabilities incurred when interest rates were higher.3 (And perhaps these liabilities were offered at somewhat generous terms to begin with.) To meet commitments like these in the current low interest rate environment, some firms have an incentive to reach for yield by investing in excessively risky assets. Furthermore, with the costs of borrowing at historically low levels, other investors might simply decide that this is a good time to cheaply amplify the risk and return in their portfolios by taking on more leverage. One could reach the conclusion that historically low and stable interest rates pose a threat to financial stability. This creates a seeming paradox for policymakers. On the one hand, the existing large shortfalls in aggregate demand call for highly accommodative monetary policies and historically low interest rates. On the other hand, such policies have the potential to raise the likelihood of financial instability in the future. So, the questions that I’m often asked regarding these matters are as follows: Do the regulators and the Fed have adequate safeguards in place to mitigate this potential financial risk? If not, should the FOMC step away from what we thought was the best monetary policy with respect to our dual mandate? Should we discard our nonconventional tools and raise the fed funds rate in order to reduce the possibility of undesirable financial imbalances in the future? I don’t believe that such monetary policy adjustment is the right approach. I think the inference that persistently low interest rates pose a danger to financial stability is based on a narrow view of the economy. This narrow view is unlikely to survive a broader analysis that takes into account all the interactions between financial markets and real economic activity. If more restrictive monetary policies were pursued to generate higher interest rates, they would likely result in higher unemployment and a sharp decline in asset prices, choking the moderate recovery. Such an adverse economic outcome is unlikely to set a favorable foundation for financial stability. Moreover, our short-term interest rate tools are too blunt to have a significant effect only on those pockets of the financial system that are most prone to inappropriate risk-taking. At the same time, these blunt tools could significantly damage other markets, as well as the growth prospects for the economy as a whole. Therefore, stepping away from otherwise appropriate monetary policy to address potential financial instability risks would degrade progress toward maximum employment and price stability. This approach would be a particularly poor choice when other tools are available, at lower social costs, to address the risk of financial instability. Let me be clear. I am not saying that financial stability concerns are not relevant for the economy or that policymakers should not take decisive action against developments that threaten financial stability. Rather, I am saying that the macroprudential tools available to policymakers are better-suited safeguards to addressing financial risks directly. These macroprudential actions can be dialed up or down given the appropriate setting of monetary policy tools; so, undesirable macroeconomic outcomes are less likely than if we were to resort to premature monetary tightening. Indeed, any decision to instead rely on more-restrictive interest rate policies to achieve financial stability at the expense of poorer macroeconomic outcomes must pass a cost–benefit test. And such a test would have to clearly illustrate that the adverse economic outcomes from more-restrictive interest rate                                                 3  I should note that increases in interest rates since last spring have increased discount factors and thus lowered the present value of pension fund and other fixed nominal liabilities. For instance, see Fitch Ratings (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  policies would be better and more acceptable to society than the outcomes that can be achieved by using enhanced supervisory tools alone to address financial stability risks. I have yet to see this argued convincingly. Macroprudential tools Let’s discuss some of these macroprudential tools. One simple but important tool is enhanced monitoring. Even before the recent financial crisis, central bankers were well aware of the key role played by stable financial markets in economic activity. Since the crisis, however, the analysis of financial stability issues has been greatly expanded and given a more prominent role in the FOMC’s deliberations. We comb through reams of data looking for evidence of incipient risks to financial stability. The Federal Reserve also has revamped its approach to bank supervision substantially to expand the focus on macrofinancial risks. Traditional bank supervisory tools are being used more intensively, and new tools have been developed. Bank capital stress tests are one well-known addition to our supervisory toolkit. Another is the augmentation of traditional microprudential supervisory work that analyzes individual institutions with efforts that take a wide-angle view of the banking industry. Supervisors look to identify common trends across institutions and emerging concentrations of risks that might pose systemic threats to the financial system. This broad view also allows supervisors to better identify sound practices among firms and incorporate them into supervisory reviews and the feedback provided in them. The Federal Reserve also has greatly expanded its surveillance efforts to financial markets outside of the traditional banking sector, such as the insurance industry and financial market utilities. These efforts are not confined to financial institutions per se, and reach a range of activities that might pose a potential threat to financial stability. For instance, staff members from the Chicago Fed are actively engaged in assessing the role of high-frequency computerized trading in securities and derivatives markets and associated risks that might arise with it. These are just a few examples of regulatory tools available to monitor and promote financial stability. And there are a host of other instruments in our toolkit, such as resolution plans, liquidity requirements and single counterparty credit limits. All are examples of improvements in supervisory practices aimed at reducing the likelihood of systemic disruptions and containing the impact should such disruptions occur. Conclusion To reiterate, I currently expect that low inflation and still-high unemployment will mean that the short-term policy rate will remain near zero well into 2015. In this environment, some have questioned the ability of our supervisory and regulatory tools to adequately address potential financial instability risks. They argue that a broad tightening of interest rate policy might be more effective in catching incipient risks that might fall through the cracks. It is certainly true that higher interest rates would permeate the entire financial system. But this is just another way of saying that raising interest rates is a blunt tool. Higher interest rates would reduce risk-taking where it is excessive; but they also would result in a pullback in economic activity in sectors where risk-taking might already be overly restrained. That’s how a blunt tool works. If you believe that financial stability can only be achieved through higher interest rates  – interest rates that would do immediate damage to meeting our dual mandate goals at a time when unemployment is still unacceptably high – then we ought to at least ask ourselves if the financial system has become too big and too complex. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Think about how problematic the cost-benefit calculus becomes if the only way we can achieve financial stability is to raise interest rates above the level where the forces of demand and supply in the real economy put them. The possible benefit of such a restrictive rate move would be to reduce risks that might be forming in the nooks and crannies of a highly complex financial system. But the costs would be 1) higher unemployment; 2) a risk of choking off the economic recovery; 3) even lower inflation below our objective; and, somewhat paradoxically, 4) the introduction of new financial risks by reducing asset values and credit quality. Given such cost-benefit trade-offs, I would have to question whether the financial system has become too complex – perhaps complex enough to generate negative social value. Rather than degrading our macroeconomic performance through suboptimal monetary policies, I would have to consider whether we should contemplate big changes to the financial system – a lot more rules, substantially higher capital requirements for all institutions and maybe even fewer financial products. However, I have a more favorable view of the social value of our financial system and the efficacy of supervision and regulation. Since the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve has expanded its macroprudential toolkit and enhanced its microprudential tools. We have also reoriented our approach to supervision to take full advantage of the Federal Reserve System’s wide-ranging expertise on macroeconomic and financial developments and risks. I believe that these regulatory efforts can effectively minimize the risks of another crisis and increase the resiliency of the financial system. We can achieve these objectives without having to resort to wholesale changes to the financial system and without degrading our monetary policy goals. Maintaining the effectiveness of the financial system for generating more-robust economic growth continues to be a crucial objective for public policy. Thank you for your time, and I would be happy to take your questions. References Evans, Charles, 2014, “Recurring themes for the New Year,” speech, Corridor Economic Forecast Luncheon, Coralville, IA, January 15. Federal Open Market Committee, 2013, meeting minutes (external), December 17–18. Fitch Ratings, 2013, “Fitch: U.S. corporate pension plans underfunded status improves,” press release (external), New York, August 15. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Daniel K Tarullo: Regulating large foreign banking organizations Speech by Mr Daniel K Tarullo, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Harvard Law School Symposium on “Building the Financial System of the Twenty-first Century: An Agenda for Europe and the United States”, Armonk, New York, 27 March 2014. *      *      * The financial crisis exposed, in painful and dramatic fashion, the shortcomings of existing regulatory and supervisory regimes. In both the United States and the European Union (EU), the crisis also revealed some particular vulnerabilities created by foreign banking operations. This evening I would like to focus on these vulnerabilities and on how best we should address them. Let me note at the outset the now commonplace observation that we have a quite integrated international financial system, with many large, globally active firms operating within a system of national government and regulation or, in the case of the EU, a hybrid of regional and national regulation. I add the equally commonplace observation that there is no realistic prospect for having a global banking regulator and, consequently, the responsibility and authority for financial stability will continue to rest with national or regional authorities.1 The question, then, is how responsibility for oversight of these large firms can be most effectively shared among regulators. This, of course, is the important issue underlying the perennial challenge of home-host supervisory relations. Another introductory observation is that – at least in a world of nations with substantially different economic circumstances, different currencies, and banking and capital markets of quite different levels of depth and development – there will be good reason to vary at least some forms of regulation across countries. Presumptively, at least, nations should be able to adjust their regulatory systems based on local circumstances and their relative level of risk aversion as it pertains to the potential for financial instability. Although the financial systems and economies of the United States and the EU are more similar to one another than they are to those of many other jurisdictions, they are hardly identical. Even between these two, for example, there may be legitimate differences within the broader convergence around minimum regulatory and supervisory standards developed at the Basel Committee, the International Organization of Securities Commissions, the Financial Stability Board, and other forums. These opening observations are important in responding to the curious charge of “Balkanization” that has been levelled at the United States and, to a lesser extent, some other jurisdictions, as a result of actions taken or proposed in response to problems presented by foreign banks during the crisis. I say “curious” for several reasons. One is that the charge reflects a misunderstanding of the allocation of responsibility between home and host supervisors that has evolved in the Basel Committee during the past several decades. Another is that the charge seems implicitly, and oddly, premised on the notion that what we had in 2007 was a well-functioning, integrated global financial system with effective consolidated supervision of global banks. A third is that the charge overlooks the fact that much of what the United States is now doing is matching what the EU has quite sensibly been doing for years. In the rest of my remarks I will elaborate on these points, though not in the spirit of a debater’s arguments, but in an effort to answer the question I posed a moment ago: How,                                                  1 I would add, in passing, the observation that I am not at all sure it would be desirable to have a single global bank regulator even if it were remotely within the realm of political possibility. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  that is, can we successfully reduce the risks to financial stability posed by large, internationally active banks? As I hope will become apparent, a theme I wish to emphasize is that we need to redouble efforts at genuine supervisory cooperation if we are to manage effectively the vulnerabilities and challenges posed by the perennial home-host issue. International principles on home- and host-country responsibilities While the circumstances and risks may have changed, the issue of the appropriate roles of home and host countries is not a new one. Indeed, it was a key motivation for creation of the Basel Committee in 1975 following the failures of the Herstatt and Franklin National banks. Many of the Basel Committee’s early activities were focused on the challenges created by gaps in the supervision of internationally active banks, as evidenced by the fact that Basel “Concordats” on supervision preceded Basel “Accords” and “Frameworks” on capital and other subjects. This task has, of necessity, been ongoing, as experience revealed gaps in supervisory coverage and as the scale and scope of internationally active banks grew. The principle of consolidated supervision emerged in the early 1980s to ensure that some specific banking authority – generally the home-country regulator – had a complete view of the assets and liabilities of the bank.2 This principle was reinforced and elaborated following the Bank of Credit and Commerce International episode in the early 1990s.3  It is important to note that each Basel Committee declaration on the importance of home-country consolidated oversight has also included a statement of the obligations and prerogatives of host states in which significant foreign bank operations are located. This feature of the Basel Committee’s approach makes sense as a reflection both of the host authority’s responsibility for stability of its financial system and of the practical point that a host authority will be more familiar with the characteristics and risks in its market. In accordance with this history, the current version of the “Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision” sets out as one of its “essential criteria” for home-host relationships that “[t]he host supervisor’s national laws or regulations require that the cross-border operations of foreign banks are subject to prudential, inspection and regulatory reporting requirements similar to those for domestic banks.”4  It is clear, then, that consolidated supervision is not intended to displace host-country supervision. Instead, as the Basel Committee has regularly noted, the two are intended to be complementary, so as to assure effective oversight of large, internationally active banks. Similarly, the stated purpose of the Basel Committee in requiring consolidated capital requirements is not to remove from host countries any responsibility or discretion to apply regulatory capital requirements, but to “preserve the integrity of capital in banks with subsidiaries by eliminating double gearing.”5 Likewise, and contrary to suggestions that are sometimes made, the capital accords and frameworks developed by the Basel Committee have always been explicitly minimum requirements. They are floors, not ceilings. Finally, it is worth noting that, in establishing a post-crisis framework for domestic systemically important banks (D-SIBs), the Basel Committee made clear that a host country may in appropriate circumstances designate domestic operations of a foreign bank as                                                  2 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (1983), “Principles for the Supervision of Banks’ Foreign Establishments (PDF)” (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, May). 3 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (1992), “Minimum Standards for Supervision of International Banking Groups and Their Cross-Border Establishments (PDF)” (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, July). 4 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2012), “Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision (PDF)” (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, September), p. 38. 5 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2006), “International Convergence of Capital Measures and Capital Standards (PDF)” (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, June), p. 7. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  systemically important for that country, even if the parent foreign bank has already been designated a global systemically important bank (G-SIB).6 The idea informing the newly created concept of a D-SIB is that an entity whose stress or failure could destabilize a domestic financial system might thereby indirectly destabilize the international financial system. Thus, the D-SIB category carries along with it higher loss-absorbency requirements than are generally applicable to domestic banks, although perhaps not as high as requirements for G-SIBs. Of course, our regulation for foreign banking organizations (FBOs) does not entail D-SIB designation or require higher than generally applicable loss absorbency. But I cite this feature of the D-SIB framework that permits designation of the domestic operations of foreign G-SIBs because it reflects rather clearly the principle that the specific characteristics of domestic markets may call for regulation of foreign banks in the host country, not just at a consolidated level. In short, the work of the Basel Committee over the years has not been directed at restraining host-country authorities from supervising and regulating foreign banking operations in their country. On the contrary, the committee has repeatedly asserted the complementary responsibilities of both home and host countries to oversee large, internationally active banking groups, in the interests of both national and international financial stability. And the committee has frequently returned to this set of issues in responding to developments that pose a threat to the safety and soundness of the international financial system. The shift in foreign bank activities Unfortunately, neither the Basel Committee nor national regulators responded in a timely fashion to the magnitude of the expansion in scale and scope of the world’s largest banking organizations in the roughly 15 years before the financial crisis. As illustrated in figure 1, at the end of 1974, just before the Basel Committee was created, the assets of the world’s 10 largest banking organizations together equaled about 8 percent of global GDP. The three largest were all American – BankAmerica, Citicorp, and Chase Manhattan. But their combined assets were equal to less than 3–1/2 percent of world GDP and, as illustrated in figure 2, about 10 percent of the GDP of their home country, the United States. By 1988 the combined assets of the world’s 10 largest banking organizations as a proportion of world GDP had nearly doubled to about 15 percent, a ratio that held constant during the succeeding decade, at the beginning of the emerging market financial crisis in 1997. Then the explosive growth began. In the next decade – that is, up to the onset of the financial crisis in 2007 – the combined assets of the world’s 10 largest banks as a share of global GDP nearly tripled, to about 43 percent. The largest bank in the world at that time, Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS), had assets equivalent to about 6.8 percent of global GDP, nearly twice the comparable figure for the three largest banks combined in 1974. Adding the assets of Deutsche Bank and BNP Paribas – the second and third largest banks in 2007 – to those of RBS, the three had combined assets equal to about 17 percent of global GDP. And each of the three had assets nearly equal to, or in one instance substantially more than, the GDP of its home country. Even the eighth-ranked bank, UBS, had assets well over four times the GDP of its home country, Switzerland. Not only did the size of the largest banks change dramatically, so, too, did their scope, reflecting the overall integration of capital market and traditional lending activities that accelerated in the decade and a half preceding the crisis. This trend was particularly apparent in the United States and the United Kingdom, homes to the world’s two largest financial centers. In the United States, the proportion of foreign banking assets to total U.S. banking assets has remained constant at approximately one-fifth since the late 1990s. But                                                  6 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2012), “A Framework for Dealing with Domestic Systemically Important Banks (PDF)” (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, October). 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  the concentration and character of those assets have changed noticeably. Today there are as many foreign as U.S.-owned banks with at least $50 billion in U.S. assets, the threshold established by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act for banks for which more stringent prudential measures must be established.7 Perhaps even more important was the shift in composition of foreign bank assets in the 15 years before the crisis, with the proportion of assets held in the U.S. broker-dealers of the 10 largest FBOs rising from approximately 15 percent to roughly 50 percent.8 Today, 4 of the top 10 broker-dealers in the United States, and 12 of the top 20, are owned by foreign banks. Meanwhile, even the traditional branching model of large foreign commercial banks in the United States had changed. Reliance on less stable, short-term wholesale funding increased significantly. Many foreign banks shifted from the “lending branch” model to a “funding branch” model, in which U.S. branches of foreign banks were borrowing large amounts of U.S. dollars to upstream to their parents. These “funding branches” went from holding 40 percent of foreign bank branch assets in the mid-1990s to holding 75 percent of foreign bank branch assets by 2009. Foreign banks as a group moved from a position of receiving funding from their parents on a net basis in 1999 to providing significant funding to non-U.S. affiliates by the mid-2000s – more than $600 billion on a net basis by 2008.9  A good bit of this short-term funding was used to finance long-term, U.S. dollar-denominated project and trade finance around the world. There is also evidence that a significant portion of the dollars raised by European banks in the pre-crisis period ultimately returned to the United States in the form of investments in U.S. securities. Indeed, the amount of U.S. dollar-denominated asset-backed securities and other securities held by Europeans increased significantly between 2003 and 2007, much of it financed by the short-term, dollar-denominated liabilities of European banks.10  Just as regulatory systems did not, in the years preceding the crisis, address vulnerabilities such as reliance on short-term wholesale funding that were created by the integration of capital markets and traditional lending, so they did not respond to the transformation of foreign banking operations. Accordingly, just as home countries of systemically important banks have been playing catch-up on capital, liquidity, and other requirements, so host countries of very large foreign banking operations are playing catch-up in dealing with the very different character of many internationally active banks from that of 20 or 30 years ago. The regulatory response In a sense, the major strengthening during the past few years of capital and liquidity requirements for internationally active banks – including the capital surcharge for banks of global systemic importance – has to date been the most important international regulatory response to the revealed vulnerabilities associated with large foreign banking operations. Building capital and improving the liquidity positions of banks on a consolidated basis is surely a key step toward assuring the stability of major FBOs in host countries.                                                  7 As of September 30, 2013, there were 24 such foreign banks, compared with 24 U.S. firms. Source: For U.S. bank holding companies: FR Y-9C; for foreign banks: FR Y-9C, FFIEC 002, FR 2886b, FFIEC 031/041, FR Y-7N/NS, X-17A-5 Part II, and X-17A-5 Part IIA, and X-17A-5 Part II CSE. 8 Source: FR Y-9C, FFIEC 002, FR 2886b, FFIEC 031/041, FR Y-7N/NS, X-17A-5 Part II, and X-17A-5 Part IIA, and X-17A-5 Part II CSE. 9 Source: FFIEC 002, various years. 10 Ben S. Bernanke, Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, and Steven Kamin (2011), “International Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe Assets in the United States, 2003–2007,” International Finance Discussion Papers Number 1014 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Of course, these agreed changes have not yet been fully implemented. It is critical not just that all jurisdictions adopt appropriate regulations that fully incorporate the new Basel standards, but also that we ensure our banks will be substantively, and not just formally, compliant as the various transition target dates are reached. It is also the case that there is more to be done in addressing the risks posed by large global banking organizations, including additional measures to deal with the run risks associated with short-term wholesale funding and ensuring that even the largest firms can be successfully resolved without either creating major systemic problems or requiring an infusion of public capital. I will return to these subjects a bit later, in discussing the cooperative agenda that lies ahead for the United States, Europe, and our partners throughout the world. First, though, I want to describe how Europe, the United Kingdom, and the United States are dealing with the vulnerabilities associated with large foreign banking operations, and thus are fulfilling their responsibilities as host-country supervisors. I discuss the United Kingdom separately from the EU both because it is outside the euro zone and because, as a host jurisdiction, it is more similar to the United States than to other EU member states or, indeed, to any other country in the world. The EU has not, since the crisis, specifically adjusted the structure of regulation of foreign banks by its member states in their role as host supervisors. For more than a decade before the crisis, EU member states had prudently required that not only commercial banking, but also investment banking subsidiaries of foreign (non-EU-based) banking organizations, be subject to Basel capital requirements in the same way as EU-based firms. With the adoption of CRD IV,11 the directive implementing the new EU capital requirements, Basel III will now be applied to all EU firms, including EU bank and investment bank subsidiaries of non-EU banking organizations. Branches of non-EU banks are generally not subject to local requirements. Before the crisis and the subsequent development of Basel III, there was no leverage ratio requirement in EU capital directives. Insofar as a new leverage ratio is part of the Basel III package agreed upon internationally, one would anticipate that it will be applied to commercial banking and investment banking firms in the EU, again including local subsidiaries of non-EU firms. Likewise, one would anticipate that the Basel III liquidity requirements will be implemented in the EU in accordance with the internationally agreed timeline and, again, that it will apply to EU subsidiaries of FBOs. A greater challenge for the EU has been dealing with banks headquartered in one EU country but doing business in other EU countries under the “single passport,” which basically allows for full access in the rest of the EU, with supervision provided only by the home country. During the crisis, there were some notable instances of banking stresses and failures involving such institutions, with consequent negative effects on depositors, counterparties, and economies in other parts of the EU. Much of the ongoing post-crisis reform agenda in Europe seems directed at ensuring the safety and soundness of EU-based institutions. The most important of these changes may be the assumption by the European Central Bank of supervisory responsibility for larger euro area banks. And, as we saw just last week, work continues on the long process of creating a credible resolution mechanism for those banks. As a member state of the EU, the United Kingdom of course implements the EU policies I have just described. But that country has applied an additional set of requirements on the local operations of foreign banks, particularly with respect to liquidity. The Prudential Regulation Authority of the Bank of England applies local liquidity requirements to                                                  11 The European CRD IV package, which implemented the global Basel III capital standards into EU law, entered into force on July 17, 2013. See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/bank/regcapital/legislation_in_ force_en.htm 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  commercial and investment banking subsidiaries of non-U.K. banks, requiring them to hold local buffers as determined by internal stress tests with both 14- and 90-day components. The assumptions on which the stress tests are premised are quite strict. For example, the U.K. subsidiary generally must assume zero inflows from non-U.K. affiliates – even for claims on non-U.K. affiliates with short terms that mature within the stress test period – and 100 percent outflows to non-U.K. affiliates. The requirements generated by the test are subject to a supervisory review and add-on that for some firms has resulted in a significant increase in the buffer requirement. Branches of foreign commercial banks may in some circumstances be subject to local liquidity requirements as well. The U.K. initiative in applying local liquidity requirements is wholly understandable in light of the difficulties encountered because of stress on foreign institutions, including the Lehman bankruptcy, during the crisis. Because London is one of the world’s two largest financial center hosts, the United Kingdom is the only country other than the United States hosting numerous, very large broker-dealers that are owned by foreign banks and also a broad array of commercial bank subsidiaries and branches that are owned by foreign banks. In fact, the six institutions headquartered outside the United States and the United Kingdom that are in the top three tiers of G-SIBs hold roughly 40 percent of their worldwide assets in those two jurisdictions.12 Thus the U.K. initiative on liquidity and its internal debates on matters such as structural supervision, the Vickers proposals, and stress testing have all been very instructive for the Federal Reserve Board. Even where we have eventually adopted somewhat different approaches, we respect the motivation and scrupulousness of the U.K. banking authorities in addressing the systemic vulnerabilities posed by FBOs and in fulfilling their responsibility to the rest of the world to assure the stability of one of the world’s two most important financial centers. Unlike the EU, the United States did not – prior to the financial crisis – require that all broker-dealers and investment banks meet Basel capital standards. The legacy of the Glass-Steagall Act, which had separated investment banking from commercial banking, meant that only commercial banks were subject to the prudential regulation of the federal banking agencies. In Europe, the dominance of universal banking, or variants thereon, led more naturally to application of capital and other prudential standards to all forms of banking activity. Even after the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act removed the remaining barriers to affiliation between investment banks and commercial banks in the United States, Basel capital requirements applied at a consolidated level to the activities of an investment bank or broker-dealer only if it did affiliate with a commercial bank. Thus, the five large “free-standing” U.S. investment banks were generally not subject to full application of Basel capital standards. During the crisis, the ill-advised nature of this regulatory state of affairs became apparent. The decline in value of many mortgage-backed securities and the consequent market uncertainty as to the true value of that entire class of securities raised questions about the solvency of major broker-dealers. Because the dealers were so highly leveraged and dependent on short-term financing, the uncertainty also led to serious liquidity strains, first at Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers and eventually at most dealers – domestic and foreign owned. Bear Stearns and Merrill Lynch were acquired by existing bank holding companies after coming close to failure. Lehman Brothers went bankrupt. Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley became bank holding companies. Through its Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Federal Reserve provided substantial liquidity to the broker-dealer affiliates of the bank holding companies, as well as to the primary dealer                                                  12 Staff estimates, using data from the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England. The U.K. data include only U.K. resident banking entities of each banking group. The U.S. data include all entities of each banking group. Both U.K. and U.S. assets include intragroup claims on related affiliates. Worldwide assets are calculated using the accounting standards of home country jurisdictions. The list of G-SIBs is available at www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_131111.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  subsidiaries of foreign banks. At the same time, the shift in strategy of many foreign banks toward using their U.S. branches to raise dollars in short-term markets for lending around the world created another set of vulnerabilities that resulted in substantial and, relative to total assets, disproportionate use of the Federal Reserve’s discount window by foreign bank branches. The experience of the crisis made clear, first, that the perimeter of prudential regulation around U.S. financial institutions needed to be expanded. As noted a moment ago, this had occurred de facto during the crisis. The Dodd-Frank Act has given a legal foundation for this change, first by mandating that Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley will remain subject to consolidated prudential regulation even were they to divest their insured depository institutions and, second, by giving the Financial Stability Oversight Council the authority to designate other financial firms as systemically important, a step that would place them under Federal Reserve regulation and supervision. Dodd-Frank further required the Federal Reserve to apply progressively more stringent prudential regulation to bank holding companies with more than $50 billion in assets. Congress also required the Federal Reserve to apply special prudential standards to large FBOs. As I have already implied, much of what we have done is simply to catch up to EU and U.K. practice. Under our recently finalized Section 165 enhanced prudential standards regulation, an FBO with U.S. non-branch assets of $50 billion or more must hold its U.S. subsidiaries under an intermediate holding company (IHC), which must meet the risk-based and leverage capital standards generally applicable to bank holding companies under U.S. law.13 Such an FBO must also certify that it meets consolidated capital adequacy standards established by its home-country supervisor that are consistent with the Basel Capital Framework. FBOs with combined U.S. assets of $50 billion or more must also meet liquidity risk-management standards and conduct internal liquidity stress tests. The IHC must maintain a liquidity buffer in the United States for a 30-day liquidity stress test. The U.S. branches and agencies of an FBO must maintain a liquidity buffer in the United States equal to the liquidity needs for 14 days, as determined by a 30-day liquidity stress test.14 The IHCs of FBOs must also conform to certain risk-management and supervisory requirements at the IHC level. Structurally, the U.S. capital requirements for FBOs are similar to those that apply to foreign banks in the EU. That is, generally applicable Basel capital requirements are applied to the U.S. operations of FBOs that own local banking subsidiaries, investment banks, and broker-dealers. In fact, the new U.S. rules are somewhat more favorable to foreign institutions, in that they only apply once the non-branch U.S. assets of an FBO exceed $50 billion. That dollar amount, incidentally, is the same as the Dodd-Frank threshold for more stringent prudential measures, though note that this statutory threshold applies if the total assets of any U.S. banking organization – foreign, as well as domestic – exceed that level. As in the EU, the capital requirements do not apply to U.S. branches of foreign banks, even though the crisis experience provides some credible arguments for doing so. The leverage ratio requirement has received particular attention. One complaint is that the foreign operations of U.S. banks are not subject to leverage ratios for their local operations. It is true that many foreign countries – including the EU member states – do not currently have leverage ratio standards for their banks. As noted earlier, however, one may reasonably expect that those countries will be implementing the Basel III leverage ratio in a timely                                                  13 Actually, FBOs need not meet advanced approach risk-based capital requirements in the United States, unless they specifically opt in to that treatment. See www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/ 20140218a.htm. 14 An FBO with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more but with combined U.S. assets of less than $50 billion must report the results of an internal liquidity stress test (either on a consolidated basis or for its combined U.S. operations) to the Board on an annual basis. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  fashion. Also, I would note in passing that the U.S. leverage ratio requirement for foreign firms will be phased in more slowly than originally proposed, so as to align it more closely with the effective date of the Basel III leverage ratio requirement. A second complaint is that there is something unfair about the United States requiring an FBO to meet the international leverage ratio in its U.S. operations, because its operations may be heavily weighted toward broker-dealer activities, which generally have higher leverage, whereas the leverage ratio for U.S. firms is based on their global operations. Again, one suspects that the foreign operations of U.S. firms could be subject to a similar ratio requirement abroad as countries implement their Basel III commitments. However, quite apart from what may happen in the future, there are two U.S.-based firms – Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley – whose global business mix resembles that of the U.S. subsidiaries of FBOs that are predominantly engaged in broker-dealer activities in the United States. In fact, under the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio the Board proposed during the summer, these and other U.S. G-SIBs would be subject to a higher Basel III leverage ratio requirement (5 percent) than would apply to FBO IHCs (3 percent). The applicable liquidity requirements, while somewhat differently defined, are roughly comparable to those already applicable to FBOs in the United Kingdom. The similar positions of our two nations as host countries for foreign bank operations heavily involved in trading and significantly reliant on potentially runnable short-term wholesale funding explain this rough parallelism. The most notable departure of the new U.S. FBO standards from existing EU and U.K. practice lies in the IHC requirement for foreign banks with large domestic operations. Given the structure of U.S. financial regulation that is a legacy of Glass-Steagall, as well as the efforts by a small number of very large foreign banks to evade the intent of Congress that capital standards apply to their U.S. operations, we needed to create this structural requirement. It is unclear how much difference this makes for the capital requirements of FBOs in the United States as opposed, say, to those of U.S. operations in the EU. That would depend on the existence and size of financial affiliates owned by the U.S. firm that are not subject to Basel standards directly. In any case, it seems sound prudential practice – and consistent with the various Basel Committee principles to which I earlier referred – that large domestic operations of foreign banks meet capital standards on the basis of all exposures in the host jurisdiction and, indeed, that they manage their risks in that country across all their affiliates. “Balkanization” and home-host responsibilities  To return to the issue of Balkanization, three things should now be apparent. First, in its new capital regulations applicable to FBOs, the United States is more a follower of the pattern set by the EU than it is an initiator of new kinds of requirements. Of course, a few foreign banks would prefer the old system under which they held relatively little capital in their very extensive U.S. operations. But that was neither safe for the financial system nor particularly fair to their competitors – U.S. and foreign – that hold significant amounts of capital here. Indeed, a firm that is genuinely well capitalized, including holding the G-SIB surcharge at its global consolidated level, should require only moderate adjustment efforts during the transition period established in the FBO rule. Second, there is considerable scope for a foreign bank to integrate its U.S. operations with its global activities within the rule the Federal Reserve adopted last month. For example, while foreign firms with more than $10 billion in non-branch assets have some additional reporting requirements, only when U.S. non-branch assets rise above $50 billion do the quantitative Basel capital requirements become applicable to the U.S. subsidiaries. Moreover, no capital requirements apply to branches so long as their parent is subject to home-country consolidated capital rules consistent with Basel standards. The U.S. operations of FBO branches and subsidiaries will not be subject to “due from” restrictions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  They remain free to lend money to their worldwide affiliates; they must simply do so with a more stable funding base. Finally, I note that many FBOs, like many U.S.-based banks, have made considerable progress in reducing dependence on short-term wholesale funding and in building capital. To some extent, the new requirements are intended to preserve this progress. Third, the capital and liquidity requirements that do apply are wholly consistent with the responsibility of host-country supervisors to assure financial stability in their own markets. Collectively, foreign banks with a large presence in the United States conduct activities of a scope, and at a scale, that could lead to problems for the U.S. financial system should they come under stress. Realistically, exposures and vulnerabilities in a large host-country market are much more difficult for home-country supervisors to assess. Indeed, U.S. regulators count on the expertise and proximity of U.K. regulators in overseeing the London operations of large U.S. financial institutions to enhance the effective consolidated supervision and regulation for which we are responsible. On the issue of home-host-country coordination in regulating large, globally active banking organizations, I would make three additional points. First, our FBO capital requirements, like those of the EU for foreign commercial and investment banks, are based on the capital rules agreed to in the Basel Committee.15 Thus, there is an overall compatibility between national and international rules with respect to applicable definitions, standards, and required ratios. Second, home countries must implement and enforce faithfully at a consolidated level these same capital rules. More broadly, home-country supervisory expectations for strong consolidated capital levels, liquidity positions, and risk-management practices are likely to facilitate compliance with domestic requirements for large FBOs of the sort applicable in the United States and the EU. It is also important that home countries assure the credibility of resolution mechanisms for their large banking organizations. This task entails the implementation of the Financial Stability Board’s principles for effective resolution regimes, including establishing a resolution authority with adequate legal powers to manage the process in an orderly fashion without injection of public capital.16 It also includes requiring each such institution to have total loss absorption capacity sufficient to recapitalize the firm even if its substantial equity buffer is lost in an extreme tail event. Home and host countries should work together toward international standards that will ensure that an appropriate amount of this capacity would be available to host authorities faced with the potential insolvency of large FBOs in their jurisdiction or with the consequences for their market of the failure of parent banks. In this regard, I think that capital requirements for FBOs of the sort now required by the EU and the United States are very likely to reduce the considerable strains that have traditionally accompanied financial distress at global banking firms. In most cases, including both internationally and within the EU itself in recent years, stress has resulted in the demand by host authorities for ex post ring fencing of capital, liquidity, or both, often in the absence of any ex ante requirements. The existence of FBO capital and liquidity standards, particularly if supplemented with the total loss absorbency measures to which I just referred, should mitigate the need for such demands, which of course come at the worst possible time for the firm trying to meet them. Third, we – by which I mean both home and major host banking regulators – need to find better ways of fostering genuine regulatory and supervisory cooperation. Particularly at the                                                  15 As a technical matter, the relevant FBOs are subject to the traditional 4 percent U.S. leverage ratio, but it is very likely that this requirement will be less binding than the 3 percent international leverage ratio because of the inclusion in the denominator of the latter of off-balance-sheet activities and exposures. 16 Financial Stability Board (2011), “Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions” (Basel: Financial Stability Board, November 4). 
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches  most senior levels of the agencies that actually supervise globally active banks, our interactions with our counterparts from other countries have become almost exclusively focused on developing international standards or reviewing compliance with existing ones. These discussions are usually conducted with numerous colleagues who are not themselves responsible for banking regulation in their own jurisdictions. As important as these efforts have been, and continue to be, following the crisis, there is a risk that by not having opportunities for senior officials of the various national agencies that have direct supervisory responsibility for banking organizations to meet and discuss shared challenges, we give short shrift to the collective interest of bank regulators in effective supervision of all globally active firms. Proposals to include prudential requirements or, more precisely, to include limitations on prudential requirements in trade agreements would lead us farther away from the aforementioned goal of emphasizing shared financial stability interests, in favor of an approach to prudential matters informed principally by considerations of commercial advantage. Conclusion  The job of regulating and supervising large, globally active banking organizations is a tough one. Issues of moral hazard, negative externalities, and asymmetric information are, if not pervasive, then at least significant and recurring. The job is made only harder by the fact that these firms cross borders in ways their regulators do not. But we cannot ignore this fact and pretend that we have global oversight. International standards for prudential regulation are not the same as global regulations, and consolidated supervision is not the same as comprehensive supervision. The jurisdictions represented on the Basel Committee not only have the right to regulate their financial markets – including large FBOs participating in those markets – they have a responsibility to their home jurisdictions, and to the rest of the world, to do so. The most important contribution the United States can make to global financial stability is to ensure the stability of our own financial system. There must be some assurance beyond mere words from parent banks or home-country supervisors that a large FBO will remain strong or supported in periods of stress. After all, as we saw in the crisis, while a parent bank or home-country authorities may have offered those words with total good faith in calm times, they may be unable to carry through on them in more financially turbulent periods. None of this means that we need be at odds with one another. On the contrary, these very circumstances call not only for more tangible safeguards in host countries, but also for more genuine cooperation among supervisory authorities. Indeed, as I hope will continue to be the case with the international agenda on resolution, total loss absorbency, and related matters, we should aspire to converge around the kinds of protections that we can expect at both consolidated and local levels.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Fritz Zurbrügg: The Swiss National Bank’s investment policy – options and limitations Speech by Mr Fritz Zurbrügg, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the Money Market Event, Zurich, 27 March 2014. *      *      * Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Swiss National Bank’s website The speaker would like to thank Dirk Faltin and Adriel Jost for their valuable support in preparing this speech. He is also indebted to Erich Gmür, Marco Huwiler and Sandro Streit for their insightful comments. Ladies and Gentlemen I would like to welcome you to our traditional Money Market Event in Zurich. I am delighted that so many of you have responded to our invitation. The focus of my comments today will be the investment policy of the Swiss National Bank (SNB), since it is now exactly ten years since the new National Bank Act (NBA) came into force, opening up new options for the SNB in the management of its foreign exchange reserves. Today I want to take the opportunity of presenting an assessment and acquainting you with the most important aspects of our investment policy. One of the most important and striking changes since 2004 has been our investments in equities and I will therefore focus particularly on our equity investments in my remarks. Following my presentation, my colleague Dewet Moser will take a closer look at developments on the foreign exchange and money markets. Monetary policy conditions Our investment policy differs in a number of ways from that of other large investors, whether they be private sector investors or sovereign wealth funds. This is due to the SNB’s special role. As an independent central bank, the SNB conducts Switzerland’s monetary policy. Our investment policy is always subordinated to monetary policy and can only be understood in the context of this policy, which is currently shaped by the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 against the euro. We introduced the minimum exchange rate in September 2011, and since then we have enforced it consistently. You will recall how, at the time, the debt crisis in the euro area was threatening to deteriorate. The upward pressure on the Swiss franc was immense. For the SNB, it was important to ensure price stability and avert serious damage to the Swiss economy. Seen from the current perspective, this was certainly achieved.  Two and a half years after its introduction, the minimum exchange rate remains a key element in the SNB’s monetary policy, and just last week, at our monetary policy assessment, we decided that it should be maintained. Although the recovery of the global economy continued in the fourth quarter of 2013, substantial risks remain. In addition, the conditional inflation forecast for Switzerland has been adjusted downwards in comparison to December. Internationally declining inflation rates and the slightly stronger Swiss franc are delaying the rise of inflation into positive territory. The SNB is now expecting inflation of 0% in the current year and 0.4% in 2015. In 2016, inflation should increase to 1.0%. Furthermore, the value of the Swiss franc is still high. With the three-month Libor close to zero, the minimum exchange rate continues to be the right tool to avoid an undesirable tightening of monetary conditions in the event of renewed upward pressure on the Swiss franc.  Through the minimum exchange rate, therefore, we are in a position to fulfil our price stability mandate. However, the consistent enforcement of the minimum exchange rate has contributed to the substantial increase in our currency reserves. Slide 1 shows that, since 2009, our currency reserves have increased by a factor of about six, and the foreign 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  exchange reserves are almost ten times higher. Our foreign exchange reserves, that is, currency reserves excluding gold, currently amount to almost CHF 450 billion, which is over 70% of Switzerland’s annual economic output. The expansion of our foreign exchange reserves means that our balance sheet is more exposed to the volatility of the financial markets than it used to be. Even slight price changes can have a strong influence on our investment performance. This has made our investment policy even more challenging. However, thanks to established processes and a high level of expertise, we are in a position to meet these demands. History of investment policy at the SNB At the SNB, the move towards a sustainable investment policy aimed at optimising risk and return began as early as the 1970s. At that time, the management of foreign exchange reserves focused exclusively on the highest possible level of security and liquidity. Imagine a situation whereby, until 1978, a residual term of only three months was a legal requirement. As a result, foreign exchange reserves consisted primarily of short-term US dollar investments, particularly US treasury bills. This led to considerable concentration risk. At the same time, the potential return was extremely low. Despite narrow statutory provisions and market-related limitations, the SNB tried to make use of the existing room for manoeuvre as regards returns. However, it was not until after the partial revision of the NBA in 1997 that strategic importance was attached to the generation of returns. This became possible because of the abolition of the maximum residual term of one year for foreign exchange reserves, which had applied until then. A further important step towards a sustainable investment policy was the entry into force of the fully revised NBA in 2004. Although, at the time, the changes to investment policy did not attract much public attention, they were very important for the SNB’s investment activities. Within the monetary mandate, investment policy was defined as one of the SNB’s core tasks for the first time. Moreover, most statutory restrictions with regard to investment instruments were removed. And so the foundation was laid for a modern investment policy whose aim is to optimise the risk/return relationship for assets. However, this was only possible to the extent allowed by monetary policy, which has always had priority over investment policy considerations.  In addition to expanding the SNB’s freedom of action, investment and risk control processes were fundamentally adapted and adjusted to the new requirements from 1997 onwards. As a result, the SNB frequently found itself in the role of central bank pioneer, not only as regards the choice of investment instruments, but also in the area of investment processes. It is with some pride that I can report how, in recent years, we have received enquiries from other central banks about our investment processes. The SNB has also played a pioneering role with regard to transparency. The composition of our investments is, to a large extent, accessible to the public. Indeed, the SNB is one of the few central banks which publishes both its investment allocation and the net result on foreign currency positions on a quarterly basis. Investment policy committed to security, liquidity and return Nowadays, therefore, when investing our currency reserves, we base our decisions on the criteria of security, liquidity and return. The currency reserves of a country serve primarily as a means to prevent and overcome crises. In order to fulfil this function, they must, in essence, be liquid. In the past, the SNB defined liquidity by specifying the term of the bonds. The shorter the residual term, the more liquid the investment appeared to be. Consequently, until well into the 1990s, the SNB’s foreign exchange reserves consisted almost exclusively of government paper with very short terms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  With time, the concept of liquidity has changed. For a long time now, we have been defining liquidity according to the potential for a rapid sale with the minimum possible impact on the market, rather than as a function of the terms of our bonds. In this case, minimum impact on the market means that, essentially, we wish to avoid significant price movements. In order to guarantee this, we hold a substantial portion of the currency reserves in liquid government bonds, in the most important global currencies. Together with our deposits at other central banks, these investments presently account for some three-quarters of our foreign exchange reserves. You can see the current breakdown of our foreign exchange reserves on the left-hand side of slide 3. For the criterion of security, the focus is on limiting market and credit risk. In this case, the decisive role is played by diversification across different currencies and instruments. We engage in currency diversification by holding our foreign exchange reserves in the currencies of all large advanced economies; the highest percentages are accounted for by the euro (48%) and the US dollar (27%), as you can see from the chart on the right-hand side of slide 3. Looking at the individual currencies, diversification occurs via the different investment instruments. As I have already mentioned, since the full revision of the NBA in 2004, additional bond categories such as corporate bonds and the bonds of foreign authorities, as well as equities, have been available. The diversification effect of equities versus government bonds can be seen in slide 4. For this chart we divided up the distribution of all daily returns on the US S&P 500 stock market index since 1999 into ten equally large groups or deciles. Then we ordered the deciles according to size of returns. The decile with the worst returns is on the left-hand side and that with the best returns is on the right. Subsequently, we assigned the associated US government bond returns to these deciles. As you see, there was a good diversification effect between equities and government bonds. This result is not hard to understand intuitively. During the cyclical upswing, when interest rates are increasing, prices of government bonds come under pressure, while equity prices benefit from the improvement in the economy and the better profit outlook for companies. Last year, this negative correlation was very clear and the diversification effect between equities and government bonds was particularly strong. However, these interrelationships apply for returns in local currency, while for us, what is critical is – ultimately – the return in Swiss francs. Here the situation looks somewhat different. This is because equity prices often correlate negatively with the external value of the Swiss franc. You can see this relationship in slide 5. The chart is based on the same approach as in the previous slide. It is easy to see that periods of poor stock market performance correspond to an appreciation of the Swiss franc, and vice versa. When equities lose value, this generally occurs in an environment of increased uncertainty in the economy and on the financial markets. In such situations, demand for the Swiss franc is particularly strong due to its character as a safe haven. The value of our equity positions is then subjected to a double loss, first the price loss and second the appreciation of the Swiss franc against the foreign currencies in which the equities are denominated. So the diversification effect of our equity investments is diminished, to some extent, by this currency effect. We cannot safeguard ourselves by hedging an appreciation in the Swiss franc because this would be tantamount to selling foreign exchange reserves against Swiss francs, and an investment decision could thus have a monetary policy effect. This example shows how monetary policy considerations limit investment policy’s room for manoeuvre.  A certain diversification effect can also exist between equities and gold. In times when uncertainty is high, the gold price often increases, while equity prices come under pressure. The opposite can occur when uncertainty decreases significantly. This was particularly evident last year, when the gold price underwent a significant correction after climbing for many years. Of course we cannot rely on this kind of diversification effect always holding. However, when it does, it is very welcome. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Returns important for preservation of real value That brings me to the third criterion for our investment activity – return. I would like to stress that the SNB is not concerned with maximising return for its own sake. Rather, return is inextricably linked to the criterion of security. Our goal is to ensure that the purchasing power of the currency reserves at least is maintained over time. That, in turn, presupposes that the long-term return we earn on our investments is equal to or greater than the average rate of inflation. Bear in mind that we are aiming to preserve real value in Swiss francs, not in local investment currencies. This means that a certain amount of positive return in local currencies is needed, if only to balance out the currency losses incurred in periods when the Swiss franc is appreciating. To improve the long-term relationship between risk and return, government bonds in our portfolio are supplemented by the additional investment categories I have already mentioned. Generally, the potential returns on equities are greater than those on government bonds issued by the major advanced economies. They can therefore make a contribution to preserving the real value of the currency reserves. To be more precise, equities increase the probability of preserving the real value of the currency reserves. This applies, in particular, in view of the current low (or negative) real returns on government bonds in core markets. So it is not surprising that equity investments have become more important for central banks in recent years.1 How high should the equity share be? I will now talk in more detail about our investments in equity. So far I have explained why the SNB invests in equity. In the next few moments, I would like to explore two questions: first, how high should the equity share in our portfolio be, in rough terms? Second, how are investments carried out on the stock market? Slide 6 shows that, between 2005 and 2010, our equity share was around 10%. Furthermore, you will see that, since 2011, we have gradually increased the share so that it now amounts to 16% of foreign exchange reserves. When determining the equity share, the challenge is to optimise the risk/return relationship in the portfolio. As the saying goes among investors: if you want to eat well, buy shares, if you want to sleep well, buy bonds. The idea behind this old stock market saying is that, compared to most government bonds, equities have a higher potential return but are generally more risky. Nevertheless, we need to begin by taking account of the diversification effect of the equity investments. The interrelationships can be seen if we look at the stylised efficient frontier path shown in slide 7. We start with a portfolio consisting solely of government bonds (point A in the chart), and then start adding equities to the portfolio. In the initial stages the risk and returns structure of the portfolio improves. The expected return increases and the expected risk decreases. However, once a given equity share is exceeded, at point B, a trade-off between risk and return begins. At this stage, each further increase in potential return has to be ‘bought’ at the cost of increased risk. In the extreme case, we reach the situation of a portfolio consisting solely of equities (point C). The equity share we are aiming for is obtained by weighing up additional risk against higher potential return. After potential return and risk have been weighed up in this way at the SNB, what does the final result look like? Fundamentally, our efficient frontier presents less attractive risk/return combinations than in the case of many other investors. That means our efficient frontier tends to look more like the right-hand curve in slide 7. In addition, the point at which a further                                                 1 According to a survey published in early 2013, only eight of 60 central banks worldwide held equities as part of their currency reserves at that time. A further six central banks stated that they intended to diversify into equities in the future (cf. Pringle, Robert and Nick Carver, eds. 2013, RBS Reserve Management Trends 2013, London, Central Banking Publications). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  increase in the equity share means a rise in total risk (point B’) is reached earlier than in the left-hand curve. I have already talked about the reasons for this. First, we can naturally only hold currency reserves in foreign currencies and not in Swiss francs. Second, the Swiss franc has the character of a safe haven at times of increased uncertainty in the economy and on the financial markets. Thus I have shown how there is a frequent negative correlation between equity prices and the external value of the Swiss franc. Third, I have also drawn attention to the fact that we have to carry the currency risk against the Swiss franc, since for monetary policy reasons we cannot hedge it. These factors constitute significant limitations on the diversification effect of our equity investments. Ultimately, they mean that the SNB’s equity share is fundamentally lower than in the case of many other investors. The point at which we wish to position ourselves on the efficient frontier between B’ and C’ depends on how we weigh up additional risk and higher return. At present, this weighing-up produces the equity share of 16% which I mentioned before.  The SNB as a passive investor How does the SNB carry out its equity investments? In brief, the SNB is a passive investor in the stock market. In other words, the SNB basically does not select individual equities. Instead, we use rule-based procedures to invest in a very broad equity universe. At present, the SNB holds some 6,000 securities in more than ten currencies. The equity universe on which our equity investments is based covers some 90% of global market capitalisation. We mainly invest in mid and large cap companies. This makes sense, particularly in view of the special liquidity requirements I have already mentioned. In addition, we also place funds in small cap companies. In terms of market capitalisation these holdings only account for a small portion of our equity portfolio, but in numbers they make up about three-quarters of all the securities we hold. This, too, shows the breadth of our equity universe. When selecting our equities, we use a benchmark. This is a combination of various commonly used indices, assembled by us. As soon as we have determined the benchmark, equity investment becomes a largely automatic process. Why does the SNB not make targeted investments in individual companies or sectors where an above-average return can be expected? In other words, why do we not engage in stock picking? Warren Buffett is quoted as having said, wide diversification is only required when investors do not understand what they are doing. I can assure you that our investment specialists have an excellent understanding of what they are doing. However, we choose to have recourse to a broad equity universe for the following four reasons. First, we achieve a greater diversification effect within the equity segment by investing as widely as possible, across both regions and sectors. Second, it should not be our objective to enforce strategic or, indeed, political interests by means of our investments in individual companies. This could limit our monetary policy room for manoeuvre and would also make our position vulnerable. Due to the size of our foreign exchange reserves, the SNB could quickly acquire large shares in companies, and this might be misconstrued as strategic participations in the event of active management of our equity holdings and corresponding overweightings in some areas. Our strategy ensures that holdings in individual companies remain low. Third, through a passive strategy we can minimise our market influence, since our policy does not cause us to give preference to individual securities or sectors. Fourth, our investment horizon is very long-term, that is, it spans several business cycles. The academic literature shows that, taking account of the costs, it is almost impossible to beat a broad stock index in the long term and systematically.2                                                 2 Cf. Carhart, Mark M. 1997. On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance. The Journal of Finance 52 (1):  57–82; also Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. 2010. Luck versus Skill in the Cross-Section of Mutual Fund Returns. The Journal of Finance 65 (5): 1915–1947. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  However, there are two areas in which we limit our investment universe in a selective manner. First, we exclude mid and large cap banks from our portfolio in order to avoid conflicts of interest. Second, we do not include companies that are in gross violation of ethical principles. I will explain these two points in more detail. Conflicts of interest with regard to investments in mid and large cap banks can come about because, according to its mandate, the SNB is also required to contribute to the stability of the financial system. Under certain circumstances, this can mean that the SNB has an information edge over the market with respect to the financial situation of individual banks. In order to avoid any suspicion that the SNB might make use of this information edge in its position as an investor, we completely exclude all investments in equities of such banks. Moreover, by doing so, we prevent market participants from attributing any signal effects to our transactions. On the question of conflicts of interest, I would also like to stress that, as a matter of principle, the SNB does not own equities in any Swiss companies for investment purposes. Should equities of individual companies be excluded from the investment universe on the basis of ethical criteria? We have been discussing this question for a considerable time and last year we made a fundamental decision. We do not invest in companies that blatantly infringe certain ethical principles. This decision was already implemented in the fourth quarter of 2013. To be specific, we do not hold equities in companies which produce internationally banned weapons, seriously violate fundamental human rights or systematically cause severe environmental damage. We believe that it is in the best interests of monetary policy if the SNB achieves sound investment returns through the widest possible diversification. Consequently, for us it is not a matter of excluding entire sectors or industries. On the contrary. We simply wish to exclude those companies for which there is clear evidence of a serious violation against the principles mentioned. Therefore the number of companies involved is very limited. How do we implement this? We are convinced that it would not be practicable for the SNB to examine the conduct of dubious companies itself. In our view, the SNB’s tasks and competences do not include the filtering-out of such companies. For the implementation, we therefore use analyses by established institutions with relevant experience. These help us to constantly review which companies fulfil the predefined exclusion criteria. You will understand that we do not provide any detailed information on the exclusion procedures or the equities involved. As I mentioned at the beginning, the SNB always endeavours to maintain a high degree of transparency and, in this respect, goes further than other central banks, especially when it comes to its investment policy. Nevertheless, it is also an established principle that we do not reveal any details about the various external providers whose services we employ in our operations. The same applies to details about the indices we use, or, indeed, the individual securities. Such information could trigger undesirable movements in the market, which would go against our principle of ensuring the minimum possible impact on the market. In addition, this information could also limit our investment policy room for manoeuvre and thereby have a negative impact on the investment results. Final considerations The NBA of 2004 gave the SNB new options in investment policy. We used these for a consistent and comprehensive further development of our investment policy. In particular, we significantly improved the risk/return profile of our foreign exchange reserves through a number of diversification measures. As I have shown, our equity investments played an important role in this process. However, although the SNB is a large global investor, its main task is monetary policy in the service of the Swiss economy. Consequently, monetary policy affects both the size of our investments and the criteria and principles we apply in managing them. My comments have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  shown that the options available to our investment policy are limited in several areas by the primacy of monetary policy. This includes the fact that we cannot hedge currency risks with respect to the Swiss franc. These limitations are sometimes reflected in the annual results. Even though we have continually extended our investment policy, thereby improving our return options, there have occasionally been years in the past with negative results. This may be repeated in the future. Given the current level of our foreign exchange reserves, a small loss in percentage terms can mean a high figure in Swiss francs. That is why it is all the more important for me to stress, once again, the SNB’s main task, which is monetary policy. The success of the SNB cannot be measured in terms of our annual results but by whether we fulfil our mandate, which is to ensure price stability while taking account of the development of the economy. In order to fulfil this task, the minimum exchange rate remains necessary for the foreseeable future. And so we return to the starting point of my presentation. I will repeat what I said before, that only the minimum exchange rate can prevent an undesired tightening of monetary conditions, should the upward pressure on the Swiss franc increase once again. Should it become necessary, we will therefore enforce the minimum exchange rate by buying foreign currency in unlimited quantities.           
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches       
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9      
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11     
12 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Charles I Plosser: Systematic policy and forward guidance Remarks by Mr Charles I Plosser, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at the Money Marketeers of New York University, Inc., Down Town Association, New York, 25 March 2014. *      *      * The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. Highlights • President Plosser highlights the relationship between systematic monetary policy and forward guidance. His goal is to help underscore how a systematic approach to monetary policy can improve the effectiveness of monetary policy in both normal times and in more unusual or extreme circumstances, such as when policy is constrained by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. • President Plosser’s preference for dealing with forward guidance is for the FOMC to articulate a reaction function as best it can. This entails describing a systematic approach to policymaking, where policy decisions are based on available information in a consistent and predictable way. • President Plosser believes the most recent FOMC statement took a step in this direction when it moved to a qualitative form of forward guidance by stating that the Committee will be assessing progress – both realized and expected – toward its policy objectives. Introduction I want to thank William Kanto and the Money Marketeers for inviting me to speak again this evening. Your series of guest speakers over the years has been quite illustrious, and it has included many Federal Reserve governors and presidents, not to mention distinguished economists and a wide array of others. So, before I share some thoughts on monetary policy with you tonight, I will begin with the usual disclaimer that my views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Of course, that disclaimer is a two-way street, and you should not necessarily associate the views of my colleagues with my views. I believe that this diversity of views among FOMC participants does more than assure variety among your guest speakers. It is one of the great strengths of our decentralized central bank. Open dialogue and diversity of views leads to better policy decisions and is the primary means by which new ideas are gradually incorporated into our monetary policy framework. Thus, I believe diversity of thought is a sign of thoughtful progress. As I noted in 2009 when I last spoke to you, the famous American journalist Walter Lippmann once said, “Where all men think alike, no one thinks very much.” Tonight I would like to focus on a particular aspect of current monetary policy that has been a source of much discussion and debate – forward guidance – that is, the practice of providing information on the way monetary policy is likely to evolve in the future. Forward guidance has taken on greater significance since the FOMC lowered the target federal funds rate to essentially zero more than five years ago. Facing this zero lower bound constraint on its primary policy instrument, the FOMC has been attempting to implement monetary policy, in part, by influencing expectations of future policy. The logic for this approach derives from the important role expectations play in shaping economic outcomes. If monetary policy can affect those expectations in specific ways, it can influence current economic conditions. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The approach I want to take in my discussion is to highlight the relationship between such forward guidance and systematic monetary policy. By systematic, I mean setting policy in a rule-like or largely predictable manner in response to changes in economic conditions. Forward guidance and systematic monetary policy are closely related. Understanding this relationship can provide insights into effective monetary policy in both normal times and in more unusual or extreme circumstances, such as when policy is constrained by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. So, I will begin with a brief review of the benefits of systematic policy. I will highlight why I think most academic economists have concluded that conducting monetary policy in a rule-like manner is preferable to regimes that are more discretionary. Systematic policy For someone my age, it doesn’t seem all that long ago when it was taken for granted that central banking was supposed to be mysterious and secretive – the less said about monetary policy the better. Indeed, it wasn’t until 1994 that the FOMC began to publicly announce the policy changes made at an FOMC meeting. Up until then, the markets were left to infer the policy action from the Fed’s behavior in the market.1  But times have most definitely changed. Transparency has replaced secrecy, and open communications have replaced mystery. While there are those who long for those thrilling days of yesteryear when central bankers said little and communicated even less, I don’t think we can turn back the clock – nor should we. Economic science has come a long way in the past 30 years, and one of the most important developments has been the recognition of the important role that expectations play in understanding economic outcomes. This is particularly evident in financial markets, where investment decisions and the valuation of securities depend on assessments of future economic outcomes. But this is also true for individuals buying homes and businesses making capital investments. When businesses and households have a better understanding of how monetary policy is likely to evolve, they can make more informed spending and financial decisions. If policymakers can reduce uncertainty about the course of monetary policy, the economy is likely to perform more efficiently. Thus, monetary policy that is more systematic and predictable can reduce expectational errors and contribute to a more stable and efficiently functioning economy. This recognition of the important role played by expectations has led many academics and policymakers to stress the importance of credibility and commitment to well-articulated monetary policy objectives. It has also led to extensive research on monetary policy rules that can enhance the predictability of policy. In fact, virtually all of the mainstream macroeconomic models are built upon the presumption that monetary policy is conducted in a rule-like manner that is well understood by all agents in the economy. In their Nobel Prize-winning work, Finn Kydland and Ed Prescott demonstrated that a credible commitment by policymakers to behave in a systematic, rule-like manner over time leads to better outcomes than discretion.2 In monetary policy, less discretionary behavior and a commitment to a more systematic approach have been shown to lead to more economic stability – lower and less volatile inflation and less volatile output. Yet, the science of monetary policy has not progressed to the point where we can specify the optimal rule for setting monetary policy and turn decisions over to a computer. Judgment is                                                 1 See the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, “Timeline to Transparency.” 2 Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott, “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 85 (January 1977), pp 473–91. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  still required. Moreover, optimal rules, that is, those that maximize economic welfare, are highly dependent on the particular model from which they are derived. For example, the optimal rule for one model can produce very bad outcomes in another model. In addition, optimal rules can often be quite complex, thus making them difficult to implement and to communicate to the public. In other words, they may not be very transparent. However, these limitations to implementing optimal policy rules should not prevent us from adopting a systematic approach to the conduct of policy. There has been a great deal of progress in identifying simple, robust rules that appear to perform well in a variety of models and environments. Such robust rules can form a basis for developing more systematic, rule-like policymaking. This rule-like approach does not mean one can know the future or what future policy decisions will be. You often hear policymakers speak of policy as being data dependent, and indeed, it is. But the data should feed into a systematic decision-making process so that policy will be similar in similar environments. One way to think about this systematic part of policy is as a reaction function with parameters that are largely stable over time. One important and desirable characteristic of such a reaction function is that it can be easily articulated to the public. This greatly improves the transparency and predictability of monetary policy, which reduces surprises. Everyone is more informed about the course of monetary policy because they understand how policymakers are likely to react to changing economic circumstances. The most well-known simple rule is that proposed by John Taylor in 1993.3 The Taylor rule calls for setting the nominal fed funds rate based on three factors. The first represents the economy’s long-run real interest rate, perhaps the steady-state real interest rate, plus the Fed’s target rate of inflation. This is sometimes referred to as the normal, or neutral, nominal rate of interest. The second factor is a function of the deviation of inflation from the central bank’s target or goal. If inflation is above the target, the Taylor rule says the funds rate should be higher, and if it is below target, the funds rate should be lower. The third element in the Taylor rule calls for an adjustment of the funds rate to departures of real GDP from some measure of “potential” GDP. Simply put, when GDP is below “potential,” the funds rate should be reduced, and when it is above, it should increase. I will point out that our recent thresholds did not provide a reaction function. They simply suggested a range of economic conditions under which we would not act. They conveyed nothing about our actions in other states of the economy. In my view, this was one of the major drawbacks to the approach and the reason changes were needed. Over the past 20 years, the Taylor rule has garnered a great deal of attention and study. Many variations have been proposed and their properties investigated. Almost all the simple rules that have been found to be robust over a range of models have very similar constructions and can be expressed as variants of Taylor’s original specification. Of course, the Fed has never adopted a formal reaction function or simple rule for setting monetary policy. But the FOMC does look at the implications of various rules for interest rates when it makes its policy decisions. The fact that the FOMC has not adopted a formal reaction function might reflect the desire for discretion on the part of some policymakers. But it also reflects the difficulty in reaching a consensus. The Committee is composed of 19 members with varying views about how the economy functions, the shocks affecting the economy, and how policy should be set to meet the FOMC’s monetary policy goals. Despite not having formally adopted a particular rule, the                                                 3 John B. Taylor, “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy, North-Holland, 39, 1993, pp. 195–214. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Fed appeared to behave in a systematic way at various times in the past. Indeed, Taylor’s 1993 article noted that his rule approximated Federal Reserve policy setting over the  1987–1992 period, save for a deviation during the stock market crash of 1987. I believe that despite the challenges, there would be large benefits to the FOMC reaching a consensus on a reaction function that could serve as a useful guide to understanding its behavior. Those benefits would be in the form of increased transparency and in the alignment of the public’s expectations with policymakers’ intentions. As I’ve discussed before, there are limitations to the use of simple rules, and no central bank can be constrained by one simple rule in all circumstances. Rules are basically intended to work well on average, but any central bank looks at many variables in determining policy. There will be times when policy must deviate from a reaction function or policy rule. However, simple rules do provide valuable benchmarks for assessing the appropriate stance of policy. They also provide guidance about the likely path of policy and thus are intended to reduce volatility. However, this outcome cannot happen unless the central bank is willing to publicly communicate a reaction function or rule. Another benefit of articulating a rule is enhanced accountability. There will inevitably be times when economic developments fall outside the scope of our models and warrant unusual monetary policy action. Events such as 9/11, the Asian financial crisis, the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and the 1987 stock market crash may require departures from the simple rule. Having articulated a rule guiding policymaking in normal times, the policymaker will be expected to explain the departures from the rule in these unusual circumstances. With the rule as a baseline, departures can be quantified and inform us how excessively tight or easy policy might be relative to normal. If the events are temporary, policymakers will have to explain how and when policy is likely to return to normal. Thus, I see several benefits to the FOMC reaching a consensus on a reaction function or policy rule, including aligning expectations for policy and enhancing transparency and accountability of the policymaking process. Forward guidance One way to think about the policy reaction function is as a form of forward guidance. Indeed, it is perhaps the best and most useful form of forward guidance. In normal times, forward guidance provides the public with information about the expected path of policy. As I’ve discussed, forward guidance is a form of transparency that reduces volatility by reducing policy uncertainty relative to discretionary decision-making. However, with the policy rate at or near zero, forward guidance can play a role in increasing the degree of accommodation. When the policy rate is constrained by the zero lower bound, the future policy rate becomes potentially more important than the current policy rate in influencing current economic conditions through its impact on expectations. In some models, when faced with the zero lower bound, it can be desirable to indicate that future policy rates will be kept lower for longer than might otherwise be the case.4 Thus, policymakers may want to deliberately commit to deviating from what they would otherwise choose to do under normal conditions, such as following a Taylor-like rule or their normal reaction function. In these models, such a commitment would tend to raise inflation expectations and lower long-run nominal rates, thereby inducing households and businesses to spend more today. This use of forward guidance asks more of policymakers than just articulating a reaction function. In a sense, it requires more of a commitment from policymakers; it requires them to commit to a future path that will not be time consistent if policymakers were only forward                                                 4 Gauti B. Eggertsson and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, 2003, pp. 139–211. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  looking. Instead, policymakers need to commit to a policy path that is history dependent. As I noted, you can think of this as a commitment to deviate from a prior reaction function, particularly if that reaction function makes no provision for operating at the zero lower bound. If such a commitment can be made credible, it can yield better economic outcomes. But managing the public’s beliefs about the future policy path is challenging if policymakers must convince the public that they will not behave as they have in the past. And I would argue that that is the circumstance that the FOMC faces.5  Managing expectations is even more challenging when policymakers have not been clear about the reaction function they use in normal times. How can policymakers credibly commit to deviate from something they have never committed to in the first place? How can policymakers convey that they will be implementing policy that is more accommodative than normal when they have not been clear about what would constitute the normal degree of accommodation? Managing the public’s expectations may be not only difficult but also counterproductive. Without the public’s understanding of policymaking in normal times, trying to pursue a commitment to looser-than-normal policy may send the wrong signal. For example, if the public hears that the policy rate will be lower for longer, it may interpret the message as policymakers saying that they expect the economy to be weaker for longer. If this is the interpretation, then the forward guidance will weaken rather than strengthen current spending. Where do we go from here? My preference for dealing with forward guidance is for the FOMC to articulate a reaction function as best it can. This entails describing a systematic approach to policymaking where policy decisions are based on available information in a consistent and predictable way. I believe the most recent FOMC statement took a step in this direction when we moved to a qualitative form of forward guidance by stating that we will be assessing progress  –  both realized and expected  –  toward our policy objectives. The idea that policy will change as we approach our objectives has the flavor of a reaction function. But, of course, there is more work to do. Because we do not know the true model of the economy, I would suggest the Committee begin by considering a set of robust policy rules designed to have good results in a variety of models and across various stages of the business cycle. Such robust rules recognize that data are measured imprecisely and are subject to revision. These robust rules typically indicate that policy should respond to changes in the gap between inflation and the inflation goal, and to changes in the deviation of output from a measure of potential output, or to changes in unemployment from the steady-state or the natural rate of unemployment. Most robust rules suggest that the reaction to the changes in the inflation gap be more than one-for-one and should exceed the reaction to changes in the output or unemployment gap. The rules also suggest that policy should be somewhat inertial. By recognizing the fundamental difficulty in measuring potential output or the natural rate of unemployment, I think a good case can be made to consider rules that rely on the growth of output or changes in the unemployment rate or employment growth. I want to stress that these rules suggest that policy should respond to changes in the output or unemployment gap not because policy is seeking to fine-tune the real economy but                                                 5 This would not be the case if the reaction function or rule explicitly described how policy would be conducted at the zero lower bound. In that case, new forward guidance would not be required, as the reaction function would have already notified the public what to expect. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  because doing so allows the economy to efficiently use resources given the economic disturbances that it experiences. By considering such robust rules, the FOMC might be able to move toward a consensus on a qualitative description of its reaction function as an important first step. For example, we would not have to specify the precise mathematical rule but would provide assessments of key variables and then communicate our policy decisions in terms of changes in these key variables. If policy were changed, then we would explain that change in terms of how the variables in our response function changed. If we choose a consistent set of variables and systematically use them to describe our policy choices, the public will form more accurate judgments about the likely course of policy – thereby reducing uncertainty and promoting stability. The FOMC has kept the federal funds rate at effectively zero since December 2008. For much of this time, interest rate rules suggested that the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates was constraining policy; in other words, that nominal rates should be negative if that were possible. However, many robust rules now suggest that given the progress the economy has made over the past year, policy either is no longer constrained or will soon not be constrained by the zero bound. That is, they indicate that the policy rate should be above zero. Rule-based policymaking would require the FOMC to indicate how it plans to adjust policy to a more normal stance. The Committee could decide to simply follow the prescriptions offered by the reaction function. Or instead, the Committee might decide that normalization will be delayed with a more gradual adjustment of rates relative to the prescriptions of the reaction function. But even if the FOMC were not prepared to choose a particular rule, it could articulate more clearly a qualitative reaction function that would serve as a baseline for future changes in policy as we exit the zero lower bound. It is my belief that doing so would be a more understandable form of forward guidance, less subject to misinterpretation as policy transitions from unusual times to more normal times. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Grant Spencer: Coordination of monetary policy and macro-prudential policy Speech by Mr Grant Spencer, Deputy Governor and Head of Financial Stability of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, at the Credit Suisse Asian Investment Conference, Hong Kong, 27 March 2014. *      *      * Accompanying tables and figures can be found at the end of the speech. 1. Introduction The Reserve Bank expects to tighten monetary policy substantially over the next two years in response to emerging inflation risks. At the same time, speed limits on high loan-to-value ratio (LVR) lending have been in place since 1 October 2013, in order to reduce systemic risk associated with highly leveraged households and rising house prices. The natural question arises: how do LVR speed limits interact with monetary policy? And to what extent should they be coordinated? These questions relate to the current business cycle but also raise a broader question – what are the general principles that should apply in managing macro-prudential policy and monetary policy going forward? These are important questions that do not have simple answers. They are being explored in the economic policy literature and the Reserve Bank is currently undertaking research to help clarify the issues in the New Zealand context. Today I would like to discuss the Bank’s current thinking on the interaction of monetary and macro-prudential policies, and point to areas for further analysis. The Bank sees it as important to communicate its thinking on policy coordination, to maintain the transparency it has built up over many years on monetary policy. To summarise the Bank’s current position, we believe it is essential to retain clear primary objectives for both monetary and macro-prudential policy. These primary objectives are price stability and financial system stability respectively. However, there is an appropriate role for policy coordination in certain circumstances and with certain policy tools. The key in this respect, is to ensure that the primary aims of the two policy arms are not undermined by too heavily diverting the attention of those policies to secondary objectives. Conceptually, there is a case for coordinating the use of monetary policy and a macro- prudential policy instrument provided they both affect outcomes relevant to the achievement of both policy objectives. In general this condition is likely to be met, but in widely varying degrees. Most of the time monetary policy and macro-prudential policy should be able to operate largely independently, or have complementary effects on each other that are relatively easy to manage (Table 1). Relative independence will be possible when one or both of the policies are in ‘neutral’, and therefore imparting little influence on the other’s objective. The greatest degree of complementarity will occur when the real and financial cycles are in sync – either rising or falling together as depicted in the SW and NE corners of Table 1. In these situations, coordination should be relatively simple, requiring each policy setting to allow for the complementary effects of the other. Conversely, the two policies will be in greatest potential conflict when the real and financial cycles are out of sync, as depicted in the NW and SE corners of the Table. These are the situations where coordination is difficult but also important. This is where the primary objectives of the two policies need to be carefully balanced. (Table 1) To explore the policy coordination options more closely, I will first examine what macro-prudential can do for price stability, and then turn the tables and ask what monetary policy can do for financial stability. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  2. What can macro-prudential policy do for price stability? The basic motivation for using a macro-prudential instrument to assist monetary policy is to help support the price stability objective of the central bank. The monetary authority will in most cases welcome assistance from a range of other policies, such as supportive fiscal policy or structural reforms that increase competitive pressures and enhance productivity. Assistance will be particularly welcome from macro-prudential policy if it targets a ‘hot spot’ such as an overheated housing market. (Figure 1) Macro-prudential instruments can reduce systemic risk in two ways: 1) by dampening credit and asset price cycles; and 2) by increasing the resilience of balance sheets in the downward phase of the cycle. When thinking about policy coordination, we are mainly interested in tools that work through the first channel, such as LVR restrictions. Our work to date suggests that LVR restrictions have material impacts on the supply of credit (RBNZ (2013)) and hence on the inflation objective. Other macro-prudential tools, such as the Counter Cyclical Capital Buffer (CCB), operate more through the second (resilience increasing) channel, and are less relevant for coordination with monetary policy1. Assistance from macro-prudential tools is likely to be most appropriate when monetary policy faces constraints and difficult trade-offs in dampening inflation pressures. For a small open economy like New Zealand, these constraints often emerge as a result of spill-over effects from the global financial markets and, in particular, exchange rate pressures. A good example is the experience with monetary policy during the last housing boom from 2003–2007. During that time, monetary policy lost a degree of traction as relatively high policy rates and market returns attracted strong capital inflows, resulting in a high exchange rate and downward pressure on long-term interest rates. Borrowers responded by locking in longer term financing at relatively low rates, thereby reducing the impact of official cash rate (OCR) increases. This meant that larger increases in the OCR were required to control inflation, putting additional upward pressure on the New Zealand dollar exchange rate. There were loud calls at the time for the use of alternative policy instruments to assist monetary policy. Possible candidates included macro-prudential policy and tax measures, such as a capital gains tax or a mortgage interest levy (Treasury and RBNZ (2006)). With hindsight, the use of another policy instrument would have been helpful during this period, to assist in slowing domestic demand and inflation pressure, with less of the work having to be done by the OCR and the exchange rate. LVR restrictions may have been able to assist, given the rapid rates of credit and house price growth at the time which presented risks for financial stability as well as price stability. Macro-prudential tools may also have been a useful complement to monetary policy in the economic downturn from 2008. If banks had entered the recession with more stable sources of funding and larger capital buffers, then the tightening in credit conditions that ensued after the GFC may have been ameliorated, potentially reducing the need to ease monetary policy as significantly. In this way, the use of macro-prudential adjustments in downturn situations can lower the risk of running up against the zero lower bound on interest rates. But there can also be significant costs if macro-prudential policy instruments are used too aggressively in support of monetary policy. All macro-prudential instruments create incentives for financial disintermediation– credit flows that avoid the regulation by moving outside of the regulatory perimeter. Over-use of macro-prudential tools in an attempt to                                                 1  These other macro-prudential tools work by forcing banks to temporarily increase capital or funding buffers during periods of rising asset prices and leverage. Because the cost of capital and/or core funding is likely to be compressed during such periods, any cycle-dampening effects from these instruments are likely to be more limited. However, these tools can have significant effects by improving the scope for banks to continue to lend in the downward phase of the cycle. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  manage the credit cycle would likely see disintermediation increase, thus reducing the effectiveness of the policy tools. Moreover, by pushing financial intermediation towards secondary ‘shadow banking’ channels, excessive use of macro-prudential policy could weaken financial system efficiency and ultimately reduce the soundness of the financial system. We have seen examples of such behaviour in New Zealand’s history and in many other countries. With all these considerations in mind, there may be scope for macro-prudential policy to assist monetary policy, to a limited extent, both in the up and down cycle, provided its primary objective of promoting financial stability is kept firmly in mind. 3. What can monetary policy do for financial stability? We regard financial stability as a necessary – but not sufficient– condition for macro-economic stability. The GFC-induced recession is evidence enough of the potential for financial instability to generate macroeconomic instability. Further, monetary policy can influence asset price and credit cycles through its impact on bank lending rates. Thus, there is a potential case for monetary policy to assist in promoting financial stability or, at a minimum, not to undermine it.2 (Figure 2) The emerging literature identifies a number of channels through which monetary policy can influence risk-taking behaviour and the build-up of systemic risk (Borio and Zhu (2010)). In particular, an extended period of low interest rates can contribute to financial stability risks by increasing risk-taking, leading to a ‘search for yield’ and compression of credit spreads. In a similar way, an extended period of low interest rates can also lead to an excessive easing of bank lending standards. Looking at the issue from another angle, a tightening of monetary policy to rein in inflation pressure has often brought an end to credit booms (Drehmann and Juselius (2012)). In other words, sharp movements in interest rates, as well as sustained low levels of interest rates, can lead to financial system stress. However, a key lesson from the literature and from our own experience is that the transmission of monetary policy to financial stability is far less clear than its transmission to inflation. In particular, the effect of monetary policy on financial stability will depend critically on the state of the financial sector at the time. For example, the impact of an OCR tightening cycle may be very different depending on the starting levels of household and corporate debt and debt servicing capacity. When are monetary policy adjustments likely to be helpful from a financial stability perspective? This is likely to be in situations where asset and credit markets are buoyant and prudential policies alone are insufficient to constrain a build-up of financial system stress. For example, by themselves, macro-prudential policies such as LVR restrictions may have limited effects on asset price inflation and the credit cycle. Macro-prudential policies must remain consistent with micro prudential principles and are therefore not generally scalable in the way that interest rates are. Further, the impact of macro-prudential policies can be eroded if there is disintermediation outside the regulatory perimeter, something which becomes more likely if interest rates are set at stimulatory levels. Thus, in a situation where inflation is near the target, but asset markets are rising sharply, assistance from monetary policy can be an important means of meeting financial stability objectives.                                                 2  Many countries are currently actively considering how to manage the potential effects of an extended period of loose monetary policy on financial stability. For example, the Bank of England has recently included a financial stability knock-out in its forward guidance on monetary policy (Kohn (2013). 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  As noted by Federal Reserve Governor, Jeremy Stein (2012), monetary policy“gets in all the cracks” of the financial system. It affects the cost of credit for all borrowers, including those that may be avoiding macro-prudential regulations as a result of disintermediation. Other policy initiatives that seek to alleviate supply-demand imbalances in asset markets can also be helpful. In the case of housing markets for example, this might involve regulatory reform around zoning and other planning restrictions, or changes in taxation that reduce the incentive for speculative investment. Should monetary policy respond to a request from the prudential authorities for tighter policy? The key test is whether this is consistent with the primary monetary policy objective of price stability. If monetary policy is diverted too far or too long from its primary objective of price stability there is a risk that the transparency and credibility of monetary policy will be damaged, thus reducing the long-run effectiveness of monetary policy in achieving its prime objective. This potential problem has been emphasised for example by Svensson (2011). Policymakers and academics around the world have debated the appropriateness of tightening monetary policy on financial stability grounds during credit or asset booms. Broadly speaking, there are two opposing views in the ‘lean versus clean’ debate: • The “clean” view was dominant prior to the GFC. This view proposes that monetary policy should not respond to asset or credit booms, except to the extent that they influence inflation pressures. It assumes that monetary policy can ‘clean up’ the impact on the real economy if the financial cycle crashes, and that the tightening in monetary policy required to lean against a credit or asset price boom would create unacceptable costs for the wider economy. This view implicitly assumes that micro- and macro-prudential instruments can effectively limit the extent of financial system damage in the downturn. • The ‘lean’ view has become more prominent since the GFC for two reasons. First, policy makers were surprised how large asset bubbles could emerge under conditions of sustained price stability, prudent fiscal policies, and small output gaps. Second, the output and employment losses and other social and economic costs associated with the aftermath of the GFC proved to be much greater and more deep-set than policy makers expected. The‘lean’ view proposes that monetary policy should actively lean against credit booms for financial stability purposes. It is assumed that: (i) monetary policy that leans against credit booms is consistent with long-run price stability; and (ii) increased interest rates can be effective in limiting a credit boom with limited costs for the wider economy. This view implicitly assumes that there can be circumstances where prudential policies – both micro and macro – are insufficient to contain financial system risks on their own. (Table 2) Research is continuing in this area. Although the ‘lean’ view has become more dominant, in particular reflecting research from the BIS (Borio and Lowe (2003)), there is no consensus that monetary policy should always respond to emerging financial stresses. Rather, there is an emerging consensus that financial stability is a valid secondary objective and that monetary policy may respond to financial stability concerns when such actions are also consistent with the primary price stability objective (Smets (2013)). 4. The New Zealand framework: conditional policy coordination New Zealand’s policy framework might be described as one of conditional policy coordination. That is to say, the two policies retain distinct primary objectives, but are free to lend a hand to the other policy objective, provided their primary objectives are not compromised. In New Zealand, such coordination is facilitated by decisions on macro-prudential and monetary policies being undertaken by the Reserve Bank’s Governing Committee, but with clearly distinct mandates for the two policies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  The Reserve Bank of New Zealand has long had a mandate to use its (micro-) prudential policies to promote a sound and efficient financial system. We do not have a mandate to protect the soundness of individual institutions. The macro-prudential policy framework established in 2013 also focuses on promoting a sound and efficient financial system using a set of instruments that may be varied through the financial cycle. A Memorandum of Understanding on macro-prudential policy was signed with the Minister of Finance in 2013 that sets out the objectives, instruments and responsibilities for macro-prudential policy (Rogers (2013)). The new macro-prudential framework draws lessons from the monetary policy framework. It incorporates a commitment to achieving the objective that it is best suited to financial stability – combined with decision-making at arm’s-length from political pressures. However, a key difference is that macro-prudential policy decisions involve a greater degree of consultation with government and the public. The New Zealand policy framework recognises the interactions between monetary and macro-prudential policies and the logic of conditional policy coordination. In pursuing its primary objective of price stability, the Policy Targets Agreement (PTA) states that monetary policy must have regard to financial stability. And in pursuing its primary financial stability objective, macro-prudential policy is required under the MoU to consider any implications for monetary policy. 5. LVR speed limits and interactions with monetary policy New Zealand has experienced live issues at the interface of macro-prudential and monetary policies. During 2003–2007, New Zealand experienced one of the highest house price appreciations among the OECD economies. A period of sustained low interest rates since 2009, combined with easing lending conditions and a housing supply shortage has contributed to a resurging housing market with house prices at end 2013 almost 15 percent above the 2007 peak. The Bank responded with the introduction of an LVR ‘speed limit’, commencing 1 October 2013 (RBNZ (2013)). The purpose of this LVR restriction is to reduce the build-up of financial system risk by: 1) dampening the rapid growth in house prices; and 2) strengthening households’ and the banks’ balance sheets. The policy does not ban high LVR lending, but allows banks to write no more than 10 percent of their mortgage commitments at LVRs over 80 percent, and has led to a significant reduction in high-LVR lending. (Figure 3) Initially, we estimated that the LVR restrictions would dampen annual growth in house prices by 1–4 percentage points; house sales by 3–8 percent, and credit growth by 1–3 percentage points over the first year that the policy was in place. The evidence to date suggests that the dampening effect of the LVR restrictions on house prices has been broadly in line with these expectations. House sales have fallen by 13 percent since September, and there are early signs that this is beginning to translate into weaker house prices and credit growth.3 (Table 3) While LVRs have a financial stability purpose, they have been an important consideration in our monetary policy assessment. The dampening effect of LVRs on house price inflation and credit is expected to reduce wealth and credit effects on consumption that might have otherwise increased due to a rapid expansion in house prices. This, in turn, is estimated to have reduced CPI inflation pressures by an amount similar to a 25–50 basis point increase in the OCR.                                                 3  Reserve Bank simulations of the counter-factual – what would have happened to house price inflation in the absence of LVR speed limits – suggests house price inflation would have been about 2.5 percent higher than its current level. We are continuing to monitor the effects of LVR restrictions and will publish new estimates of their impact in the Reserve Bank’s May Financial Stability Report. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Earlier this month, in response to broadening inflation pressures, the Reserve Bank began an OCR tightening cycle after three years of no change in the policy rate. Given that the LVR restrictions began to moderate the housing cycle from October 2013, the monetary policy tightening cycle might have needed to be more accentuated in their absence. While the main benefit of the LVRs has been to redress the impact of the easier lending conditions, they may also have helped to take some pressure off the New Zealand dollar exchange rate. What if the policies had not been “conditionally coordinated”? While purely hypothetical, if these policy decisions were being made on a strictly independent basis, we may have seen macro-prudential policy‘wait’ for the coming monetary policy tightening cycle to slow the housing market. An absence of any macro-prudential measures may in turn have prompted the monetary policy tightening to have started somewhat earlier. To be clear, the monetary policy tightening cycle that is now underway is motivated by the need to ensure that CPI inflation remains in the vicinity of 2 percent over the medium term. The boost to financial system resilience provided by the LVR restrictions, as well as a decision to increase risk weights for high-LVR housing lending4, has meant that monetary policy has not needed to consider a tightening for financial stability purposes. However, while not motivated by the financial stability objective, the monetary policy tightening is expected to help in dampening further house price inflation. In this regard, as interest rates move back to more normal levels, we will expect to have greater scope to ease or remove the LVR restrictions. The Reserve Bank stated from the outset that the LVR restrictions are not intended to be permanent. They will be removed once housing market pressures have moderated and when we are confident there will not be a resurgence in house price inflation (Wheeler (2013)). But how should the exit be coordinated with the expected OCR tightening cycle? The factors to consider include: – The degree of moderation achieved in rates of house price inflation and credit expansion; – Factors that might affect the potential for a resurgence in house price inflation following the removal of the LVRs, such as the dampening effect of increased housing supply and mortgage rates, and the stimulatory effect of higher net immigration flows; – Any distortions or inefficiencies that become apparent as a result of the policy. A decision to ease or remove LVR restrictions will ultimately take into account both the financial stability and price stability implications of doing so. We will be alert to the risk that the removal of LVR restrictions could produce a resurgence in house price inflation, which would potentially undermine both financial and price stability. 6. Conclusion While monetary policy and macro-prudential policy need to retain their separate primary objectives of price stability and financial stability, the significant spill-over effects between the two policies make a clear case for their co-ordination. However, such coordination must be conditional on each policy arm continuing to focus on its primary objective. Changing to joint objectives for both policies would: 1) complicate policy decisions; 2) undermine transparency; and 3) potentially be damaging to the credibility of monetary policy and macro- prudential policy.                                                 4  Increased risk weights for high-LVR mortgages applied to the large Internal Ratings Based (IRB) banks from September 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  The policy framework in New Zealand is consistent with this conditional coordination approach. In the monetary policy targets agreement we have financial stability as a secondary objective. This means that the monetary authorities need to think hard if an OCR decision might have adverse effects for financial stability. Similarly, in the macro-prudential MoU it is required that macro-prudential initiatives have regard to their potential impact on monetary policy. There remain many aspects of policy co-ordinations where we need to deepen our understanding. These include: • The quantitative effects of macro-prudential policy on macro-economic outcomes and their implications for monetary policy. • The scale and timing of spill-over effects between the OCR and our four macro-prudential tools. • How best to coordinate OCR and macro-prudential policy decisions at different points of the economic and financial cycles, particularly when the two cycles are out of sync and the policies are not complementary. This is an active area of the academic literature and a priority area for our own research. I look forward to the insights that this work will give us for our future monetary and macro-prudential policy decisions. References Beau, D, L Clerc and B Mojon (2012) “Macro-prudential policy and the conduct of monetary policy”, Banque De France Working Paper, 390. Borio, C and P Lowe (2003), “Borio, C. and P. Lowe (2002), “Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: Exploring the nexus”, BIS Working Paper, 114. Borio, C and H Zhu (2008) “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: A missing link in the transmission mechanism?” BIS Working Paper, 268. Drehmann, M and Juselius M (2012), “Do debt service costs affect macro-economic and financial stability?”, BIS Quarterly Review,September 2012. Kohn (2013), “The interactions of macro-prudential and monetary policies: a view from the Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee,Speech given to the Oxford Institute for Economic Policy, http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/speech692.pdf. Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2013), “Regulatory impact assessment: Restrictions on high-LVR residential mortgage lending”, http://rbnz.govt.nz/financial_stability/macro-prudential_policy/5407434.pdf Rogers, L (2013), “A new approach to macro-prudential policy for New Zealand”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 76:3. Treasury and RBNZ (2006), “Supplementary Stabilisation Instruments: Initial report”, http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary_policy/about_monetary_policy/2452274.pdf. Smets (2013), “Financial stability and monetary policy: How closely interlinked?”, Riksbank Quarterly Economic Review, 2013:3. Stein (2012), “Lean, clean and in-between”, Speech presented to the NBER research conference: Lessons from the financial crisis for monetary policy, http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/stein20131018a.htm 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Svensson, L (2011), “Monetary Policy after the Crisis”,Speech given at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Fransisco, http://larseosvensson.se/files/papers/LS111129e.pdf Wheeler (2013), “The Introduction of Macro-prudential Policy”, Speech delivered to Otago University, http://rbnz.govt.nz/research_and_publications/speeches/2013/5407267.html.    Table 1. Possible scenarios for macro-prudential and monetary policies  Source: Adapted from Beau et al (2012).   Figure 1. Monetary and Macro-prudential policy interactions    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  Figure 2. Monetary and Macro-prudential policy interactions    Table 2. Different views of the role of monetary policy in achieving financial stability  Source: Adapted from Smets (2013). 
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Figure 3. Share of high-LVR lending      Table 3 Housing and credit developments since the introduction of LVR speed limits  * Due to the slow-moving nature of housing credit, this figure is calculated as an annualised three-month percent change.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Janet L Yellen: Remarks on Women’s History Month Remarks by Ms Janet L Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Women’s History Month Reception, US Capitol, Washington DC, 25 March 2014. *      *      * It’s an honor and a pleasure for me to be here with you to mark Women’s History Month, which itself has some history behind it. March 8, 1911 was the first International Women’s Day, and it was 1980 when President Carter established National Women’s History Week. In 1987, Congress acted to make that week a full month. Women, of course, are also a part of history for the other 11 months of the year. And I would add that women were influencing the course of history long before 1980, or 1911. But I am glad that there is, each year, a time when we pause to think about the role of women, because history is more than simply what happened, and more than what women and men did to make it happen. History is what we remember about those deeds. It is the lessons we have taken from the past and the knowledge we draw on to live today and to shape the future. For me, one lesson from history is that it is no coincidence that America’s great success in the past century came as women steadily increased their participation in every aspect of society. Starting with gaining the vote, just a few years before International Women’s Day, “The American Century,” as it’s sometimes known, was also a century of progress for women. Fundamental to our country’s values, to those ideals that have been and continue to be so influential around the world, is the principle of equality for all, including for women. One reason America’s example is influential elsewhere is because progress toward these ideals has been accompanied by great success in broadly raising living standards. And I think our economic success has been due in substantial part to the fuller participation and contribution of women to the economy. Their increasing participation in the workforce, particularly after 1970, was a major factor in sustaining growing family incomes. Making fuller use of the talents and efforts of women in the workplace has made us more productive and prosperous. If I were to apply this lesson, I would hope that our nation continues to reap the benefits of greater participation by women in the economy and that we do everything that we can to foster that participation. Women have made great progress in many occupations and professions, but lag in others. In my own profession, there has been a gradual increase in the share of women in economics, but women still remain underrepresented at the highest levels in academia, in government and in business. There are doubtless numerous reasons for this, and in fact economists themselves are among those engaged in trying to understand the factors that explain why more women aren’t rising to higher levels. I hope we continue to seek this understanding, in my field and others where women are in the minority, because the benefits of greater participation for women, it seems to me, are clear and substantial. As we continue to make progress in recovering from the Great Recession, our country is going to need the best efforts, ideas and talent it can muster to succeed in an increasingly competitive global economy. If women’s history can shape the future, I hope that it inspires America to take those steps we can take to draw forth these contributions from all Americans. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Glenn Stevens: The economic outlook Speech by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 17th Annual Credit Suisse Asian Investment Conference, Hong Kong, 26 March 2014. *      *      * I thank Alexandra Rush for assistance in compiling these remarks. When I last spoke at this conference two years ago, the United States had just avoided a feared “double-dip” recession. Europe was in the news, with acute concerns over the feedback loop between weak economies, bank asset quality and sovereign finances. China’s growth had moderated, and many feared it would decline sharply. Since then, the world economy has continued its expansion. Growth in global GDP was a bit below trend in 2013, with reasonable prospects of some pick up this year. None of the downside scenarios that have exercised minds over the past couple of years have, as yet, come to pass. That doesn’t mean they won’t, only that the world economy has been climbing the “wall of worry” for a few years now. Overall, in 2014 economic global growth is thought likely by major forecasters to be a bit higher than in 2013, and at about average pace. More of the growth is coming from the advanced countries, and proportionately not quite so much from the emerging ones. That is probably a welcome re-balancing in some respects, after the weakness of the advanced countries in recent years. The United States continues its recovery led by private demand and over the second half of last year the economy expanded at an annualised rate of just over 3 per cent. With the current agreement over the US Federal budget, one headwind from last year will abate somewhat. Of course there have been effects of the recent severe weather and it will still be a little while yet before US policymakers get a clear reading on the pace of expansion. But there is no obvious reason to expect that the expansion will be de-railed. The euro area has resumed growth, albeit in a somewhat hesitant fashion and with noticeable differences in performance by country. Some quite pronounced adjustments to cost structures are occurring in some of the so-called “peripheral” countries, as needed under the single currency area arrangement. In Japan, the initial results of the policy measures over the past 18 months have been quite positive, though of course the proposed “third arrow” reforms are yet to be fully delivered. The much anticipated “tapering” of the US Federal Reserve’s monthly asset purchases commenced in December. The initial expectation of tapering in the middle of 2013 caused more market ructions than the event itself. That said, as often occurs when the Fed changes course, investors have taken the opportunity over this period to re-assess their positions and their appetite for risk. So far, investors have not fled from risk indiscriminately. They have drawn distinctions between alternative classes of investment and the differing outlook across countries. Long-term sovereign yields for the core advanced countries remain low and, with compressed risk spreads, borrowing costs for many private-sector borrowers also remain low. A few emerging economies have lately come under pressure, with bond yields spiking and exchange rates depreciating. In most of these instances, country-specific issues can be identified as sources of legitimate concern for investors. It is notable that the number of such countries under pressure is smaller than in the middle of last year, because some have made credibility-enhancing policy adjustments in the intervening period. So far, so good, then for tapering. In my opinion, we should welcome it. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  There is a tendency, though, to talk about “normalisation” of monetary policy in major advanced countries as though it is happening in all of them. It isn’t: it is really only happening in the United States. Even there it is at a very early stage but the United States is actually on a path that neither the euro area nor Japan is even contemplating yet. In those jurisdictions, so far as I can tell, the discussion is about whether further easing may be in order. In fact were the Bank of Japan (BoJ) to step up its current program of quantitative and qualitative easing, it would soon be adding more cash to the global financial system, in absolute terms, than the Federal Reserve. Intriguingly, the BoJ’s actions attract rather less attention than the Fed’s. I am not in a position to opine about whether or not such further easing might occur, but the point is simply that the monetary policy trajectories of the major currency areas could diverge, and increasingly so, over the next couple of years. One interesting question is how fully this possibility is reflected in major exchange rates. Turning to the Asian region, China’s economy grew close to, and in fact a little faster than, the government’s target last year. Strong and about equal contributions to growth were made by household consumption and investment. Consumer price inflation continues to be stable. Recent indicators have shown possible signs of slower growth in the early part of 2014: growth of industrial production slowed; retail sales and passenger vehicle sales moderated; and fixed asset investment growth was a little lower in January and February, though quite stable in year-ended terms. Given that the growth target was more than met last year, and given that the Chinese New Year holiday period makes it more difficult to assess trends in the data, it may be a little too early to draw strong conclusions. Spot prices for steel and iron ore have fallen lately though, on movements to date, seem within the range seen in recent years. In fact, people may be too inclined to fret over what are still relatively small movements in monthly PMIs, and the like, in China. Sometimes they fret even more than they do over small bumps in the US economic data. The greater concern is the risks involved with the build-up of credit in so-called “shadow banking” over the past five or so years. To a considerable extent this growth in financial activity surely reflects the natural tendency to avoid the effects of price and quantity constraints imposed on the core banking sector, in an environment of strong demand for credit. In certain respects, it arguably provides genuine services to the economy. The potential problems, on the other hand, are all too familiar and well understood, at least in a qualitative sense. They include excessive maturity mismatches, where long-term loans are funded essentially by short-term borrowings; less-than-ideal transparency about asset quality; distorted incentives for provincial government entities; assumptions on the part of investors in wealth management products about major bank or government support – and so on. Recent credit events in China have increased focus on the possibility of failure of entities with non-viable business models. There has been a widening of risk spreads for lower quality credits. To some extent this could be seen as a positive development, as a clear-eyed assessment and pricing of underlying economic risks is critical for sound longer-run development in China no less than in any other nation. But of course we cannot know how much further this re-assessment of risk may have to run, nor how disruptive it could turn out to be for the Chinese financial system and the economy. It is clear that the Chinese authorities are across the issue, and in all likelihood they have the ability and resources to manage the situation. Some reforms have already been implemented, which will help to manage such risks in future, while steps taken to moderate the flows of total social financing seem, so far, to have had some success. In the meantime, a broader set of other recent reforms represent further incremental steps towards greater financial market liberalisation: the removal of restrictions on most lending rates and some liabilities, with those on deposit rates expected to follow; the recent widening 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  of the renminbi’s trading band, as part of the central bank’s commitment to let markets play a greater role in the economy; and the introduction of the Shanghai Free Trade Zone with some associated easing of capital account restrictions. These are all welcome moves and are in China’s long-run interests. Around the Asian region generally, at this stage, our sense is that economic growth is continuing at about its trend pace. All countries will be watching closely both developments in China and the impacts on capital flows and risk-pricing as the Fed tapers and other major central banks implement their own chosen policies. Turning to the Australian economy, I continue to find a fascinating divergence between the views of foreign observers, especially in Asia, many of whom say to me “Australia is doing very well” and the tone of the commentary at home, which is typically a lot more pessimistic. My reading of the actual data is that they suggest that the economy has been doing a bit better than much of our domestic commentary over the past couple of years would have you believe, but not quite as well as many foreign investors seem to have thought. Australia certainly weathered the financial crisis well, and with a real GDP some 13 per cent larger than it was at the beginning of 2009, compares well with many other advanced countries. It is the case, though, that growth while positive, has been running at a pace a bit below its trend pace for about 18 months now. The rate of unemployment has increased by something like a percentage point over the same period. Most people are familiar with the fact that there have been very strong conditions in the natural resources sector. The biggest positive terms of trade shock in at least a century drove a mining investment boom of truly epic proportions, and that added a major impetus to demand in the economy. But the terms of trade peaked about two and a half years ago; the capital spending by the resources sector has also now peaked and is expected to decline significantly over the next couple of years. In the rest of the economy, households have spent most of the past five years behaving more conservatively, or rather more normally, than they did over a long period up to the mid 2000s when they had been in a very expansive mood. Both consumption and residential construction have been soft for a while. I have spoken at length about these trends before and explained why they were to be expected. Nonetheless, many businesses exposed to those sectors, including retailers, builders and banks, have found the going harder. In addition, because the mining boom was associated with a very high exchange rate, other trade exposed sectors have also faced more challenging conditions. Looking ahead, as the resources sector’s capital spending continues to fall, it will be desirable to see some other sources of growth strengthen. One is export volumes for resources, which are already growing strongly, as the additional capacity put in place over recent years becomes utilised. For example, iron ore shipments have risen by about 85 per cent from their levels of five years ago, to around 1.5 million tonnes per day. Exports will rise further over the coming year or two, as additional resource projects are completed and, at the margin, some other areas face slightly less of a headwind from the exchange rate. It is unlikely, though, that a pick-up in resources exports, as important as that will be, will be enough to keep overall growth on the right track. It will be helpful if some of the other areas of domestic demand that have been subdued start to grow faster. For that to occur, households would need to have made progress on their desire to sustain higher saving, and to consolidate debt where needed. Businesses outside of mining would need to have made some progress in containing costs, and raising efficiency. They would also need a bit more confidence about the future than they did before, as a pre-condition to making plans to lift their investment and add to their workforces. There are some promising signs in this regard. Recent data shows stronger household consumption over the summer. The latest surveys and our own liaison confirm this, and suggest that retailers are more optimistic than they were a year ago. That said, we expect 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  consumption spending to grow in line with income or perhaps a little faster, but not at the pace seen in the years prior to the financial crisis. We certainly see abundant signs of confidence in the housing market. Dwelling prices have seen a broad-based rise of 10 per cent in the past year and are now about 5 per cent above the previous peak in 2010. Initially this was not associated with very much at all in the way of faster housing credit growth. That has now picked up a little, though it remains far below the rates seen in the 1990s and 2000s. The pick-up is most noticeable for investors, who need to take care with the amount of leverage they take on. It is clear that dwelling construction activity will rise strongly over the period ahead. Over the past three months, approvals to build private dwellings were at the highest rate for at least three decades. This increase is welcome, certainly at an aggregate level, since on most estimates Australia’s additions to the dwelling stock have been running at a rate below population growth over recent years. Measures of business confidence have improved over the past six months. Businesses seem, so far, to be taking a cautious approach to investment, however: they are waiting for stronger, more persistent signals of improved conditions before committing to significant increases in capital expenditure. That’s actually pretty normal in a cyclical upswing. In their hiring decisions there are some early promising signs of improvement, though it is too soon to see much in the way of concrete evidence of stronger gains in employment yet. So there is encouraging early evidence that the so-called “handover” from mining-led demand growth to broader private demand growth is beginning. Putting all this together, we think economic growth will continue, and may strengthen a little later this year and pick up further during 2015. It is important to stress that this outlook is, obviously, a balance between the large negative force of declining mining investment and, working the other way, the likely pick up in some other areas of demand helped by very low interest rates, improved confidence and so on, as well as higher resource shipments. The lower exchange rate since last April and the improved economic conditions overseas also help. Because we are trying to assess the balance between very different forces, however, there is inevitably a very substantial range of uncertainty surrounding this central outlook. That is simply unavoidable. The fact is that no one can say with certainty just how smooth a “handover” will occur. Nor can anyone pretend to be able to fine-tune it. On inflation, our view is that it will be a little higher than we thought three months ago. This takes account of the most recent data, which was higher than expected, and allows that the result conveyed at least some genuine information. Nonetheless, we think it unlikely that this signifies persistent and serious inflation pressures. Unemployment has been rising, and will probably rise a bit further yet; growth in labour costs have slowed noticeably in response. Indeed, growth of the wage price index is around the lowest in the 15-year history of the measure. Measures of unit labour cost growth are correspondingly quite low. So, absent continually rising profit margins on the part of businesses, we don’t see the conditions for persistently higher consumer price inflation, even though tradable goods prices are expected to rise due to the lower exchange rate. Measures of inflation expectations remain well-anchored and are around or below their long-run averages. Our view remains that the outlook for inflation, while a little higher than before, is still consistent with our medium-term target. Trends in asset prices are an area to watch. In particular, we need to be alert to the possibility that the past year of strong rises in dwelling prices leads people to assume that this is the norm. Were such an assumption to lead to increasing speculative activity, accompanied by a renewed increase in household leverage with all the associated risks to the housing market and the economy more generally, that would be unwelcome. This is a theme discussed in some detail in our latest Financial Stability Review, released earlier 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  today. We are watching this closely, and we remind people that house prices can go down as well as up. In fact there have been two episodes where prices fell for a year during the past decade. The Australian Prudential Regulation Authority will also be emphasising with lenders and their boards, as it has been for some time now, the need to maintain high lending standards. There is, of course, the full panoply of other “risks” that can be identified. As always, the exchange rate is a source of significant uncertainty. Much of Australia’s outlook also depends on developments overseas. Further progress towards the full treatment of banking problems and the return to sustainable fiscal budgets in Europe will be important. With greater certainty in the United States over their fiscal policies and the path of monetary policy, the risks there may now be more on the upside. On the other hand, if some event – like a geo-political shock – led to a wider retreat from risk taking, this could have a significant dampening impact on the global economy. China’s outlook is important for Australia as, for that matter, it is for other countries. China is now the largest or second largest trade partner to most significant economies. Not only the way China manages the current financial issues, but its implementation of structural reforms, so as to maintain robust economic growth in the long run, will have an impact on all of us. Our monetary policy settings have been unchanged since last August, at what by any standard is a very accommodative level. This is playing its part in supporting sustainable growth in demand, consistent with the inflation target. We have signalled that if the economy evolves in line with the present set of forecasts, a period of stability in interest rates could be expected. Having said that, let me return to a more global perspective, to make the point that sustainable growth over the long run has to rely on more than just monetary policy. Strong long-run growth won’t be achieved in any country simply by manipulating interest rates (or, for that matter, exchange rates). Monetary policy’s main contribution over the long run is to provide a stable monetary standard. That is a necessary condition for strong growth but it is not a sufficient one. Nor will fiscal expansion serve as more than a temporary boost to growth. Indeed the limits to fiscal activism are surely all too clear in many countries now. Other conditions need to be right for growth. These include ensuring the environments for competition, innovation and investment, including in human capital, are sound. In those areas, various other government policies must come to the fore. That is the spirit in which the countries of the G20 recently committed to coming up with measures that could raise the level of world GDP by 2 per cent above what it would otherwise have been, over a horizon of five years. This isn’t to be achieved by a program of cheap money or debt-financed spending. Many of the needed measures are likely to be politically demanding for governments to introduce. But if signing up to the challenge helps to galvanise efforts for the sorts of reforms that need to be made, then it will have been a worthwhile initiative. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Graeme Wheeler: Meeting demand for statistics in a fast moving world Remarks by Mr Graeme Wheeler, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Official Statistics User Forum, Wellington, 26 March 2014. *      *      * Introduction It’s a pleasure to be here today and talk about the Reserve Bank’s experience as a user of official statistics. Like many central banks, we’re a major user and producer of statistics. We’re a big user of economic statistics so I’ll start by talking about some of our needs in this area. I’ll then go on to discuss our role in collecting, using and disseminating statistics on the financial system and some of the changes we’re facing. And I’ll offer a central banker’s view of some of the challenges that statisticians face in meeting the growing demands from users of these statistics. At the Reserve Bank, we rely heavily on a broad range of economic data. Statistics New Zealand produces many of the statistics we use but we also rely on data from other domestic and offshore sources. Once every quarter, we undertake an in-depth forecast to arrive at our best projection of where the economy and inflation are headed in the future. This in turn helps guide our policy decisions. We use a range of economic models, all of which rely heavily on data, and apply lots of judgment. Our assessment of the economy is very comprehensive. When we look at the external economy, we consider the economies of our major trading partners, the terms of trade, the exchange rate and the current account. When we look at the domestic economy we consider household and business spending, savings, credit trends and confidence. When we assess inflation pressures, we consider the economy’s growth potential alongside its actual growth rate and take into account the labour market, import prices and other factors that influence prices. Let me give you an idea of just how reliant we are on economic statistics. Our system for processing, storing and managing time series data is known as the Financial Sector Information System (FSIS). We developed it about six years ago and it provides us with a robust database for nearly all the data we produce or use. Today, FSIS holds around 36,000 time series. Around 20,000 of these are macro-economic time series relating to New Zealand and the global economy. Statistics New Zealand would produce the lion’s share of those 20,000 series. You’ll be relieved to hear that I’m not going to talk about all 20,000 statistics but let me make a few comments about what matters to us as a large scale user. Timeliness and reliability are obviously important when we’re trying to assess the economy in real time. So too is good quality guidance on how the statistics are compiled or what the statisticians call “metadata”. When we encounter puzzles in the data, it is essential to be able to have open and honest conversations with Statistics New Zealand about what might be causing them. Revisions need to be handled carefully. Most data are revised from time to time, but if revisions are large enough to re-write history, the original data would have had the potential to mislead policymakers. The earlier we can learn about upcoming revisions and what is driving them the better. Another thing that matters for us and for all users of Official Statistics is harmonisation. The economic data Statistics New Zealand produces should ideally be consistent with the financial data the Reserve Bank produces. There is real value in working off a common business register when we are putting together institutional statistics. That has real benefits for all users. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  What would be our top four ‘wants’ from Statistics New Zealand? We’d like sector balance sheets that would tell us who owes what to whom across the economy and with the rest of the world. We’d like a quarterly income-based measure of GDP, which would provide a useful alternative perspective on output to the existing production and expenditure-based measures. We’d like GDP to be rebased at the very least every 10 years to capture structural change in the economy. And we would love a monthly CPI to enable more timely analysis and forecasting of inflation. We recognise that there are many statistical needs and resources are limited. But nor should we lose sight of their value. New Zealand’s annual GDP is more than $220 billion so better quality or more timely decisions that result in a very slight improvement in economic performance could easily be worth millions of dollars per annum. We greatly value having a voice in Statistics New Zealand’s data development process and the opportunity to engage at a point in the process where our views can be taken into account. By all accounts, our relationship with Statistics New Zealand is in a good shape but both parties need to work hard and keep improving it. The Reserve Bank’s financial statistics Turning now to financial statistics, the Bank is a major user of data on the financial system, most of which we produce in-house, drawing on the powers under the Reserve Bank Act (1989) to collect data from financial institutions. These data account for most of the other 16,000 time series in our FSIS database and include institutional data collected for prudential purposes, data on the financial markets, data on notes and coins, and published financial system statistics. Our survey respondents include banks and other financial institutions and this “micro-data” is used in our role as a prudential regulator and supervisor. Commercial confidentiality means that this data isn’t generally published, but we use it to compile broader financial system statistics. We’ve a well-established practice of constructing and publishing these statistics. An example would be the Standard Statistical Return for the banking system, which provides comprehensive information on the banking system’s balance sheet. Some of our statistics act as inputs in the production of Statistics New Zealand’s own statistics, including the national accounts. Table 1 Some key Reserve Bank Financial Sector Statistics Collection Coverage Standard Statistical Return (SSR) Banks and Non-bank lending institutions Credit card survey Credit card issuers Liquidity survey Banks LVR new commitments Banks with residential mortgage lending Trade weighted indexes Major trading partner currencies Planned/Under Development Insurance data collection Licensed insurers Managed funds survey Investment and superannuation funds managed by NZ fund managers  Income statement survey Banks Bank balance sheet survey Banks NZ Securities database Securities issued in the New Zealand market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Financial statistics since the global financial crisis Our financial data collections have grown substantially in recent years for three reasons. First, the intensity of our prudential oversight has increased since the Global Financial Crisis of 2008/09. We’ve sought to strengthen our prudential regime for banks for example. As elsewhere, the GFC showed that risks around bank liquidity and funding in a period of financial turmoil were potentially much greater than anyone had expected. In 2010, we introduced new standards for banks requiring new minimum liquid asset requirements and a minimum core funding ratio. Introducing these new standards meant that we needed new liquidity and funding data to monitor compliance with the new standards at both an individual bank and financial system level. Another example of stronger prudential standards has been the introduction of temporary speed limits on the banks’ high-loan-to-value (LVR) lending reflecting our concern at the growing risks in the housing sector. This, in turn, required us to collect additional data on banks’ housing lending broken down by LVR. A second driver expanding our need for statistics has been the expansion of our regulatory responsibilities in recent years. Since 2008, the Reserve Bank has been given responsibility for the prudential regulation of the Non-Bank Deposit Taking Sector (NBDT). New standards for capital, liquidity and related party exposures inevitably require more data to be collected from the industry and may prompt a further upgrading of the sector’s statistics in the future. In 2010, we became the prudential regulator and supervisor of the Insurance sector, which up until that time had been relatively loosely regulated in New Zealand. This meant that there is currently little in the way of formal statistics on the insurance sector. Consequently we’re currently planning a data collection from the industry designed to meet our prudential and broader statistical needs. This is a major job as there are around 100 newly licensed insurers, and there are a wide range of potential risks to cover. The third driver behind the expansion in our financial collections has been growing demand from the general public, international agencies, media and financial analysts in the years following the financial crisis. There’s a growing appetite for more granularity and detail in financial statistics and for coverage of new areas. For example, there’s demand for more detail on the financial products and services offered by banks, expanded data on financial prices, and the ability to drill down into financial sub-sectors to a rather greater extent than before. And there’s much greater interest in understanding the capital markets – an area that to date hasn’t been well captured in statistics in New Zealand. Meeting demand for statistics in a fast moving world What statistics to produce and when poses important challenges for us as the main producer of New Zealand’s financial statistics. We need to respond to the increasing demands for data and data transparency but we also need to manage the cost, size and complexity of our statistical function and keep respondent burden to an acceptable level. Decisions to proceed with new collections must be based on a clear business case. In many respects the decision to begin a new financial data collection has the hallmarks of an investment decision to purchase a long-lived asset. We engage extensively with users in trying to identify clearly the benefits of the new data for financial analysis and policymaking in the future. Some of the benefits associated with new statistics accrue several years down the track once a good time series is developed. Choices made now about what (or) not to collect and how to collect it can have implications for the quality of financial analysis (or policymaking) for years into the future. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  In assessing the costs of the new collection we also focus on the costs that our respondents might incur in undertaking significant internal system changes and enhancements in order to provide the information. We have an obligation to ensure that the costs that they incur are “worth it”. Keeping up with structural change is always a challenge. The absence of financial statistics on a particular part of the financial sector can sometimes mask structural changes completely, because financial analysts have no way of seeing them. More often, we may be aware of shifting patterns but lack the statistics that can properly capture them. This can occur when new types of financial institution develop or when existing financial activities migrate from one type of institution to another that isn’t well represented by our statistics. Structural changes can be very difficult to detect when they involve new financial products, unregulated institutions or the provision of financial services from offshore. Structural change can also arise due to shifts in trading patterns between New Zealand and the rest of the world. Since the 1970s, the Bank has published weighted average measures of the New Zealand dollar relative to the currencies of our major trading partners. We report a variety of real and nominal measures of these trade weighted exchange rates (TWIs) on our website. Our flagship TWI was developed 15 years ago following the introduction of the euro and is based on five currencies (the US dollar, Australian dollar, yen, euro and British pound). Since then, trading patterns have changed dramatically. In particular, China is now the largest single destination for New Zealand’s merchandise exports and its exchange rate has become more flexible. Some years ago we developed a broader 14 currency trade weighted index, which included the Chinese currency and this is published daily on our website alongside the five currency index. However, we are currently undertaking a full review of all the exchange rate measures that we publish, which we hope to complete before the end of the year. Even with good statistical practices, and extensive liaison with users, many statistical collections ultimately become obsolete and need overhauling. Our standard statistical return for the banking system has served us well over the past 15 years but we’re now re-developing it. That reflects changes in the banking sector over the period and a better understanding of what to monitor in the sector. For example, the existing return provides little if any data on the banks’ incomes and expenses and other performance metrics. Our hope is that a new collection methodology will serve us well for the next 15 years. During the rapid changes associated with the GFC, it became clear that the traditional time lags in the availability of some of our financial sector data became too long for fully informed analysis. Increasingly we drew on data from banks’ internal management systems that could be provided closer to real time. We’ve used this experience to try and shorten the time lag in the availability of some of our financial data. We’ve done this in areas such as bank credit, liquidity, solvency and debt issuance. Timeliness is essential for good policy making but timing also needs to be weighed alongside other parameters such as data quality, respondent burden and the costs of processing the data more quickly. Financial systems are complex, and users – especially uninformed users– often have difficulty interpreting the data. Our challenge is to provide the external users of our statistics with metadata and guidance around the use of our statistics without overloading them with too much information. As we seek to re-develop many of our statistics over the next few years and develop new ones, we will need to give equal attention to the support we provide to the users of the new statistics. Let me conclude briefly by saying There is no magic to good policy making. Good decisions depend on good quality statistics and information. Official statistics play a crucial role in informing the decisions that we take. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  They also provide accountability for those decisions. As a user of official statistics we would like to see a number of improvements to the suite of data we consume. We want faster, higher frequency, more comprehensive and higher quality statistics. New Zealand’s financial sector statistics, most of which are collected by the Reserve Bank, are in the midst of substantial change. The insights and changes prompted by the global financial crisis have provided us with a unique opportunity to assess the quality and fitness of purpose of our financial statistics and given some urgency to introduce some new data collections, redevelop existing collections, and explore new avenues for data supply. Whilst we’re the biggest user of our own statistics, we are taking into account the needs of a broad range of stakeholders in meeting this challenge. I wish you a fruitful two days. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  DeLisle Worrell: What is a fair trade? Text of The Fair Trading Commission’s 10th Annual Lecture by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, Bridgetown, 14 March 2014. *      *      * Tonight I will explore with you the ways in which economists, accountants, lawyers and business people try to arrive at a fair price of things, a price that is somehow the “correct price”. To illustrate how difficult that is, I begin with three controversial examples, two of which will be familiar to you. My first example is taken from a book of short stories by the brilliant Jamaican satirist Anthony Winkler. The story I will quote from at some length is entitled “The man who knew the price of all fish”. Here is how that story opens:  Baba was a black man with no past. He had nothing ahead of him; he had nothing behind him. He had dropped out of oblivion one day, grew up in Montego Bay on the island of Jamaica, growing into manhood with a tremendous lower jaw burgeoning above his windpipe, a jawbone as large as the top jaw of any mastiff, a jaw that jutted out under his face disjointed, un-proportioned, stiff, mysteriously heavy, capped with a lower level of green teeth. He was a black man with no past and no future, with a forehead rounded and indented like a goat’s with two thick and hirsute arms that dropped below his waist when he walked.  His eyes, which people would squint to look into, were sunk deep inside his black face, sheltered by two fat lids that dropped thick as cream, squiggled down deep into the mystery blackness of his skin, and black themselves, so that except for their shine in the sunlight, they were hidden in the camouflage of his face.  And, on top of this, he had no past. He had no future; he had no wife; he had no children; he had nothing, except a small black hulled canoe, and some wire fishpots and mangrove-stained lines he used to catch fish with.  Every night he rowed out in his canoe and set his fishpots and threw down his lines, and every morning he rowed into Giddy Beach with a canoeful of dead fish and sold the dead fish to women as poor as himself, who would higgle him furiously, insult his fish, call him a jinal, meaning that he was intent on robbing them, paw over the corpses of the fish, hold him up to cynical comparison with more successful fishermen, accuse him of having a white mother, call him a Rastafarian, then walk away clutching contemptuously at the dead fish wrapped in newspaper, for which they had paid Baba’s price. For it was impossible to higgle him down, because he had no past and could not be either insulted or deprecated.  It did not matter what they called his mother, because he had no mother. He had no wife they could say cuckolded him; he had no children who got poor marks at school; he had no grandfather who bubbled over his senility on street corners; he had no cousins who were cat-o’nined for stealing; he had no aunts who painted their faces for tourist men at nights; he had no attachments which made him vulnerable to abuse; he had no one to be called into shame over.  And so no one had ever higgled him down on the price of his fish. If he said that the green-skinned, beak-teeth parrot-fish were a shilling each, it was impossible to shake him. The woman could call the fish gangrened, she could say it had slimy skin, she could say it was not a fish, she could say anything, it would not matter. She could higgle until her black face was greener than the parrot-fish, it would not matter. For once Baba had decided that a fish was worth a shilling, God could not alter its price. The fish was always sold for a shilling. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  My second example is familiar to you: it is the Emera purchase of Barbados Light and Power (BL&P) shares a couple of years ago. You will recall many people argued that the price being offered was too low, and that based on the company’s earnings or some other criteria, the shares were worth much more. Those who made such arguments were wrong. There is only one correct price known to economics, and that is the price at which a trade takes place, provided there is no coercion of seller or buyer, and no misinformation as to the quantity or quality of the good or service exchanged. The price offered by Emera for the shares of BL&P was a fair price, simply because many of us were happy to sell at that price. My third case study has become a cause celebre in the new international game of bashing the banks. I refer to the London inter-bank borrowing rate (Libor) scandal. I am sure you believe you know what happened: banks borrowed at one interest rate, but reported a different rate to the Bankers’ Association which compiled the averages, and that is why they have been prosecuted by the New York Attorney General. I have to tell you that that story bears no resemblance to the facts. Much of my understanding of these events is based on my correspondence on this matter with Professor Avinash Persaud.  In fact, the problem with Libor emerged in 2007 when the major banks in the London market stopped borrowing from each other at short term. It puzzles me greatly that no-one thinks to ask why a problem arose with Libor only as recently as 2007. The answer is that up until then banks did borrow from each other when they were temporarily short of cash. Every day each bank reported to the Bankers’ Association the rate at which it had borrowed, the Association computed the average, and the whole world used that as their reference rate.  You immediately see the problem: if nobody is borrowing, there is nothing to report, and the rate on which international finance is anchored disappears. That is what has been the case since 2007, when commercial banks began to withdraw from the short term market for funds. Round about 2005 British banks were sourcing as much as 1/3 of their funding by borrowing on financial markets at short term, rather than through customers’ deposits. Confidence in the value of the short term instruments used in the financial markets began to evaporate in 2005, with the large-scale failure of sub-prime mortgages in the US. By 2007 short-term international funding had all but dried up, including the sourcing of funds on the London interbank market. Libor had ceased to exist, and the most important reference rate for international financial transactions had disappeared. The market had no solution to this problem; in market economics there is no price if there is no transaction. Since 2007 there have been no transactions of substance between the major banks in the London market, and therefore no short term London interbank interest rate.  It is strange that economists and bankers the world over fail to acknowledge this fact. Notice I did not say that Libor had ceased to exist. The crucial word is “offer”; the banks continued to make token offers to buy and sell liquid funds, but those offers were deliberately set at unrealistic levels, for reasons that are obvious, if you think about it. I like old cars, and I own a version of the original Mini, built by the British Leyland Company. I have no intention of selling it, so if you were to offer to buy, I might quote you an outlandish price, rather than saying an outright no. In similar fashion, banks on the London market had a motive to quote unrealistic rates, since they did not wish to borrow on the interbank market.  A difficulty arises because the calculation was based on offer rates, rather than actual realised rates. I presume that, up until 2007 when the market dried up, the rate that was published by the British Bankers’ Association was in fact the average rate at which borrowings had actually been realised on the day. It may have been called an offer rate, but it was actually the realised rate, and should have been called the London inter-bank realised rate (LIBRR). This was the rate that disappeared in 2007. Offer rates remained, as many of them as there were banks, and none of them realistic, because nobody wanted to lend or borrow. The LIBRR, the only rate that mattered, because it is the only rate at which transactions actually took place, no longer exists.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  These three examples – the price of fish, the Emera transaction, and the disappearance of the London Interbank Realised rate – illustrate some of the conundrums economists face in their search for an objective way to determine what is a fair trade. Can a trade be fair if the seller adopts a take it or leave it attitude? Can we say that a trade is unfair if both buyers and sellers are happy with the price, even though others not party to the trade say it is unfair, whether or not they had an opportunity to participate? What is the fair price, in circumstances where no transaction actually takes place? Let me say a little about how economics has tried to address these questions.  One approach adopted by economics is to imagine that everything in the world is traded by open auction, and that the final auction price is the fair price. That is the model underlying the famous demand and supply cross which everyone who has done an elementary economics course will have encountered. The seller hopes for top dollar, the buyer is looking for a bargain, and the auctioneer achieves a price that is within an acceptable range for both parties. Except when he doesn’t. As you know, it often happens that an auction item fails to reach the reserve price, so this is not a complete answer to the question of the fair value. The auction is also not objective. The result depends on who attends, where and when it is held, the skill of the auctioneer, and many other factors. Similar items may fetch widely different prices at different auctions.  An alternative economic approach to determining fair value is to establish the cost of the item to be traded, and a fair profit for the trader. This approach is of limited applicability in practice, because the cost of bringing items to market is information which is seldom available to all parties at the time of the trade, and the notion of a “normal” profit is completely arbitrary. As the hearings on public utility prices which the FTC and its predecessor has conducted in the past four decades would by now have demonstrated, there are so many discretionary factors which go into the pricing decision that there is no single unambiguous cost of producing anything. The problem is especially intractable when we’re talking about services, such as airline transportation, hotel accommodation, legal services, banking and educational services, to cite just a few random examples.  Economics has made many attempts to make either of these two basic approaches – cost plus and the equilibrium of demand and supply – a better match with our everyday transactions in the real world. This is not the occasion to go into detail, but it is fair to summarise by saying that no convincing model has emerged that would adequately provide a fair value in the circumstances of the examples with which we began, or in many other instances that might be cited.  The most important element in determining values in practice is what actually obtains elsewhere in the market, for all goods and services and in all markets. Whatever it is you may be selling or buying, your benchmark for determining what is a fair price is the price of comparable products or services. If you are buying or selling a 3 bedroom, 2 bathroom house, you feel satisfied with your settlement price if the value is roughly what similar homes have sold for in the neighbourhood in recent times. If you are opening a hairdressing business, you will price your services on the basis of what others in the profession are charging.  The prices of Banks beer, Carib and Heineken are not identical, but they are comparable. The ruling prices that we observe in daily commerce cannot be explained by established economic theory, even though theory may be employed to rationalize them after the fact. That becomes clear whenever there are abrupt changes in the prices at which trades take place, in circumstances where nothing fundamental has been altered. The markets for property and financial assets provide the most striking examples. With no extraordinary change in demand or supply, and with little increase in cost, market prices from time to time spiral upwards, only to come crashing down eventually. That was the case with the housing boom in the US and Europe in the mid-2000s. The rapid upward spiral in prices from around 2003 cannot be explained with reference to changes in the demand and supply of housing; 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  prices developed a momentum of their own. Naturally, the price spiral did come to have an effect on demand and supply; more and more property developers vied to construct new homes, which in turn spurred frenetic activity in building supplies, furnishings, transport and related services. At the same time, as the price of housing soared beyond the reach of ordinary folk, many over-reached themselves, and many more were pushed out of the home buyers’ market. With supply going up and demand falling, the twain could never meet, and the famous intersection point with which is the enduring symbol of market economics became unattainable. In these circumstances, the market can never find the fair price.  Another circumstance in which the inadequacy of economists’ pretensions about determining fair value may be seen, is in the market for entirely new products and services. If I am not mistaken, Amazon.com, the internet retailer, made losses for most of the first decade of its existence. Yet its share price kept on rising throughout. For all of this time Amazon was funding its deficit with additional capital. As it turned out, Amazon’s business model was successful and the investors who waited out the company’s long incubation period have benefitted from an appreciation in the value of their holdings, but the majority of similar ventures went belly up, resulting in the collapse of the Dotcom Bubble.  A third illustration of the difference between economic theory and how prices are in fact determined, comes from the world of automobiles. The world’s leading manufacturers, Toyota, General Motors, Volkswagen , all sell some models that are virtually identical in markets all around the world. But the landed price of a Corrolla of a certain specification always varies from country to country, even when all else is identical: the factory where it was made, the shipping costs, etc. There is evidently not a single global market for Corrollas which clears at the fair value of a Corolla. Nor is there a determinate fair value at which all the currencies of the countries in which Corrollas are sold exchange with each other.  The evidence is all around us of our failure to understand what drives prices, and our inability to determine when a transaction is fairly valued. The increase in the demand for gold from wealthy Asians, and from others seeking a safe haven for their investments, is admittedly large, but it is nowhere near enough to explain the enormous spiral in gold prices. Violence and political instability has clearly been an element driving an upward spiral in oil prices, but actual supplies and new sources and technologies have not produced the expected correction. The relative values of the dollar, the yen and the euro owe much to traders’ guesses about what markets will do next, and little to the fundamental weaknesses or strengths in policy or economic performance of the countries concerned. Airline pricing is a complicated mystery to us all, involving so many factors that have to be projected years into the future, that an objective measure of operating cost, which takes replacement costs fully into account, is beyond practical reach.  Together with my colleague Dr. Winston Moore, and our late friend and colleague Prof Roland Craigwell, I recently edited an e-book which recorded how frequently and by how much prices actually change in the Caribbean. The book, which may be freely downloaded from the website of the publisher, the Caribbean Centre for Money and Finance, analyses price changes in Barbados, Curacao, St Lucia and Trinidad and Tobago, using data from the consumer price surveys conducted every month for the compilation of the Consumer Price Index. We found that in Barbados between 50 and 80 percent of consumer prices were changed every month, by as little as 3 percent for some items, and by as much as 29 percent for others. Moreover, very few prices moved in tandem with the prices of substitutes or similar items, and prices jumped around, rising rapidly one month and barely increasing or even falling in the following month, a phenomenon economists refer to as “low inflation persistence”. These features are not at all what might have been expected from either of the two approaches economists use to determine value. The demand for consumer items hardly fluctuates from month to month, nor does the supply, which, in the short term, will be taken from inventories which have already been priced.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Economists are understandably reluctant to accept the fact that their fundamental contributions to determining fair values have limited practical application. Most economists still believe that supply prices and demand by informed customers do conflate to produce a fair price, in spite of all the evidence to the contrary. This is not the place to discuss the very many studies that purport to find support for the conventional view and why there is such dissonance with everyday experience, nor is this the audience for such intricacies. Whatever may be their merit, it is clear that we need a way of arriving at fair values in trade that may be applied to our everyday transactions.  Accountants, lawyers and others have attempted to fill the vacuum left by the economists. However, their definitions all come back to use of the market mechanism. Their guidelines are tantamount to saying that any trade that is accepted by agents on both sides of the market may be said to be a fair trade. That is a tautology. We want to know which market price is fair value: is it the price I paid for my house just days before the bottom fell out of the market? I should think not. But neither is it the upset price at which the auctioneer disposes of my former property after the lender has repossessed. Somewhere in between the fair value lies, but the market cannot tell us what it is.  Is there no way of determining what is a fair trade? The answer to that question is nuanced.  In cases where today’s offer price is not much different from the price I paid the last time I bought a similar item, the markets work perfectly well. Everyone accepts that the price is fair if it accords with their expectations, and our expectations are formed on the basis of previous experience. The market does work, for known products with which everyone is familiar, and for modest price variation.  The market cannot provide a fair estimate of value when the product is unknown, and when prices vary sharply over time. For new or unfamiliar products there is no reference price to use as a point of departure. Typically such a price appears in due course, after a small number of dominant firms arrive at an understanding among themselves on the range of values at which the product will be offered.  The problematic cases occur when there is an abrupt change in the value at which the market makes a trade, and in circumstances when a fair value is needed, but there is no trade. The value may be needed for accounting and reporting purposes, as for example when assets have to be booked at market value, or it may be needed as a reference price for other transactions, as was the case with Libor.  Unless there is official intervention at this point, or unless a market leader emerges with sufficient power to impose their will, no settled price may emerge. In the latter case, when a price is imposed through market dominance, traded values may not be considered fair.  So, is it not possible to determine what is a fair trade, if the product price fluctuates a great deal? It is possible to arrive at a fair price, but only with official intervention. Left to its own devices, the market will continue to flounder, and agents on the buying or selling side will object that the price at which they are obliged to trade is unfair.  These circumstances warrant aggressive and credible official intervention, sufficient to establish a benchmark for values, determined on a basis which is fully explained, and which is consistent with market understanding of the fundamentals that drive that particular market, as well as being sensitive to production costs and market demand for the product.  Official intervention has gotten a bad rap in recent policy discussion, often because the policy has not been fully understood, is not in line with market sentiment, or is based on economic assumptions that are unrealistic. However, official intervention which is in line with economic fundamentals, which is fully explained, and which takes full account of the intentions, motives and resources of market participants, may be the only way of attaining a fair value in trade, in circumstances where there is no established norm for prices, or where there has been a large departure from the norm. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  I will conclude by applying this approach to some of the examples I have cited in this essay.  In the case of Libor, my view is that the Bank of England needs to set a benchmark rate, on the basis of a full analysis and documentation of the underlying market liquidity situation used to justify that rate, and invite banks to use that as their reference rate for international transactions, should they choose to do so. No unofficial financial institution in London has the wealth of data and analytical resources to take an informed view of the real costs of liquidity, comparable to what the Bank of England may deploy. The Bankers’ Association would be free to circulate offer rates, and should be encouraged to do so, but the only rate that may logically be averaged for the guidance of the market should be the Interbank Realised Rate, the rate at which money was actually borrowed and lent.  In contrast, I believe the Barbados authorities were correct to have stayed out of the determination of the settlement price for the BL&P shares. In this case, the market achieved a price which was accepted as a fair price by a majority of shareholders, and the transaction was executed in a clear and transparent manner. Not everyone agreed with the pricing, but it is the nature of markets that not everyone agrees.  The management of asset price bubbles, including surges in property prices, also justifies aggressive intervention by official institutions. The nature of the intervention will be determined by individual circumstance, but it must be large enough and must be pursued with determination and persistence, until the steam goes out of the inflationary surge. Sound data, convincing analysis and effective communication are the key to success.  Finally, what about the man who knew the price of all fish? For me, that is a true example of a market that functions as well as any market can, in the real world. As we all know, there are so many things having nothing at all to do with economics which influence whether we think a transaction is fair: whether the counterparty is someone we trust, whether the parties to the transaction have comparable bargaining power, whether the circumstances of the trade facilitate bargaining, whether the parties meet face to face, and many other factors. Small traders and informal markets often work to the satisfaction of all, if the price at which items are traded is left to the parties undertaking the transaction.  Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Ardian Fullani: Promoting a public debate around the new economic growth model Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Meeting with Agro-Business and Banking Sector Representatives, Lushnja, 13 March 2014. *      *      * Dear guests, It is a great pleasure for me to be here today to discuss one of the most important sectors of the Albanian economy – agriculture. Moreover, the fact that this meeting takes place in one of the areas with extraordinary potential for the development of this sector – I am referring here not only to Lushnja, but the entire Fier district – is very significant. I do not think I am surprising anyone, particularly those engaged daily with entrepreneurship, when I state that the recent years’ global economic crisis had an easily recognisable impact on the Albanian economy as well. The pace of economic growth has slowed markedly, particularly in the past two years. According to the latest forecasts, the Albanian economy is expected to pick up slightly in the next few years due to improved monetary and financial conditions, and the fact that our trading neighbours are, similar to Albania, showing the first signs of recovery after several years. However, we expect growth to remain weak for a while yet compared to the pre-crisis period. Under these circumstances, the Bank of Albania has been promoting a public debate around the new economic growth model, even before this global financial crisis took hold. The central bank’s stance has been clear and transparent to the public. We have constantly stated that the main sources of economic growth in the two decades of transition are reducing markedly, and the Albanian economy needs to be re-oriented towards new sectors in the very near future. The Bank of Albania sees agriculture – and, in a broader sense, the entire agro-business – as one of the main sectors standing at the front of this re-orientation. My presence here today, and Bank of Albania’s presence, should serve as a confirmation of our commitment to discussing the new growth model and the primary role that agriculture should play in it. * * * The Albanian economy had a very difficult year in 2013. Domestic demand, and consequently economic growth, hit one of the lowest levels in history. The inflation rate hit the lower bound of the Bank of Albania’s target tolerance band, while budget deficit and public debt increased considerably. The economic performance was also accompanied by uncertainties surrounding the external economy – Albania’s trading partners in particular –, but also the domestic economy considering that 2013 was an election year. All the above contributed to the deceleration and a more cautious behaviour of economic agents. Some of domestic product indicators saw significant changes. Worth mentioning is the construction sector, one of the top contributors to economic growth during 2000–08, which has shrunk considerably in the past years. Fortunately, the Albanian banking system remains solid and well-capitalised. Despite the increasing non-performing loan portfolio, banks have sufficient capital to address this phenomenon. I would like to elaborate more on this latter point. The performance of lending has become the focus of attention for policy-makers and economic agents. The slower economic growth was followed by sharp deceleration in lending. The reasons are quite understandable: on the one hand, businesses have reduced their demand for loans due to uncertainties relating to the sale of their own products; and on 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  the other hand, banks have been pursuing a more conservative approach to lending, being uncertain about the success of different business plans. Global theory and practice suggest that the investment and credit cycles progress in line with the performance of aggregate demand. In other words, we will see a stable recovery of lending only when economic growth recovers at a steady pace. However, as we have already stated, we believe that there is room within the Albanian reality for a better performance of lending. Channelling savings into profitable investments and supporting businesses with lending are the reasons for the existence of the banking system. We have been constantly emphasizing this message, and we have taken concrete steps, which have lowered the banking system’s financing cost and provided incentives for lending through an adequate regulatory environment. The Bank of Albania expects the situation to improve in the next few months, following the macro prudential measures we have taken to facilitate lending, and banks’ cleaning up of balance sheets and credit restructuring. I did not intend to make a random overview of the situation, but to show the Albanian economic reality at this moment and present the future challenges. It is easily understandable that the weak economic growth calls for innovative solutions from other new sectors. There is room for banks to lend to profitable projects as they continue to collect deposits and maintain sound levels of financial ratios. It is now the responsibility of all policy-makers to help entrepreneurship, in order to get a clear view of the right investments for the future. We have stated in our reports that the new sources of growth should originate from competitive sectors in the domestic and, even further, in the external market, so that the trade balance keeps on showing the improvements of 2013. Export growth is important in the long run to offset the moments of weakness in domestic demand, by diversifying the sources of income. Although the economy benefits from the increase in the exports of mineral products, the latter are often exported without any sort of processing in the domestic market and, consequently, make little contribution to improving productivity and competitiveness of the Albanian economy. Bank of Albania’s research and analyses show that traded goods’ sector has shown increasing productivity compared to the non-traded one. During the 2000s, the Albanian economy was most focused on non-traded sectors like construction, and hotels and tourism, with a low share in the growth of productivity. Improving them and successfully facing competition in the international markets should lie at the core of Albania’s new economic growth model. Bank of Albania’s analyses suggest that these structural changes will contribute to recovering the economy at a faster pace in the years ahead and restoring the previous growth rates. The agriculture sector meets the above criteria to lie at the core of this new model better than any other economic sector. On the other hand, we must recognise that despite Albania’s vast natural resources, we have not managed to fully utilise these potential resources for the agriculture sector to face competition in the international markets. The Bank of Albania sees great potential in agriculture, which, for a number of reasons, could not materialise in the past years but can become more beneficial in the future. Unlike other sectors, whose future benefits may be limited, agriculture may represent an important source for a second period of dynamic economic growth. The Albanian economy should be re-oriented towards those sectors whose capacity to compete in the international markets is the best signal for the development potential. The Albanian economy being a net importer of food products hints at a low level of competitiveness and represents one of the major future challenges. Lushnja is one of the main regions of the Albanian agriculture the recovery of our economy should start from – and holding this meeting here today is not mere coincidence. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Bank of Albania’s analyses have been paying increasing attention to developments and related perspectives in this sector. As we speak, 47% of the Albanian population and around 49% of the labour force lives in rural areas and engages in agriculture-related activities. According to the latest data for 2012, around 24% of the land area is used to cultivate different agriculture cultures. However, despite the vast resources concentrated in agriculture and the important role it plays as the main source of income for a considerable part of the population, only 20% of gross added value comes from this sector. The low share in economy in proportion to the considerable number of the population involved in agriculture indicates the low productivity in this sector. The latest data show that the exports of “food, beverages and tobacco” account for 6.2% of total exports. Livestock and agricultural products share 0.78% and 2.3% in total exports, respectively, whereas agro-industry shares 3%. Fier district represents a considerable part of production factors in agriculture. The latest data show that Fier shares 18% in total agricultural land, thus being classified as the district with the highest share in the country. In 2012, more than 56 thousand farms were registered in Fier, the highest number on a country-level. This number accounts for 16% of total farms in the country, providing the highest share of income from the sale of agricultural products, and about 20% of Albania’s total income. Related to livestock, Fier, and mainly Lushnja district, have a considerable share in livestock products. As a district, Fier produces 20% of total livestock production (milk), whereas Lushnja produces 9%. The above setting witnesses private efforts and entrepreneurship to develop this sector. In order for this process to go ahead at a more accelerated pace, the policy-makers should identify the advantages and problems this sector encounters, in order to address them quickly. In 2012, the Oxford University published a book focused on economic growth in South-Eastern European region. This book elaborates on a number of structural problems and challenges facing the Albanian economy, in its efforts to develop further. Agriculture has significant share in this analysis. Some of these problems are acknowledged and frequently mentioned, such as the important infrastructure-related issues that include the road, watering, draining, storage and processing systems. Problems with land ownership and the transformation of its function for other activities continue to remain a major obstacle for the country’s normal development, and raise ongoing concerns relating to the price and use of this important factor of production, and further on, to the normal functioning of product markets and other land-related factors. Agriculture is affected by other structural problems that need a long-term solution. Average-size farms continue to be relatively small, thus restricting the development and growth of average productivity, or differently known as “the economies of scale”. There are many reasons behind this. We can mention the inheritance of the communist system and the separation of land after its collapse. As it was stated above, the lack of a normal land market also due to ownership problems, naturally plays an important role in establishing larger farms and, consequently, more competitive ones. These problems also affect the agricultural sector-bank relationship and the lending activity at home. The recent data show that lending to the agricultural sector accounts for 1.25% of total lending to businesses, on average. It is a considerably low figure, which should raise our concern, considering that this sector contributes by one/fifth to the gross domestic product. I believe that there are two reasons driving the banking system to be reluctant to finance different projects in this sector. First, risk classification and categorisation for credit to agricultural sector is a commitment different from the other activities. The lack of formalisation, even for matters such as regular maintenance of information and statistics 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  about ownership, and financial statistics, damage the farmers’ credibility from the early steps of lending. I find that there is room for prudential intervention by public institutions, not to condemn farmers, but to better prepare them and assist them in formalising their business. In light of this, the Bank of Albania has in the past years initiated a campaign to improve the financial education of the Albanian people. The recent results of our questionnaires indicate that the Albanian urban population shows increasing and a more complete knowledge related to various financial problems they encounter. But the results on rural areas reveal that the education level remains considerably lower. Second, the Albanian agricultural sector suffers from the lack of information and evaluation. As I noted above, one of the reasons why banks hesitate to increase their lending is the lack of complete information on farms and their products. Further, the quality certification standards for Albanian products remain low. One of the main reasons restricting higher exports and, consequently, higher production, is the lack of certification in accordance with the highest standards for all the Albanian agricultural products. This type of certification does not only prove the elementary food security required by the European markets, but also establishes a starting point for competition in the market. The presence of these standards at a reliable level would lead to the improvement of all market mechanisms, by helping bank lending in proportion to the quality of products. In the framework of concerns facing the agricultural sector, the Bank of Albania has increased its interest in microcredit institutions. In many developing countries, these institutions have led to an increase in lending, particularly to the agricultural sector and the rural population in general, thus trying to work out the formalisation and evaluation problems I stated above. I find that the successful experience of microcredit institutions in other countries could be imported to Albania. Consequently, all policy-makers should get closer to these institutions and help them grow, as the microcredit institutions are the ones that have great potential to become important lenders to the private agricultural enterprises, better than any other intervention by financial and public institutions. Let me conclude by saying once more that the agricultural sector should be an important source for Albania’s further development. But the solution to the problems facing this sector calls not only for greater attention, but above all, for a modern way of thinking and a more concrete cooperation between all related stakeholders. I, therefore, hope that today’s meeting will contribute to drawing the attention towards this important sector and push forward the required structural reforms, which would also encourage the cooperation between agriculture and the banking and financial sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jeremy C Stein: Crowdfunding for community development finance Welcoming remarks by Mr Jeremy C Stein, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Crowdfunding for Community Development Finance Conference, Washington DC, 24 March 2014. *      *      * Good morning. Let me start by welcoming everyone to the Federal Reserve. Today’s topic of crowdfunding for community development finance is an important and topical one, and I want to thank you all for helping us think through the challenges and opportunities presented by this new technology as it relates to raising funds for local communities. This gathering is particularly timely for two reasons. First, in many communities, traditional resources for community development are shrinking, and the field is actively seeking to identify new sources of funding. Second, the Securities and Exchange Commission recently released its proposed rule under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups – or JOBS – Act, which is likely to influence the environment for crowdfunding in general and for community development finance specifically. To the extent that most people know about crowdfunding at all, they may associate it with tech startups or independent movie production, since the press coverage has often focused on examples in these areas. These stories typically describe the use, and often success, of crowdfunding, as aspiring inventors and artists are able to tap the Internet to raise the money that can help make their visions a reality. The question for today is whether this power of the crowd can be harnessed to support community development, a field that has not widely benefitted from crowdfunding thus far. Indeed, when I say “power of the crowd,” it is worth noting that while individual investment amounts may be small, the total amount of funds raised from this source can be large. Although we lack reliable data on the current size of crowdfunding, some sources indicate that it’s a multibillion-dollar industry, with more than 1 million separate offerings each year, and that the field is growing rapidly.1 While crowdfunding may not be as well known in the community development context, there are, in fact, existing models of crowdfunding for community development that we can learn from. I understand that several of these existing models will be discussed on a panel later this morning. One local example is Fundrise, an investment platform for commercial real estate that gives individuals the opportunity to invest directly in neighborhood businesses. Fundrise started on the H Street corridor here in D.C., and has completed 18 real estate deals totaling more than $10 million. For example, this platform attracted 361 people to invest a total of $350,000 toward the redevelopment of 906 H Street, N.E. Currently a vacant building, this property, which is located on the quickly revitalizing H Street corridor, now has the funding necessary to renovate the property and transform it into a restaurant or retail space. A second example is Calvert Foundation’s Community Investment Note. This is an interesting one because Calvert Foundation was essentially doing something akin to crowdfunding for community development before Internet platforms became available. As you may know, Calvert Foundation is a certified Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) that was established in 1988 as a 501(c)3 when Calvert Investments found strong interest among its clients to invest directly in underserved communities. Since 1995, 13,000 people have invested in these notes, which provide a financial return while economically empowering communities.2 According to Calvert Foundation, these                                                 1  Massolution, “2013CF: The Crowdfunding Industry Report”. 2  Calvert Foundation. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  13,000 individual investments have collectively helped to create 430,000 jobs for low-income individuals, built or rehabilitated 17,000 affordable homes, and financed close to 26,000 nonprofit facilities and social enterprises.3 Both the Fundrise and Calvert Foundation examples hint at the potential of scaling up crowdfunding for community development. Many of you may be wondering, “Why is the Fed interested in this topic?” First, at a fundamental level, it’s important for us to keep our finger on the pulse of financial innovation and the changing dynamics of the financial services industry – even in those parts of the industry where we do not have a direct regulatory role. We know that financial innovation can offer both opportunities and pitfalls; by carefully and even-handedly studying each new product or service at an early stage in its lifecycle, we can hope to better understand both the potential benefits, as well as any risks for adverse impacts on households and communities. Also, through convenings like today’s event and by sharing promising practices, the Federal Reserve System has a longstanding history of supporting local and regional community and economic development efforts that contribute to economic growth and employment. To the extent that crowdfunding has the potential to bring new capital into low- and moderate-income communities, we want to be involved in helping the learning process along. As I mentioned earlier, many people associate crowdfunding with tech startups and art initiatives. However, there may be ways that this new form of fundraising can be adapted to community development investing. Given how wide open the issues are, today’s event is a working meeting with discussion groups. We appreciate your willingness to share your time with us, and we look forward to benefitting from your insights. Thank you.                                                 3  Calvert Foundation (PDF). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Kikuo Iwata: Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing and Japan’s recent economic and financial developments Speech by Mr Kikuo Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the International Centre for the Study of East Asian Development (ICSEAD), Kitakyushu, 24 March 2014. *      *      * Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. Introduction I express my thanks for having such a large audience gathered from Kitakyushu and other regions, and also for giving me an opportunity to speak in front of you. About a year ago, I was appointed as Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, on March 20, 2013. In the 40 years up to that time, I had been teaching in college while studying as an economist within academia, and in the latter half of those years I consistently emphasized that the biggest challenge for Japan’s economy was to overcome deflation at the earliest possible time, and that the role of monetary policy to that end was critical. On April 4, 2013, shortly after the current governor and deputy governors, including myself, assumed their duties, the Bank of Japan decided to introduce an unprecedented scale of accommodative monetary policy called quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE), and so far, it has been pursuing the policy as scheduled. Today, I will explain the aim of the QQE in light of recent developments in Japan’s economy. To understand the QQE, it is necessary to gain your understanding of the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) that the Bank aims at – or, in other words, the Bank’s inflation targeting policy – and the thinking behind the policy. Let me start with this point (Chart 1). I. Price stability target A. Why is deflation problematic? I mentioned earlier that overcoming deflation at the earliest possible time was the biggest challenge for Japan’s economy. While deflation is “a persistent decline in prices”, it often seems to have been used to refer to “a situation in which the economy is in a vicious cycle of price decline and recession” – that is, the same meaning as “deflationary recession”. In terms of sentiment toward spending in everyday life, you might often think that a decline in prices is a favorable thing. As prices of various goods and services decline, you can get more at the same price. What is the problem (Chart 2)? Decline in aggregate demand due to deferred spending At the outset, we need to acknowledge the difference between prices in general and those of individual goods and services. As for the former, there are indicators such as the CPI and the domestic corporate goods price index. Price stability that the Bank aims at is defined by the CPI. The CPI shows changes in the total amount of expenditure required to purchase the equivalent goods and services purchased by households at a given time, which is called the “reference period”. The CPI is calculated by giving a value of 100 for the reference period and comparing prices of the observation period with those of the reference period. Inflation is defined as a situation 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  in which the CPI persistently rises; on the contrary, deflation is defined as a situation in which the CPI keeps falling. A price rise or fall of individual items such as vegetables and television sets does not constitute either inflation or deflation. Keeping that in mind, let me now explain what the consequence of a persistent decline in general prices – rather than price declines in individual goods and services – will look like. To be sure, a decline in prices itself will have the effect of raising your real income. However, a persistent decline in prices means that the more you wait, the more goods and services you can get at the same price. In other words, it means that the value of cash and deposits increases just by holding them. Thus, firms and households will hoard money as much as possible and defer actions that are associated with spending, such as consumption and investment. Put in the jargon of economics, aggregate demand will decline. That is a problem. If aggregate demand declines and sales of goods and services decrease, firms will reduce production to a level consistent with the decline in sales. As corporate profits will decline and employee income will fall accordingly, people’s consumption and housing investment – as well as firms’ business fixed investment – will further stagnate. Namely, aggregate demand will further decline, and that will induce a further decline in price levels. Thus, the economy will be trapped in a vicious cycle of price declines and recession (Chart 3). Increase in effective debt burden In addition, as a decline in prices means that the value of money for goods and services will increase, for those who borrow money, the value of money that they will have to repay in the future will increase. Thus, that represents an increase in the effective debt burden. It might be easier to understand if you consider a case in which you have a mortgage. As the amount to be repaid is fixed while wages and real estate prices decline due to deflation, you feel the debt service burden gradually increase. The effective burden of debt you already have will become heavier and, even for future borrowings, somewhat more than nominal interest rates suggest. Therefore, firms and households will become cautious about borrowing money. In addition, households and firms that have already borrowed will try to repay their debts as soon as possible, even by restraining their consumption and investment. Thus, housing investment and firms’ business fixed investment will stagnate and aggregate demand will become compressed, thereby resulting in a vicious cycle of recession and price declines (Chart 3). B. Why is stable and moderate inflation desirable? By contrast, in an environment of stable and moderate inflation, for example, in a case where the CPI rises about 2 percent year-on-year, the mechanism that is a reversal of what I have just explained under deflation will work (Chart 4). Increase in aggregate demand due to rejuvenated spending Namely, if you can envisage that prices will rise, many of you might wish to purchase things that you can buy as much as possible before the prices rise. A front-loaded increase in demand ahead of the consumption tax hike next month has often been referred to these days, and a similar mentality works in a consistent manner. Of course, like perishables, there are a number of goods that cannot be purchased in advance, and most services cannot be brought forward. Here, I am just talking about the trends as a whole. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Unlike a consumption tax hike, which is a one-off event that alters prices at a certain point of time, the price level will gradually rise. Therefore, the incentive to bring spending forward will not work as powerfully as in the case of a front-loaded increase in demand ahead of the tax hike, but rather slowly and constantly. As spending in terms of consumption and investment is stimulated due to the future price outlook, aggregate demand in the economy as a whole will increase. Sales of goods and services will rise and firms will expand their production to a level consistent with the increased sales. As corporate profits improve and employee income increases, consumption and housing investment, as well as firms’ activity – including business fixed investment – becomes further rejuvenated. In other words, aggregate demand will further increase and prices will rise accordingly. A virtuous cycle of a buoyant economy and inflation will be generated (Chart 4). Costs of rapid inflation As a matter of course, what I have in mind here is stable and moderate inflation, not unexpected rapid inflation or so-called hyperinflation. As you are well aware of, hyperinflation is the last thing we want. If a rise in wages and pensions cannot keep up with rapid inflation, your real income will decline and the real value of cash and deposits saved will also decline rapidly. Through reducing the effective debt service burden of past debt, an unexpected income transfer, so to speak, from creditors to debtors will occur, in which creditors will lose and debtors will gain. By contrast, in case you wish to newly borrow money, the lender will require a high interest rate in preparation for future high inflation, making your fund-raising difficult. If rapid inflation goes on, there is the need to frequently revise the prices of goods and services. As it becomes ever more difficult to envisage future manufacturing costs and selling prices, firms will not be able to even prepare their production plans. The economy will tumble into turmoil. Therefore, what the Bank is aiming at is that stable and moderate inflation continues, and not by any means generating hyperinflation (Chart 4). C. Advantages of inflation targeting policy In order to achieve stable and moderate inflation, what kind of policy will be desirable? One answer is a policy framework called inflation targeting. The Bank has been pursuing monetary easing under the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. That can be understood as a typical example of inflation targeting policy (Chart 5). Enhancing policy credibility and predictability Inflation targeting policy has a number of advantages. To begin with, as the policy contains a specific numerical target for the future inflation rate, it can be judged objectively whether the target has been met. Through enhanced transparency, a central bank’s obligation to be accountable with regard to policy judgment and the status of achieving the target will become crucial. That will create a situation in which credibility in monetary policy is likely to be enhanced. As it becomes easier to forecast price levels, various economic entities can conduct economic activity on the basis of such forecasts. The predictability of future prices will be further reinforced as credibility in monetary policy becomes enhanced (Chart 5). 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Preventing hyperinflation About the Bank’s policy, some demonstrate concern that when the time comes for the Bank to stop monetary easing, it might be difficult to do so due to pressure from financial markets or the government, and that eventually leads to inducing hyperinflation. The adoption of inflation targeting also is effective against such concern. The reason for that is that the inflation targeting policy is a device to hold a specific numerical target for the future inflation rate and make a commitment to achieving a situation that generates neither inflation above the target rate nor deflation. Though the inflation targeting policy has often been discussed in Japan as a measure to overcome deflation, it was originally adopted in countries like New Zealand in the 1980s that suffered high inflation. I would like you to understand that, in case the economy should overheat and the inflation rate should rise well above the 2 percent price stability target, the Bank has already made a commitment to taking appropriate measures in line with the framework of inflation targeting policy. I should stress that, in line with the mission stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act, the Bank will conduct monetary policy based on its judgment and responsibility while facilitating communication with the government (Chart 5). II. Aim of the QQE and the current situation of Japan’s economy So far, I have explained the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI; namely, the so-called inflation targeting policy and the thinking behind that. Now, I will talk about the contents and effects of the QQE, which was introduced as a policy to achieve the 2 percent price stability target, by also taking into account the current state of Japan’s economy. A. What is the QQE? The QQE consists of two pillars (Chart 6). The first pillar is the commitment under which the Bank will achieve the price stability target of 2 percent as soon as possible. The Bank has made a clear commitment that it “will achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years”. The second pillar is to engage in actions that embody the commitment specified in the first pillar. As exemplified by the phrase “quantitative and qualitative monetary easing”, those actions are to increase the “quantity” of the Bank’s balance sheet and change the “quality” of its asset purchases. An increase in quantity requires massively increasing the amount of money the Bank directly supplies to the financial system – this is called “the monetary base” – at an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion yen. Measures to increase the monetary base are mainly through the purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs), and the Bank will purchase JGBs so that their outstanding amount will increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen. A change in quality requires purchasing assets with a higher risk profile. Among the JGBs, the Bank has started purchasing those with longer remaining maturities. In addition, it has increased the amounts of purchases in exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) in order to reduce risk premiums on assets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  When we decided to introduce the QQE last April, we used the expression “a new phase of monetary easing both in terms of quantity and quality”. The Bank has been pursuing monetary easing in exactly that manner, at an unprecedented scale. B. Working on expected real interest rates While the QQE consists of those two pillars, as far as its transmission channels are concerned, the most important factor of all in terms of having an effect on the economy is lowering expected real interest rates. The following explanations will become somewhat complicated, but please bear with me (Chart 7). Expected real interest rates are obtained by subtracting the expected rates of inflation from the nominal interest rates actually observed in financial markets or over the counter. While nominal rates – that is, objective interest rates – are visible, expected real interest rates are those that people forecast subjectively, based on their respective price projections, and thus various rates exist on a person-by-person basis. Viewed from the borrowers’ side, real interest rates are equivalent to borrowers’ subjective expectations regarding their real costs of borrowing, taking into account price changes, when they borrow money at a certain nominal interest rate. Consequently, the lower the expected real interest rates of an economic entity, the more subdued the entity expects its real cost of borrowing to be. The QQE has the effect of reducing nominal interest rates and the effect of lifting each economic entity’s inflation expectations, and both will exert downward pressure on expected real interest rates, which are derived from subtracting the expected rates of inflation from the nominal rates (Chart 8). C. Spillover effects on the real economy If many economic entities lower their expected real interest rates, that will stimulate demand in the real economy in a number of ways. For example, when real interest rates decline, investment in cash, deposits, and fixed-income securities (excluding inflation-indexed bonds) becomes less attractive; thus, people will shift their portfolios from those financial assets to equities and tangible assets such as land and housing, or to foreign currency-denominated assets with higher returns. The rise in equity prices and the appreciation of foreign currencies will stimulate private consumption through the wealth effect (Charts 9 and 10). In addition to the decline in expected real interest rates, other factors – including an increase in consumption and an improvement in export conditions due to the depreciation of the yen – will encourage firms to be more aggressive in their business fixed investment (Charts 11 and 12). According to the Business Outlook Survey, conducted jointly by the Cabinet Office and the Ministry of Finance, the index of business conditions for large enterprises will decline to minus 9.8 in the April–June quarter but is expected to rise to plus 8.3 in the July–September quarter. That of small and medium-sized enterprises follows more or less the same pattern with that of large enterprises (Chart 13). While that may be partly due to statistical peculiarities, it suggests that firms anticipate a subsequent decline in spending after the consumption tax hike in April 2014 as a result of the front-loaded increase in spending to be relatively short-lived. If a shortage of aggregate demand in the economy as a whole is eliminated through an increase in demand such as private consumption and investment, price levels will naturally rise. In fact, the recent developments in the CPI show that Japan’s economy is following a path toward overcoming deflation as expected (Chart 14). 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Production increases as demand expands, and thus employment conditions will also improve. That does not suddenly result in a rise in wages and bonuses, but tends to first lead to an increase in the number of employees, mainly non-regular employees. Nevertheless, due to an expansion in corporate profits and tightness in the labor market, the income each employee receives will gradually increase (Chart 15). If employee income as a whole increases in such a manner, that will further elevate the consumption of households, including those that have not benefited from the wealth effect through a rise in stock prices or the appreciation of foreign currencies. An increase in corporate profits will increase business fixed investment. Those increases in demand will again lead to an increase in income. An improvement in fiscal conditions due to an increase in tax revenue and an improvement in pension financing caused by a rise in asset prices will also alleviate people’s concern about the future as a whole, and thereby exert positive effects on the economy. In such a manner, by overcoming deflation starting with the QQE, a virtuous cycle of the economy is expected to continue (Chart 16). D. Outlook up to fiscal 2015 As for the outlook, Japan’s economy is expected to continue with a moderate recovery as a trend, supported by an improvement in the employment and income situation, while it is expected to be affected by the front-loaded increase and the subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the consumption tax hike. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, is likely to be around 1¼ percent for some time. After that, it is expected to gradually return to the rising trend and is likely to reach around the 2 percent price stability target toward the end of fiscal 2014 through fiscal 2015 (Chart 17). Concluding remarks Let me conclude my remarks by touching on the economy of Kitakyushu (Chart 18). Kitakyushu’s economy was long stagnant after the Lehman shock, but it has gradually been improving in the region’s main force – the manufacturing sector – partly on the back of a correction in the yen’s appreciation. Recently, an improvement has started to spread from large to medium- and small-sized firms, and the regional economy has been recovering moderately on the whole. Historically, Kitakyushu prospered since the Meiji Period, centering on the Chikuho coalfield and Moji Port, and by utilizing this location advantage, a government-managed steelworks started operation in Yahata in 1901. For reference, while the Kitakyushu branch of the Bank of Japan marked its 120th anniversary last year, the precursor of that branch – namely, the Saibu branch – was established around that time, in 1893. Kitakyushu has represented Japan’s modernization, and despite a number of difficulties, it has thrived and subsequently has been improving and evolving. As a result of many years of tremendous efforts, Kitakyushu has established itself as one of the prominent industrial areas in Japan – with electrical machinery and the automobile industry, in addition to the steel industry – as well as a base for international trade with Asian and other countries. Other than on the industrial front, Kitakyushu City has become one of the world’s environmental cities, and recently was selected as a “model city for green growth” by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), and as a “future city” by the Japanese government. In addition, the government has decided to recommend “local industrial heritage sites of the Meiji period”, which include Yahata steelworks-related facilities in Kitakyushu, to the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  (UNESCO) as candidates for World Heritage sites this fiscal year. This region has started to grab the spotlight in industrial tourism. As global competition intensifies in the years ahead, the path Kitakyushu follows might not be a smooth one. However, this region has a strong industrial base, including manufacturing technology and human resources, which has been established over many years. This region also has well-developed traffic and distribution systems, with a 24-hour airport and the starting point of the East Kyushu Highway that extends to Miyazaki City scheduled to be opened in fiscal 2014. While fully utilizing those strengths, I strongly believe that Kitakyushu’s economy will further grow and develop into the future. Thank you.    
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11  
12 BIS central bankers’ speeches  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 13  
14 BIS central bankers’ speeches  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 15  
16 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Yves Mersch: Efficient retail payments – key in strengthening the competitiveness and growth potential of the EU Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the ECB/Bank of Italy Workshop on “Interchange Fees”, Rome, 24 March 2014. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a great pleasure for me to be here today to contribute to this discussion on retail payments in the euro area and in Europe more broadly. But first of all, I would like to thank the Banca d’Italia for organising this workshop jointly with the ECB, and for hosting it in this beautiful setting. I am also grateful to Fabio Panetta for opening this event in the morning. Payment systems and payment schemes, like this city, don’t get built in a day. Good things take time. Payments are a network industry, and they rely on cooperation between banks and other payment service providers – cooperation that calls for resolve and stamina. Today, I would like to talk about retail payments and the ECB’s and the Eurosystem’s role in those payments, and to touch on current developments and future challenges. I’d also like to say a few words on interchange fees, the issue of this workshop. Why are retail payments important? Payments oil the wheels of the single market. They facilitate the “four freedoms”– the free movement of people, goods, services and capital. Without an efficient electronic payment system, the Union would not have been able to develop and grow over the years. And neither should we forget the contribution made by the large-value and retail payment systems to Europe’s economy at the height of the crisis and in its aftermath. They helped Europe’s economy to run smoothly. Some of you may still remember the times when wages were paid in cash, or the inconvenience of obtaining foreign currencies for trips abroad, the complexities of cross-border payments, not to mention the plans disrupted by unforeseen exchange rate movements. You may even remember how interbank positions were cleared and settled at a physical meeting at the central bank at the end of the business day. Efficient, robust, standardised and integrated retail payments and payment systems are essential to make trade easier, to increase competition and innovation, to foster financial integration and to complete the single currency project. They play a key part in strengthening the competitiveness and growth potential of the European Union. In 2012 the ECB published a study, conducted with 13 EU central banks, on the social and private costs of different retail payment instruments.1 The study showed that the social costs of retail payment instruments are substantial and amount to €45 billion, i.e. 0.96% of GDP for the participating EU countries.2.So, in terms of costs, retail payments certainly matter. An ECB study from 2009 shows that in countries with more developed retail payment services banks perform better – both in terms of their accounting ratios and their profit and                                                 1  See Schmiedel H., Kostova G. and Ruttenberg W., “The social and private costs of retail payment instruments – A European perspective”, Occasional Paper Series, No 137, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, September 2012. The paper is available at https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecbocp137.pdf. 2  Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Netherlands, Portugal, Romania, Spain and Sweden. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  cost efficiency.3 Retail payment transaction technology itself can also improve bank performance, and evidence shows that heterogeneity in retail payment instruments is associated with enhanced bank performance. Similarly, a higher usage of electronic retail payment instruments seems to stimulate banking business. There is also evidence showing that retail payment services generate more stable revenues for banks and decrease their risk. So, also in terms of bank performance, retail payments matter. In this context, the discussions on “ring-fencing” retail banking activities are relevant. Retail banking is about taking deposits, offering credit to the real economy and providing payment services to firms and households. These three functions are key public services. To sum up, retail payments are important, and maybe more important than people often think. I am convinced that even greater efficiency in payment systems would further advance the development of the internal market. Let me now turn to the role of the ECB and the respective national central banks. The central banks’ role One of the basic tasks of the European System of Central Banks is to promote the smooth operation of payment systems. The integration and harmonisation of retail payment systems within the euro area is therefore of vital concern to us. Progress in this field has only been achieved gradually. It takes time and is sometimes difficult to recognise. However, looking back to when the euro was introduced, we can see that we have made some considerable progress. Back in 2000 most cross-border credit transfers were processed via correspondent banking arrangements, which were based on bilateral relationships between financial institutions. To provide adequate geographical coverage, many bilateral arrangements were needed. It was a system which was considerably less efficient than the fully automated interbank funds transfer systems that were used for national payments in most Member States. These arrangements might also explain the high charges for cross-border payments at that time. The European Commission’s report “Bank charges in Europe”,4 published in April 2000, stated that the average total cost of a cross-border credit transfer was €17.10 for a €100 transfer. Moreover, a cross-border credit transfer took on average nearly 3½ days. Since the introduction of the euro, the ECB and the other Eurosystem central banks have worked in close cooperation with the Commission and the payments industry to establish the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). The ECB has acted as a catalyst here, providing analytical work and producing progress reports, together with the national central banks, as well as organising conferences and other events to bring market participants together. It has also worked closely with EU legislators, supporting a harmonised legal framework for retail payments. It has resulted in some concrete achievements: • Pan-European schemes for basic retail payments, i.e. the SEPA credit transfer and direct debit, were introduced by the payments industry in January 2008 and November 2009 respectively. • Costs for cross-border payments are the same as for national payments, and                                                 3  See Hasan I., Schmiedel H. and Liang S., “Return to retail banking and payments”, Working Paper  Series, No 1135, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, December 2009. The paper is available at http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp1135.pdf. 4  See http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/health_consumer/library/surveys/sur14_en.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  • The execution time for a credit transfer does not take more than one banking day (D+1) and the trend is clearly towards same day – or even real-time – settlement of retail payment transactions. The ECB has also been a strong advocate of the SEPA end date regulation and it specified 1 February 2014 as the end date for migration to SEPA credit transfer and direct debit. Despite the Commission’s late amendment allowing banks to process old payment formats until 1 August this year, most Member States succeeded in migrating before the original deadline of 1 February 2014. The most recent migration figures from February 2014 shows that 93.9% of all euro area credit transfers, and 80.3% of all euro area direct debits were processed in SEPA format. Current developments, future challenges As I said earlier, good things take time. That applies to the European Union and to the creation of an integrated market for retail payments. The successful migration to SEPA credit transfer and direct debit does not mark the end of our efforts in retail payments, but lays the foundation for new and innovative payments, and further integration. I wish to take this opportunity to mention some areas in which we would like to see further integration and harmonisation. First of all, cards. Cards are the alternative to cash at the point of sale. 12 years after the introduction of euro banknotes and coins, we still don’t have an integrated European market for card payments. That is why the Eurosystem is currently preparing a report entitled “Card payments in Europe – a renewed focus on ‘SEPA for cards’”. It will emphasise the need to harmonise principles, business practices and rules, as well as technical standards relating to card payments. We would also like to see payments become faster. Although the D+1 requirement for credit transfers – part of the Payment Services Directive – came into effect in 2012, an increasing number of merchants want to have a payment confirmation before providing the goods or services, and person-to-person payments via mobile phones seem to have great potential. It is becoming clearer by the day that the market wants increasingly faster retail payment execution. Such services are already available in some Member States, but they need to be widely available across Europe. Even if we are focusing on the euro area and the rest of Europe, we should however also aim for integration in a broader context, by bringing forward SEPA standards to a global level as an input for others. SEPA is based on the ISO standard for financial services messaging and on clear business rules.5 The use of this global standard and these rules for retail payments worldwide would further facilitate the interlinking of payment systems and increase efficiency for all involved. Think about its potential for remittances by migrant workers. Security, unsurprisingly, continues to be a critical topic. Advances in technology mean that the safety and security of retail payments remain of vital interest to market participants and authorities alike. The SecuRe Pay Forum published its recommendations for improving the security of internet payments in January 2013, and it recently published its “public note on security of payment account access services”.6. The creation of the Euro Retail Payments Board (ERPB) by the ECB’s Governing Council is another step taken by the Eurosystem to foster an integrated, innovative and competitive market for retail payments in euro in the EU. The ERPB will bring together representatives from both the supply and demand sides to identify strategic issues and work priorities,                                                 5  See “ISO 20022 Financial Services – Universal financial industry message scheme”. 6  See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/pubnote201403securitypaymentaccountaccessservicesen.pdf. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  including business practices, requirements and standards, and ensure they are addressed. The Commission will participate as an observer. Similar “social dialogue” bodies have already been set up and are successfully operating in several Member States. The move to establish the ERPB was very well received and its first meeting is scheduled for 16 May. Finally, I would like to say a few words on virtual currency schemes. Bitcoin is perhaps the most notable and topical of these, but certainly no longer the only one. Many media commentators have been wondering what impact these currencies will have on retail payments and even on central banks. I agree that virtual currency schemes are an interesting phenomenon and should not be ignored or dismissed. The ECB was one of the first public authorities to see their potential and their risks and published a detailed analysis in 2012.7 Despite the overall rise in the value of bitcoin since the publication of the report and the media attention it is getting, our conclusions still seem to be valid, namely, that such currencies are not (at least yet) economically important. In Europe, virtual currencies do not pose a risk to price stability or financial stability, but do pose a risk for users. However, this user risk is more related to speculative investments and consumer protection, and not necessarily to payments. Nevertheless, we are closely following developments and keeping in touch with other authorities. All in all, we are living in a time of rapid change. It may well hold in store some novel and even unconventional challenges as we create the building blocks for further financial integration. Interchange fees Let me conclude by touching on interchange fees, the topic of today’s workshop. The fees have turned out to be a rather controversial issue, not only in Europe but also worldwide. The Eurosystem’s position is neutral on interchange fees. But clarity is needed so that banks and other payment service providers can decide on future investments. That clarity has now been provided in the Commission’s proposal for an interchange fee regulation, which we very much welcome. Even with a cap on interchange fees, banks should seize the opportunities that a “SEPA for cards” offers. The growth potential for cards at the point of sale is still substantial in Europe, especially in some countries. The favourable outlook for card transactions is a business case in itself, even for a scheme that operates with a low interchange fee. Building the European Union is a slow and laborious but ultimately rewarding process. The migration to SEPA credit transfer and direct debit marks the completion of another element in that construction, and there are more to come. I am sure that today’s workshop will give us new insights and help pave the way for further design and construction work, which is of such value to the people of this continent. Finally, a word of thanks to the colleagues of the Banca d’Italia for their warm welcome and hospitality. And, of course, thank you all for attending this workshop today. Unfortunately, I soon have to leave for Frankfurt, so let me wish you “buon appetito” and a fruitful afternoon session.                                                  7  See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/virtualcurrencyschemes201210en.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Takahide Kiuchi: Recent developments in economic activity, prices and monetary policy Speech by Mr Takahide Kiuchi, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Shiga, 19 March 2014. *      *      * I. Economic developments A. Overseas economies I would like to start my speech with a look at overseas economies. Overseas economies – mainly advanced economies – are starting to recover, although the performance remains lackluster in some parts and they are expected to recover moderately. Looking at the projections of global economic growth recently released by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the growth for 2014 is projected to be at around 3.7 percent, mainly due to rises in growth rates of advanced economies. Looking at respective major countries and regions, the U.S. economy has continued to recover moderately. A downtrend was observed in some economic indicators around the turn of the year, but this likely is largely attributable to temporary factors such as winter snowstorms. As for the outlook, the pace of economic recovery is expected to gradually rise, led by domestic demand in particular, mainly as the fiscal drag continues to fade and because accommodative financial conditions are projected to be maintained. The European economy has been picking up after it emerged from a recession in 2013. Private consumption has been picking up moderately, with consumer sentiment continuing to improve, although the employment and income situation has remained severe. Business fixed investment has bottomed out. Although attention still needs to be paid to the point that there are various adjustment pressures, including the European debt problem, the economy is likely to continue picking up, mainly due to a pick-up in domestic demand that reflects improvement in business and household sentiment. Meanwhile, the Chinese economy has continued to see stable but somewhat lower growth than before. As for the outlook, although structural reforms by the Chinese government such as those to respond to the problem of excess production capacity may exert downward pressure on domestic demand, the economy is expected to maintain stable growth as the government will likely continue to pay consideration to economic activity as well as the employment situation, and as the environment surrounding exports will improve. On the other hand, some of the emerging economies other than China and commodity-exporting economies have continued to lack momentum. In some of these economies facing structural problems, economic activity has been notably weak and financial markets have been showing unstable movements since 2013. In India, the economy remains in a state of deceleration, particularly in domestic demand. Growth momentum in the ASEAN countries remains weak. Under these circumstances, I am paying attention particularly to developments in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, the prospects for the European debt problem, and the pace of recovery in the U.S. economy as risks to the outlook for overseas economies. B. Current state of and outlook for Japan’s economic activity and prices Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately. According to the second preliminary estimate of the real GDP growth rate in the October-December quarter of 2013 released on March 10, 2014, which registered 0.2 percent on a quarter-on-quarter basis and 0.7 percent on an annualized quarter-on-quarter basis, the economy continued to increase at a pace considered to be above its potential for four consecutive quarters. Looking at each 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  component, exports – which registered a small increase of 0.4 percent on a quarter-on-quarter basis – are likely to have leveled off more or less recently, considering developments in real exports in January 2014. Business fixed investment has increased for three consecutive quarters on a quarter-on-quarter basis, and the pick-up has become evident as corporate profits have improved. While a front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike in April 2014 has recently been observed, private consumption has remained resilient as a trend with improvement in the employment and income situation. With regard to the outlook, Japan’s economy is expected to continue its moderate recovery as a trend, albeit with some fluctuations caused by the consumption tax hike. Exports are expected to increase moderately, mainly against the background of the recovery in overseas economies. Public investment is expected to trend upward for the time being and then become more or less flat at a high level. Business fixed investment is projected to follow a moderate increasing trend. Private consumption and housing investment, albeit with some fluctuations caused by the consumption tax hike, are expected to remain resilient as a trend, supported mainly by improvement in the employment and income situation. Meanwhile, prices have risen markedly in the past year. The year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI, for all items less fresh food, and the same hereafter) has been around 1–1/4 percent for three consecutive months through January 2014 – the first time since November 2008 that it has exceeded 1.0 percent. On a basis excluding food and energy, it has also registered high growth of 0.7 percent  –  the highest level since August 1998 – for two consecutive months through January 2014. Regarding the outlook, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, is likely to be around 1–1/4 percent for some time. According to the Bank of Japan’s interim assessment released in January 2014 of the October 2013 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report), the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for the real GDP growth rate was 2.7 percent for fiscal 2013, 1.4 percent for fiscal 2014, and 1.5 percent for fiscal 2015. The median of their forecasts for the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hikes, was 0.7 percent for fiscal 2013, 1.3 percent for fiscal 2014, and 1.9 percent for fiscal 2015. II. Risks to the outlook for economic activity and prices Although there are both upside and downside risks to the Bank’s aforementioned baseline scenario regarding economic activity and prices in Japan, I personally pay closer attention to downside risks. The consumption tax hikes are unlikely to affect the ongoing moderate recovery trend, although they may temporarily cause greater fluctuations in economic activity. However, I am paying particular attention to developments in exports and consumption as downside risks to the economy. In addition, as revealed in, for example, the minutes of the Monetary Policy Meetings (MPMs), I personally hold a more cautious view of the outlook for prices compared with the forecasts in the baseline scenario. Let me share some of my considerations regarding the outlook with you. A. Developments in exports Exports have continued to slightly lack momentum. This reflects both external demand factors and other factors, and I consider that exports are likely to continue to lack momentum for some time. Regarding external demand factors, it must be noted that Asian economies that are Japan’s major export destinations still lack momentum. For example, looking at developments in the Chinese economy since the beginning of 2014, the Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) for manufacturing activity for February marked its lowest level since the middle of 2013, and, in parallel with the progress in implementation of measures to cope with structural problems, there are signs of sluggishness in the pace of increase in fixed asset investment. In addition, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  there is uncertainty regarding the outlook for the issue of shadow banking, and depending on the outcome of this, it could become an additional downside risk to the Chinese economy. There is also high uncertainty regarding some emerging and commodity-exporting economies facing structural problems. In these economies, a buildup of imbalances has progressed, such as accumulation of private-sector debt, due to excessive fiscal and monetary policy measures following the Lehman shock and to the increase in capital inflows to these economies based on excessive expectations for economic growth. I think these economies are currently undergoing an adjustment process. Therefore, the financial markets in these economies are likely to become unstable when market participants become concerned about the possibility that a reversal in the global flow of funds might occur in the process of normalization of the U.S. monetary policy, and this instability may become an additional downside risk to emerging economies. In addition, attention needs to be paid to developments in Ukraine, although it is difficult to predict the possible effects at present. On the other hand, in the U.S. economy, adjustments such as those in the housing market and of household debt have progressed. However, prolonged adjustments may have brought about an increase in the number of unemployed who have difficulties finding a new job, and also in the number of people who have problems participating in or returning to the labor force, leading to new structural problems such as persisting economic slack and a decline in the growth rate of labor productivity. Taking account of these possibilities, I am paying particular attention to the pace of recovery in the U.S. economy. Next, I would like to point out two possible factors contributing to the lack of momentum in Japan’s exports, other than the aforementioned external demand factors. The first is that structural factors – including the shift of Japanese firms’ production sites to overseas accompanying increased local procurement of parts by Japanese manufacturers – may be at work. According to recent research conducted by the Cabinet Office, manufacturers are expected to continue to increase the ratio of overseas production. This suggests that firms are more conscious of the low growth rate of domestic demand relative to that in external demand, rather than changes in foreign exchange rates. The second factor is that Japanese firms may be taking a cautious stance toward lowering foreign currency-denominated contract prices of exported goods. This could suggest that firms currently have a stronger tendency to enjoy a temporary increase in profits stemming from a rise in prices of exported goods denominated in yen, rather than to expand their overseas markets by lowering foreign currency-denominated contract prices. I will continue to pay attention to how these two factors will affect Japan’s exports. B. Developments in consumption Private consumption remains resilient and a front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike has also been observed recently. However, there are signs that consumer sentiment might be changing. For example, (1) the consumer confidence index deteriorated in February 2014 to its lowest level in two years and five months and (2) the overall diffusion index for future economic conditions in the Economy Watchers Survey dropped in February to its lowest level in two years and ten months, mainly due to a drop in the index of household activity. In particular, I think it is necessary to carefully monitor whether the momentum in private consumption will eventually weaken if the current declining trend in real wages continues. Let me elaborate on this point. At present, the number of employees is increasing while real wages decrease, and thus real compensation of employees in total is on a moderate increasing trend. However, there is a large gap between the year-on-year growth in real compensation of employees in total and in real private consumption: in the October-December quarter of 2013, the former showed only a moderate increase of 0.6 percent, while the latter increased by 2.3 percent. There seem to have been fairly strong expectations among the public since 2013 that, as the inflation rate rose, the rate of wage increases would eventually reach the same level. However, it must be noted that, if the public increasingly 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  expects that the rate of wage increases will remain below the inflation rate for a protracted period, this could make consumer sentiment cautious, thereby negatively affecting the public’s consumption behavior. In relation to this point, let me now turn to developments in wages. Scheduled wages, or base salaries, remain on a declining trend, but supported by the improvements in corporate profits and in supply and demand conditions in the labor market, they are likely to stop declining at some point after the upcoming spring wage negotiations. However, many firms seem to remain cautious about significantly increasing the levels of monthly salaries – the so-called base salaries – due to concerns about future increases in fixed costs, while they are willing to use improved profits to reward their employees with a rise in lump-sum payments. This stance of firms is consistent with the fact that they remain cautious about increasing the number of regular employees. The active job openings-to-applicants ratio, which shows supply and demand conditions in the labor market, has exceeded 1.00, reaching 1.04 in January. However, supply and demand conditions in the labor market for regular employees do not seem to be so tight, and therefore it seems difficult to expect significant increases in their base salaries, which will be the subject of discussion during the wage negotiations. Considering that (1) most wage increases could be regular annual raises or a rise in lump-sum payments, although base salaries could rise to a certain level, (2) the proportion of non-regular employees – whose wages are not discussed in the wage negotiations – to total employment is increasing, and (3) the rates of wage increases in small firms and in the public sector are likely to be relatively low, the rate of overall wage increases could remain only moderate despite the temporary positive effects expected from the termination of the measures that reduced salaries of government employees to secure funds for reconstruction work after the Great East Japan Earthquake. If that turns out to be the case, and if the rate of nominal wage increases consequently falls below the rate of increase in the CPI excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike, consumers might increasingly expect that decreases in real wages will be protracted. Developments in wages therefore require careful monitoring. C. Outlook for prices The Bank’s outlook and the private sector’s expectations for prices for fiscal 2013 have been converging, but there is still a wide gap between them for fiscal 2014 and 2015. As for the outlook for prices, I take a more cautious view than the forecasts in the Bank’s baseline scenario, as evident from the fact that I formulated a proposal to change the expression regarding the outlook for prices in the October 2013 Outlook Report, although it was defeated by a majority vote during the MPM. Let me explain the background to this view. So far, the Bank’s quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) has produced positive effects on Japan’s economy by stimulating domestic demand and supporting the positive developments in economic activity. This has contributed to some degree to price rises through an improvement in the output gap. I personally take the view, however, that rises in the inflation rate to date have been caused mainly by changes in the foreign exchange rates, and that the trend in the pace of the price rises is more moderate if the effects of developments in the foreign exchange rates are eliminated. In addition, the rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations remains moderate, as will be explained later, and the rate of wage increases may remain moderate for the time being. Therefore, I take a cautious view regarding the outlook for prices. The rate of inflation has risen markedly within a short period since 2013, but the Bank’s price stability target aims at creating a virtuous cycle in which wages and prices increase in a balanced manner with an upturn in economic activity, and at maintaining it stably. For this to happen, it is necessary that prices rise at a pace consistent with the increase in the growth potential of the economy. Given this, I consider that the price stability target of 2 percent is appropriate only when it is regarded as a medium- to long-term target. I will elaborate on this point later when I will explain my proposal regarding the conduct of monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Let me add that, as for firms’ responses to the consumption tax hike, there will likely be variation among different industries and sales strategies, in terms of such aspects as the degree to which they pass higher costs on to sales prices and the timing of price revisions. The price trend therefore may remain difficult to assess for a while. Bearing this in mind, I would like to monitor developments in prices closely. III. Conduct of monetary policy The Bank introduced QQE at the MPM held on April 3 and 4, 2013, with a view to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. Under this new framework for monetary policy, the Bank conducts money market operations so that the monetary base increases at an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion yen. In order to realize this, the Bank purchases Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that their amount outstanding increases at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen. In addition, with a view to lowering risk premia of asset prices, the Bank purchases exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trust (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding increase at an annual pace of about 1 trillion yen and about 30 billion yen, respectively. In aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, the Bank has committed to continuing with QQE as long as it is necessary for maintaining the target in a stable manner. Almost one year has passed since the introduction of QQE. So far, it has exerted positive effects on Japan’s economy through a positive influence on the expectations of financial markets and of households and firms. Since the introduction of the policy, however, while supporting the concrete measures of QQE, I have continued to propose changing the expression in the Statement on Monetary Policy regarding the time frame for achieving the 2 percent price stability target and for continuing with QQE, although my proposal has been repeatedly defeated by a majority vote during the MPMs. Let me explain the background to my proposal, as well as my personal views on some points of discussion regarding the conduct of monetary policy. A. Issues to be considered regarding the price stability target Prior to the introduction of QQE, the Bank introduced the price stability target of 2 percent at the MPM held in January 2013. First of all, I would like to explain my thinking behind the price stability target from two perspectives. First, the Bank conducts monetary policy based on the principle that the policy shall be aimed at “achieving price stability, thereby contributing to the sound development of the national economy.” In line with this principle, “price stability” is defined as “a state where various economic entities including households and firms may make decisions regarding such economic activities as consumption and investments without being concerned about the fluctuations in the general price level.” It could be said that, by realizing such price stability, the Bank is responsible for creating in the medium to long term an environment in which the economy can achieve sustainable growth so that its growth potential will be realized to the maximum extent. In other words, I think that achieving price stability plays a role as an intermediate objective, or a yardstick, to achieve the ultimate goal of contributing to the sound development of the national economy. In my view, therefore, the most important thing in the conduct of monetary policy is not to pay attention solely to monthly movements in price indices, but to give due consideration to a wide range of developments in the overall economy in achieving price stability, and thereby achieve this ultimate goal. Second, the price stability target of 2 percent aims to maintain the 2 percent inflation rate in a stable manner. This is because price stability consistent with the sustainable growth of the economy must be sustainable over the medium to long term. Therefore, in order to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, a temporary achievement of 2 percent in the observed inflation rate is not sufficient – it is necessary that the rate be stabilized at that level. In order 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  to achieve this, households, firms, and financial markets need to act on the assumption that prices will increase by about 2 percent; in other words, that medium- to long-term inflation expectations be about 2 percent. So far, medium- to long-term inflation expectations have been mostly in positive territory as a trend, while actual prices have long been on a declining trend. Consequently, price stability has not been achieved, and thus the economy has been in an undesirable situation. This is the background to why it became necessary to introduce QQE. However, I think that medium- to long-term inflation expectations in Japan are mainly determined by supply side factors such as the potential growth rate and the labor productivity growth rate, rather than by the level of the Bank’s price stability target and the supply and demand balances in the goods, services, and labor markets. At least for now, I think that the 2 percent target is well above the level that is consistent with the economy’s growth potential. For example, although the observed inflation rate has risen markedly, recent various indicators suggest that the rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations, such as for five to ten years ahead, remains moderate. Therefore, to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, I think it is necessary that a wide range of economic entities make use of the benign economic and financial environment brought about by QQE and make continuous efforts to strengthen the economy’s growth potential. If medium- to long-term inflation expectations rise as a result of such efforts, it could become appropriate to set the target for the level of inflation at 2 percent, although I think that this will require considerable time. Due to the reasons I have explained so far, I have continued to propose at MPMs not to restrict the time frame for achieving the 2 percent price stability target to about two years, but to aim to achieve it in the medium to long term. Moreover, I think there will be room for a future review of the level of the price stability target that is currently set at 2 percent, considering future changes in the growth potential and medium- to long-term inflation expectations. B. Issues to be considered regarding QQE When the introduction of QQE was decided in April 2013, I supported the concrete measures of QQE because I considered that this would open up significant opportunities in terms of three aspects. First, the measures would provide an opportunity on the demand side to create a virtuous cycle by stimulating the economy. Second, they would offer an opportunity on the supply side to encourage the government’s growth strategy that contributes to strengthening the growth potential of Japan’s economy and its fiscal consolidation, as well as positive actions by firms and households. And third, the measures would afford an opportunity to return to the conventional interest rate policy in the future, as zero interest rates produce positive effects through an improvement in economic and price conditions. On the other hand, QQE entails considerable potential risks, in my view; for example, normalization of the measure will not be an easy process, and speculation that the Bank is engaged in financing fiscal deficits could increase. One cannot rule out the possibility that, under the current policy commitment, if financial markets increasingly view achieving the 2 percent price stability target in about two years as difficult, the Bank will be obliged to extend or strengthen its monetary easing driven by such external factors, even in a situation where it is judged that side effects outweigh positive effects on the economy. In this regard, my understanding is that the 2 percent price stability target can be consistent with the fundamentals of Japan’s economy only from a medium- to long-term perspective. I am therefore paying particular attention to the risk that, if the current large-scale monetary easing policy were to be protracted or such policy strengthened by additional measures, the associated side effects would instead outweigh the positive effects, and this would undermine economic stability in the long run. This is why I have proposed that the Bank aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in the medium to long term and designate QQE as an intensive measure with a time frame of about two years. My proposal aims at securing an opportunity for the Bank to thoroughly examine, after a certain period of time, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  whether the side effects of QQE are not outweighing the positive effects and review the easing measures in a flexible manner depending on economic and financial conditions at the time. C. Monetary policy and structural reforms QQE itself is a powerful policy, but it will exert maximum effects when combined with various efforts by both the public and private sectors. Generally speaking, monetary policy can provide indirect support for structural reforms mainly by working on the demand side of the economy, but cannot substitute for such reforms themselves. For example, as I mentioned earlier, various measures on the supply side to strengthen the growth potential of the economy are necessary to increase the potential growth rate and the labor productivity growth rate. In relation to this, the possibilities of a decline in the potential growth rate and of a rise in the natural unemployment rate, for example, have recently become a hot topic of discussion in the United States and other major advanced economies. Due attention should be paid to the risk that excessive monetary easing without an accurate recognition of these structural changes could result in the accumulation of economic and financial imbalances. There is also a concern that, if excessive expectations on monetary policy increase, or if monetary easing is promoted beyond the appropriate scope of monetary policy, this may lead to losing momentum for advancing necessary structural reforms and instead exert negative effects on economic growth from a long-term perspective. In order to ensure that the effects of monetary easing fully take hold, the government’s efforts to secure confidence in fiscal sustainability are also essential. In a situation where the Bank continues to purchase a large amount of JGBs, if the government’s efforts to achieve fiscal consolidation through structural reforms were to weaken or such speculation were to permeate the financial markets – reflecting overly heightened expectations that stability in the bond market will be ensured by the Bank’s JGB purchases – confidence in fiscal sustainability could be undermined and long-term interest rates could rise. This in turn could worsen fiscal conditions and substantially constrain the effects of monetary easing. As specified in the joint statement by the government and the Bank released in January 2013, the implementation of fiscal consolidation measures is an important prerequisite for the success of QQE and is essential for Japan’s economy in overcoming deflation and achieving sustainable growth. D. Use of a wide range of policy measures 1. Loan support program In addition to powerful monetary easing through QQE, the Bank has established a fund-provisioning measure called the Loan Support Program to support initiatives to make the best use of accommodative financial conditions within efforts to increase bank lending and strengthen the growth potential of Japan’s economy. The program consists of two measures: the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank lending (hereafter the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility) and the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth (hereafter the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility). At the MPM held in February 2014, the Bank decided to increase the scale of the two facilities and extend the deadlines for new applications under these facilities, which were due to expire shortly, by one year. Specifically, under the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility, the maximum amount of the Bank’s fund-provisioning to each financial institution will be increased from the amount equivalent to the net increase in its lending to an amount that is twice as much as the net increase in its lending. As for the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, the maximum amount of the Bank’s fund-provisioning under the main rules will be increased from 3.5 trillion yen to 7 trillion yen, and the maximum amount of its fund-provisioning to each financial institution will be increased from the current 150 billion yen to 1 trillion yen. Furthermore, under these 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  facilities, financial institutions will be able to borrow funds at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent per annum for an extended duration; namely, for four years instead of one to three years at present. With these revisions, the Loan Support Program is expected to further promote efforts to increase bank lending and strengthen the growth potential of Japan’s economy, thereby complementing QQE and contributing to an improvement in the economy. I consider it desirable to aim at achieving economic conditions that are preferable from a medium- to long-term perspective by making use of various measures in a parallel manner, as I have explained, instead of relying too much on QQE, which has considerable side effects. 2. Conduct of monetary policy in view of the effects of interest rate policy An unconventional policy such as the asset purchase policy implemented under QQE can be regarded as an exceptional and somewhat temporary measure to generate upward momentum in economic activity and prices and affect the direction of such momentum under the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. On the other hand, a conventional interest rate policy can be regarded as a usual, fine-tuning measure that is used when it is time to encourage economic activity and prices to reach desirable levels. My understanding is that, if the momentum of economic activity and prices becomes sufficiently strong as a result of the positive outcome of QQE and the expected rate of return rises, only with zero interest rates being maintained, the effects of monetary easing will be cumulatively increased by the conventional interest rate policy, and consequently stimulative effects on economic activity will take hold. In fact, in calculating Japan’s policy interest rate under the Taylor rule,1 my recent estimates suggest that the rate has been shifting upward, from being in negative territory to 0 percent or almost in positive territory, reflecting the improvement in the output gap and the increase in prices since the introduction of QQE. Therefore, in my view, if the cumulative effects of monetary easing generated by maintained zero interest rates, in addition to easing effects of QQE, increase further going forward, one option is to gradually shift the focus of monetary policy conduct from the asset purchase policy to the zero interest rate policy, in view of the role of the two policy tools as well as the balance of their positive effects and side effects. Precisely because the unconventional policy is a new policy measure with a short history, its side effects in general could still have many unknown parts. In particular, in the future, in order to achieve the smooth normalization of monetary policy while maintaining financial market stability, I consider that aiming to make such a shift in the focus of monetary policy conduct, together with the government’s fiscal consolidation, will become the important requirement.                                                 1 The Taylor rule is a monetary policy rule under which the level of a benchmark policy interest rate is calculated based on a particular formula using, for example, the deviation of the observed inflation rate from the targeted inflation rate, and the output gap. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jeremy C Stein: Incorporating financial stability considerations into a monetary policy framework Speech by Mr Jeremy C Stein, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington DC, 21 March 2014. *      *      * I would like to talk today about how one might explicitly incorporate financial stability considerations into a monetary policy framework.1 Doing so involves tackling two questions – one that is relatively easy and one that is much harder. The easier question is, should financial stability concerns, in principle, influence monetary policy decisions? To be specific, are there cases in which one might tolerate a larger forecast shortfall of the path of the unemployment rate from its full-employment level than one would otherwise, because of a concern that a more accommodative policy might entail a heightened risk of some sort of adverse financial market outcome? This question is about theory, not empirical magnitudes, and, in my view, the theoretical answer is a clear “yes.” I will say a bit more about why shortly, but let me stress that I am not breaking any new conceptual ground here; the basic argument has been laid out by a number of others, including Woodford and Kocherlakota.2  The second question is, how does one operationalize the theory? What sorts of data should one look to, and what sorts of empirical methods should one use, to calibrate by how much the stance of monetary policy should be altered relative to the case in which financial stability considerations are completely set aside? This question is very difficult. In the interests of advancing the conversation, I will venture some tentative thoughts on one possible approach, which is somewhat different than what I have seen in other recent work on this topic. While I hope to convince you that this path is worth exploring, I cannot say that I know yet exactly where it will lead – and, in particular, whether it will ultimately deliver monetary policy prescriptions that differ in a quantitatively meaningful way from those offered by our current models. So I do not intend anything that follows as a comment on the current stance of our policy. Before getting too deep into the details, let me preview my bottom line. I am going to try to make the case that, all else being equal, monetary policy should be less accommodative – by which I mean that it should be willing to tolerate a larger forecast shortfall of the path of the unemployment rate from its full-employment level – when estimates of risk premiums in the bond market are abnormally low. These risk premiums include the term premium on Treasury securities, as well as the expected returns to investors from bearing the credit risk on, for example, corporate bonds and asset-backed securities. As an illustration, consider the period in the spring of 2013 when the 10-year Treasury yield was in the neighborhood of 1.60 percent and estimates of the term premium were around negative 80 basis points.3 Applied to this period, my approach would suggest a lesser willingness to use large-scale                                                  1 The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to David Lopez-Salido and Egon Zakrajsek for a number of helpful conversations and for carrying out the empirical work reported here. Thanks also to William English and Jon Faust for their comments. 2 See Woodford (2012) and Kocherlakota (2013, 2014). 3 The 10-year nominal rate hit 1.63 percent on May 2, 2013. An estimate of the term premium based on the oft-cited methodology of Kim and Wright (2005) was negative 0.78 percent on this day. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  asset purchases to push yields down even further, as compared with a scenario in which term premiums were not so low.4  The informal intuition I have in mind is that there is a cost associated with pushing risk premiums too low, because doing so increases the likelihood that they may revert back in a way that hinders the Federal Reserve’s ability to achieve its mandated objectives. In what follows, I will try to make this intuition more precise and to generalize its applicability. Do financial stability considerations belong in a monetary policy framework? However, let me start with the conceptual question of whether financial stability considerations belong at all in a monetary policy framework. As I said earlier, I think the clear in-principle answer here is “yes.” The generic argument rests on three assumptions. First, suppose that the Federal Reserve focuses only on its traditional dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. To keep things simple, suppose further that these two goals are not in conflict with one another – say, because aggregate demand is weak, depressing both employment and inflation – so that we can boil things down to one objective: keeping unemployment close to target. With the usual quadratic loss objective function, this assumption would say that the Federal Reserve cares about minimizing the expected value of (U – U*)2. A little bit of algebra shows that this objective function can in turn be decomposed into two pieces: (1) an “expected shortfall” term, given by the squared deviation of expected unemployment from the target level of U*; and (2) a “risk” term, given by the variance of realized unemployment, U.5  Second, the argument assumes that there is some variable summarizing financial market vulnerability – I will be abstract for the moment and just call it FMV – which is influenced by monetary policy. That is, easier monetary policy leads to increased vulnerability as measured by FMV. Moreover, when FMV is elevated, there is a greater probability of an adverse event – some kind of financial market shock – that, if it were to occur, would push up the unemployment rate, all else being equal.6  The third and final assumption is that the risks associated with an elevated value of FMV cannot be fully offset at zero cost with other nonmonetary tools, such as financial regulation. To be clear, this assumption does not imply that regulation is not helpful in reducing financial vulnerabilities – it only says that regulation is not a perfect instrument. These imperfections could stem from regulatory arbitrage; political-economy constraints; or the fact that too much regulation can also impede economic growth, just like overly restrictive monetary policy.7 Thus one way to think of my construct of FMV is that it is a stand-in for the level of financial vulnerabilities that remain after regulation has done the best that it can do, given the existing real-world limitations.                                                  4 Again, I stress that this statement is directional, not quantitative – I am not claiming that the magnitude of the adjustment one would want to make is large, or that the policy we had in place at the time was miscalibrated in any absolute sense. Rather, my point is just that the financial stability costs of asset purchases are likely to loom larger when term premiums are more negative, and that this consideration belongs in the discussion. 5 Kocherlakota (2014) emphasizes the same decomposition of the Federal Reserve’s loss function. Note that, in focusing only on mean and variance, this functional form sets aside what may be another important aspect of vulnerabilities: tail risks that are not well captured in variance as opposed to higher moments. 6 If I had introduced an explicit time dimension, it might be more natural to assume that easier monetary policy today raises the probability of an adverse event at some medium-run future date, even while reducing the probability in the short run. In this case, there might be an interesting set of intertemporal tradeoffs to be considered, particularly if the economy were in a very vulnerable position today. In any event, these are just assumptions at this point, meant to illustrate the logic of the argument. 7 See, for example, Stein (2013) for an elaboration of these points. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  In this setting, even with inflation concerns entirely set aside, monetary policy faces a tradeoff. Consider a situation in which unemployment is above target. A more accommodative policy has the usual benefit of lowering expected unemployment and thus reducing the expected shortfall term in the objective function.If, however, it also raises the conditional variance of the unemployment rate via an elevated-FMV channel – thereby increasing the risk term in the objective function – then there is a cost to be weighed alongside the benefit. And importantly, this is true even when financial stability is not a separate objective in and of itself; as I have framed it, financial stability matters only insofar as it affects the degree of risk around the employment leg of the Federal Reserve’s mandate.8  To be sure, absent a concrete measure of FMV, as well as some sense of the responsiveness of FMV to monetary policy, this discussion is all pretty theoretical and non-operational. So I will turn to measurement in a moment. But it is worth noting one useful qualitative observation that emerges just from the logic and from the nature of a quadratic loss function. In making the tradeoff I just described, the marginal benefit of using easier policy to reduce the expected unemployment gap is greater when the gap itself is large – that is, when unemployment is far above target. In this case, even a quite high level of financial vulnerability may not imply a much different stance of monetary policy than would fall out of a more traditional analysis. However, as the unemployment gap shrinks, financial stability risks loom larger in relative terms, so an analysis that takes them on board may lead to more of an adjustment in the stance of policy. Okay, but how do you measure financial market vulnerability? Financial sector leverage At an abstract level, the framework that I have sketched corresponds closely to that in Woodford’s work, although his model is much more fully articulated. When it gets down to implementation, Woodford suggests that the most natural measure of financial market vulnerability is a variable that captures “leverage in the financial sector.” In other words, faced with unemployment above target, he would have monetary policy be less accommodative, all else being equal, when financial-sector leverage is high. This recommendation rests on three key premises. First, when financial-sector leverage is high, the probability of a severe crisis in which multiple large intermediaries become insolvent is elevated – that is, we are more likely to have a replay of what happened in 2008 and 2009. Second, easy monetary policy is asserted to increase the incentives for the financial sector to lever up. And, third, focusing on leverage as opposed to asset prices avoids putting the central bank in the position of having to “spot bubbles”: Even if it is impossible for the central bank to know when an asset class is overvalued, the risks to the economy associated with overvaluation are presumably greater when intermediaries are highly levered.9  In my view, these are generally sensible arguments, and an approach of the sort that Woodford outlines may well turn out to be fruitful. At the same time, this leverage-centric approach also has some drawbacks, which suggest that there is likely to be value in a parallel exploration of other tracks. For one thing, the effective degree of leverage in the financial system is not easy to measure in a comprehensive fashion. One can certainly look                                                  8 See Tarullo (2014) for a similar observation. 9 Woodford (2012) writes, “It is important, I believe, to realize that the real issue is not identifying whether one type of asset or another is currently overvalued. Instead, what central banks (and potentially other ‘macro-prudential' regulators) need to be able to monitor is the degree to which the positions taken by leveraged institutions pose a risk to financial stability… A central bank need not be able to identify asset over-valuations in order to recognize situations in which the probability of simultaneous financial distress at several institutions is non-trivial.” 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  at things like banks’ capital ratios, but some of the important action, from a financial stability perspective, is likely to be in subtler forms of leverage that are either outside of the traditional banking sector or more prone to shape shifting. More to the point, recall that, for the purposes of informing monetary policy, one wants to focus on those sources of financial vulnerability that are least effectively dealt with via regulation. And the more reliably a form of leverage can be measured, the better a candidate it is for being handled with a regulatory or supervisory approach. In other words, if we were to see signs that banks’ capital ratios were in danger of eroding, we would certainly want to do something, but it is hard for me to imagine that the something should involve monetary policy – the obvious first line of defense in this case would be to turn to our regulatory and supervisory tools. In response to this critique, one might instead seek to focus the attention of monetary policymakers on broader measures of private-sector leverage that are outside the reach of traditional financial regulation. For example, Borio and Drehmann document that the ratio of credit to the private nonfinancial sector relative to gross domestic product (GDP), once suitably detrended, has substantial predictive power for financial crises, so perhaps it might make sense for monetary policy to condition on this kind of broad credit-to-GDP ratio.10 However, if one goes this route, another measurement challenge arises: How, if at all, does monetary policy influence the evolution of the ratio? Without an answer to this question, it is hard to say how much one would want to alter the stance of policy when, say, the ratio is abnormally high relative to trend. And the measurement problem is likely to be a difficult one, given that the credit-to-GDP ratio is a slow-moving variable: Unlike with asset prices, there is no scope for doing an event-study analysis of the effect of a change in policy on the item of interest.11  Risk premiums in the bond market Motivated in part by these observations, I would like to spend the rest of this talk exploring an alternative, albeit potentially complementary, approach to the problem. Rather than focusing primarily on some measure of intermediary leverage as an input into the monetary policy framework, my suggestion is to also look at estimates of risk premiums in the bond market. Thus, at a broad thematic level, I am taking a capital-markets-centric view of financial stability, as opposed to a purely intermediary-centric view. This is, of course, not to suggest that shocks to large leveraged intermediaries are not as important – if not more so – as those that play out primarily in capital markets. Rather, the premise is simply that disruptions originating in the capital market can be of consequence in their own right, and that they may be less amenable to being dealt with via financial regulation. In this regard, I am echoing a point made recently by Feroli and others, who have emphasized the fragilities related to bond fund flows.12  Let me start by being clear on terminology: By the “risk premium” on an asset category, I mean the ex ante expected return, based on an objective statistical model, that an investor can anticipate earning on the asset in excess of that on short-term Treasury bills. So I will use the words “risk premium” and “expected return” interchangeably in what follows. And, for the sake of concreteness, I will focus on two of these bond market risk premiums in particular: the so-called term premium, which is the expected excess return on longer-term Treasury bonds relative to short-term bills, and the credit risk premium, which is the expected                                                  10 See Borio and Drehmann (2009). But here, too, one might argue that macroprudential tools that reach beyond the banking sector to target broad measures of household leverage might be more direct, if such tools were available. An example would be limits on the loan-to-value ratios of all mortgage loans, irrespective of whether they reside on bank balance sheets. 11 A further difficulty lies in the real-time estimation of the underlying trend in the credit-to-GDP ratio and, hence, in the gap relative to trend. See Edge and Meisenzahl (2011). 12 See Feroli and others (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  excess return on bonds with credit risk (for example, corporate bonds, or asset-backed securities) relative to safe Treasury securities. With all of the rhetorical heat that gets generated about whether the Federal Reserve can or should try to spot bubbles, it is worth keeping some uncontroversial facts in mind. It is widely accepted among researchers in finance that there is an economically large amount of predictable variation in the risk premiums on a wide range of assets classes.13 For example, Cochrane and Piazzesi document that the excess returns on longer-term Treasury securities can be predicted one year ahead with a simple model that delivers an R-squared in excess of 40 percent.14 Analogously, Greenwood and Hanson show that the returns on junk bonds relative to Treasury securities over two- to three-year horizons can also be forecast with R-squared values in the ballpark of 30 to 40 percent, in this case by using two intuitively appealing forecasting variables: credit spreads and the high-yield share, which is the fraction of total bond issuance that comes from the high-yield category.15 Figure 1 illustrates the time-series variation in estimates of both of these risk premiums. Again, these sorts of findings are largely undisputed. Where there is more controversy is over the interpretation of these patterns, with some arguing that they reflect waves of irrational investor sentiment and others taking the view that they come from more rational factors, such as time variation in either the risks facing investors or their tolerance for bearing such risks. Here is where one can get into hard-to-resolve debates about bubble spotting and about whether one can expect the Federal Reserve to be smarter than other market participants. However, at least for some purposes, these debates are beside the point. In particular, the implications for monetary policy that I have in mind do not seem to depend critically on the difficult question of why there is so much time variation in expected bond market returns; they only require that this variation exists, as we know it does. In other words, there may be scope to make considerable practical progress while remaining largely agnostic about the whole metaphysical are-there-bubbles question.16  Okay. So let’s stipulate that risk premiums in the bond market move around a lot. The next observation to throw into the mix is that monetary policy is one of the factors that have an important influence on these movements. An emerging body of empirical work finds that an easing of monetary policy – even via conventional policy tools in normal times – tends to reduce both the term premiums on long-term Treasury securities and the credit spreads on corporate bonds.17 That is, monetary policy always tends to work in part through its effect on capital market risk premiums, perhaps through a risk-taking or reaching-for-yield mechanism.18                                                   13 See Cochrane (2011) for a recent survey of what is by now an enormous literature. 14 See Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005). 15 See Greenwood and Hanson (2013). 16 This statement admittedly sweeps some important subtleties under the rug. More precisely, I suspect that, if one takes the Federal Reserve's legal mandate as given – and, more specifically, takes as given an objective function such as minimizing the expected value of (U – U*)2 – then one can remain agnostic about the source of variation in risk premiums and still reach the kinds of conclusions that I do in what follows. However, if one asks whether such a mandate is itself normatively optimal in a fully micro-founded model, my intuition is that the source of variation may matter quite a bit. For example, I would conjecture that it might be more normatively appropriate, holding fixed the consequences for aggregate activity and unemployment, to lean against a sharp reduction in risk premiums that is driven by investor sentiment rather than against one that is driven by a rational response to changes in the risk environment. 17 See, for example, Hanson and Stein (2012); Gertler and Karadi (2013); and Gilchrist, Lopez-Salido, and Zakrajsek (2014). 18 Note that, as an econometric matter, it is easier to establish a causal effect of monetary policy on risk premiums than on broad measures of leverage, because asset prices can be measured on a daily or even intraday basis. So they can be directly related to innovations in the stance of policy, as proxied for by, for 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  However, while this empirical observation sheds some interesting light on how monetary policy influences the real economy, it does not by itself suggest that there is any financial stability dark side – that is, any meaningful increase in what I have been calling FMV – to the lowered risk premiums that go with monetary accommodation. For there to be such a dark side, there would have to be some sort of asymmetry in the unwinding of the effects of monetary policy on these risk premiums, whereby the eventual reversal either happens more abruptly, or causes larger economic effects, than the initial compression. Let’s take an example. Suppose that initially, the credit risk premium on high-yield bonds is 400 basis points, and that, because the unemployment rate is well above target, the Federal Reserve wants to add monetary accommodation. Suppose further that doing so lowers the credit risk premium to 200 basis points temporarily but also increases the odds that this risk premium will, at some point in the next couple of years, revert sharply, moving back in the direction of 400 basis points. What is the downside here? Given a desire for accommodation, is it not better to have credit risk premiums pushed down to a lower on-average level, even if that potentially involves a more volatile down-then-up path? Again, the answer depends critically on whether there is some kind of asymmetry, whereby the eventual increase in spreads either is more abrupt, or has a larger effect on the real economy, than the initial compression. In table 1 and figure 2, I present some new evidence that bears on this asymmetry. To do so, I build directly on recent work by Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (hereafter, GZ).19 GZ show that changes in credit risk premiums have substantial predictive power for measures of economic activity like GDP and unemployment. More specifically, GZ construct a variable called the excess bond premium (EBP). The EBP at any point in time is, roughly speaking, a measure of marketwide credit spreads minus an estimate of the expected default losses on bonds. Hence, it can be thought of as a proxy for the excess return that bondholders can expect to earn, net of defaults, on a going-forward basis – very much in the spirit of the risk premium concept to which I have been referring. Not surprisingly, the EBP exhibits considerable time-series variation, reaching a peak in the wake of the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy. Moreover, in simple forecasting regressions, changes in the EBP are associated with significant movements in GDP and unemployment one year later. In other words, an increase in the EBP – that is, a widening of the non-default-related component of credit spreads – portends a decline in economic activity and employment a year later. The specifications of GZ are linear, so they impose the assumption that increases in the EBP have an effect that is symmetric to decreases. In table 1 and figure 2, I look explicitly for asymmetries, with a specification that allows an upward move in the EBP to have a different effect on the economy than a downward move. The results, which come from a sample spanning the period from January 1973 to December 2012, are striking. Upward moves in EBP – again, those corresponding to a widening of credit spreads – are very informative about the future evolution of the real economy. The coefficient estimates imply that an increase of 50 basis points in the EBP in a single quarter, which is roughly a once-every-five-years kind of move, is associated with a two percentage point slowing of GDP growth over the next four quarters and slightly more than a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate over the same interval.20 These effects are, by any standard, economically important. By contrast, declines in the EBP have no discernible effect at all on economic activity.                                                                                                                                                       example, movements in short-term rates in the wake of an announcement by the Federal Open Market Committee. A similar identification strategy is not available for linking monetary policy changes to movements in, say, nonfinancial-sector leverage, given that the latter is measured infrequently. 19 See Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012). 20 To be a bit more precise, in the 40-year sample period, there are seven observations in which the EBP increases by more than 50 basis points in a single quarter. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  Putting it all together, this reasoning suggests that the credit risk premium – as measured, say, by a forecasting model like that of Greenwood and Hanson – may be an operationally useful measure of financial market vulnerability. When this risk premium is low, there is a greater probability of a subsequent upward spike in credit spreads and the EBP. Moreover, such upward spikes, when they do occur, are associated with significant adverse economic effects. To be clear, we are not necessarily talking about once-in-a-generation financial crises here, with major financial institutions teetering on the brink of failure. Nevertheless, the evidence suggests that even more modest capital market disruptions may have consequences that are large enough to warrant consideration when formulating monetary policy. If so, the indicated directional adjustment would be to be less aggressive in providing monetary accommodation in the face of above-target unemployment, all else being equal, when risk premiums are abnormally low. Of course, there are many caveats. Foremost among them is the fact that the ability of increases in the EBP to predict future economic activity may not reflect a causal link from the former to the latter. Perhaps there are economic slowdowns that are caused entirely by nonfinancial factors, and, when investors see one on the horizon, they get skittish, causing the EBP to rise. If so, it would be wrong to conclude that easy monetary policy – even if it does, in fact, cause lower risk premiums – has any causal effect on the probability of a future slowdown. So at this point, the evidence that I have reviewed can only be thought of as suggestive. Making progress on these difficult issues of causality will likely require a clearer articulation of the underlying mechanism that leads to such pronounced asymmetries in the relationship between credit spreads and economic activity. If a causal link is, indeed, present, what is there about it that leads increases in spreads to have a much stronger effect on the economy than decreases? I suspect that the answer has to do with something that mimics the effect of leveraged losses to financial intermediaries – and the attendant effect on credit supply. For example, GZ document that their EBP measure is closely correlated with the credit default swap spreads of broker-dealer firms. The reason could be that losses on their inventories of risky bonds erode the capital positions of these firms, which might in turn compromise their ability to provide valuable intermediation services. Alternatively, a similar mechanism may play out with open-end bond funds, whereby losses cause large outflows of assets under management, again compromising the intermediation function and aggregate credit supply.21  Conclusion To restate my main point, I believe that measures of bond market risk premiums – for example, estimates of the expected excess returns on long-term Treasury securities relative to Treasury bills and on credit-risky bonds relative to Treasury securities – may turn out to be useful inputs into the monetary policy framework. These variables have the potential to serve as simple proxies for a particular sort of financial market vulnerability that may not be easily addressed by supervision and regulation. Again, however, let me emphasize the conjectural nature of these remarks. Even if this broad way of thinking about the problem turns out to be useful, there is a ways to go – in terms of modeling and calibration – before it can be used to make quantitative statements. Thus, at this early stage, I would not want to claim that one is likely to get policy prescriptions that differ significantly from those of our standard models. We will have to do the work and see what emerges. Finally, a more general theme that has been lurking in the background here is the sharp difference in perspective that subfields of economics sometimes bring to a given question. As I noted earlier, one of the central and most widely shared ideas in the academic finance                                                  21 Basset and others (2014) document that changes in the EBP are associated with significant changes in bank lending standards, which suggests a broader pullback in the credit intermediation process. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  literature is the importance of time variation in the risk premiums (or expected returns) on a wide range of assets. At the same time, canonical macro models in the New Keynesian genre of the sort that are often used to inform monetary policy tend to exhibit little or no meaningful risk premium variation.22 Even if most of the specifics of what I have had to say in this talk turn out to be off base, I have to believe that our macro models will ultimately be more useful as a guide to policy if they build on a more empirically realistic foundation with respect to the behavior of interest rates and credit spreads. References Bassett, William F., Mary Beth Chosak, John C. Driscoll, and Egon Zakrajsek (2014). “Changes in Bank Lending Standards and the Macroeconomy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 62 (March), pp. 23–40. Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark L. Gertler (1989). “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, vol. 79 (March), pp. 14–31. Borio, Claudio, and Mathias Drehmann (2009). “Assessing the Risk of Banking Crises – Revisited,” BIS Quarterly Review, March, pp. 29–46. Cochrane, John H. (2011). “Presidential Address: Discount Rates,” Journal of Finance, vol. 66 (August), pp. 1047–1108. Cochrane, John H., and Monika Piazzesi (2005). “Bond Risk Premia,” American Economic Review, vol. 95 (March), pp. 138–60. Edge, Rochelle M., and Ralf R. Meisenzahl (2011). “The Unreliability of Credit-to-GDP Ratio Gaps in Real Time: Implications for Countercyclical Capital Buffers,” International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 7 (December), pp. 261–98. Feroli, Michael, Anil K. Kashyap, Kermit Schoenholtz, and Hyun Song Shin (2014). “Market Tantrums and Monetary Policy,” paper presented at the 2014 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, a conference sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, February 28. Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi (2013). “Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity (PDF),” working paper, October. Gilchrist, Simon, David Lopez-Salido, and Egon Zakrajsek (2014). “Monetary Policy and Real Borrowing Costs at the Zero Lower Bound,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014–03. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 2013. Gilchrist, Simon, and Egon Zakrajsek (2012). “Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, vol. 102 (June), pp. 1692–1720. Greenwood, Robin, and Samuel G. Hanson (2013). “Issuer Quality and Corporate Bond Returns,” Review of Financial Studies, vol. 26 (June), pp. 1483–1525. Hanson, Samuel G., and Jeremy C. Stein (2012). “Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012–46. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Kim, Don H., and Jonathan H. Wright (2005). “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward                                                  22 This is true even of those models that – following in the tradition of Bernanke and Gertler (1989) – incorporate some form of financial market friction. Typically, the friction is modeled as something that effectively changes the expected cash flows associated with financial intermediation, but not the net-of-default risk premium earned by investors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  Rates,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005–33. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Kocherlakota, Narayana (2013). “Low Real Interest Rates,” speech delivered at the 22nd Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference, Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., April 18. –‒‒‒  (2014). “Discussion of 2014 USMPF Monetary Policy Report,” speech delivered at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, a conference sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, February 28. Stein, Jeremy C. (2013). “Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses,” speech delivered at “Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter,” a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, February 7. Tarullo, Daniel K. (2014). “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability,” speech delivered at the 30th Annual National Association for Business Economics Economic Policy Conference, Arlington, Va., February 25. Woodford, Michael (2012). “Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability,” NBER Working Paper Series 17967. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April.      
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Anselmo Teng: Abundant opportunities for the MSAR financial sector Speech by Mr Anselmo Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at the 2014 Spring Cocktail Reception of the Monetary Authority of Macao, Macao, 17 March 2014. *      *      * Honourable Secretary for Economy and Finance, Mr. Tam Pak Yuen, Honourable Director-General, Economic Affairs Department of the Liaison Office of the Central People’s Government in the Macau Special Administrative Region (MSAR), Mr. Wang Xindong, Honourable Counselor, the Office of the Commissioner of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the MSAR, Mr. Nie Quan, Distinguished guests from the financial industry, media friends, and colleagues, While the dancing Snake goes to praise merits, the galloping Horse comes to deliver good news. Today, practitioners of the Macao financial industry gather to celebrate the new spring season. First of all, on behalf of the AMCM, I wish everyone a successful and healthy New Year of the Horse! We are honoured to have the Secretary for Economy and Finance, Mr. Tam Pak Yuen, with us. On behalf of the AMCM, I would like to express our sincere gratitude to Secretary Tam for his presence in our reception, his continuous guidance to the AMCM, and his support for the development of the financial sector! At the same time, I welcome our guests, especially, Director-General, Economic Affairs Department of the Liaison Office of the Central People’s Government in the MSAR, Mr. Wang Xindong; Director-General, the Office of the Commissioner of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the MSAR, Mr. Nie Quan; and practitioners from the local financial industry. Over the past year, under the auspices of the Central Government, with the guidance provided by the MSAR Government to assiduously pursue appropriate economic diversification and the joint efforts of all stakeholders, the MSAR economy achieved new highs in many aspects. The financial industry actively contributed in the process while it itself also flourished in such a favourable economic environment. At end-2013, total assets of the banking system reached MOP990.1 billion, a year-on-year increase of 24.4%; total deposits stood at MOP680.1 billion, a rise of 25.8% over a year earlier; total loans amounted to MOP534.7 billion, a year-on-year increase of 31.4%. For the whole year of 2013, profits after tax reached MOP7.5 billion, a rise of 31.5% over a year earlier. While the scale of assets continued to expand, all prudential supervisory indicators stayed at healthy levels: the non-performing loan (NPL) ratio at 0.09%; the capital adequacy ratio (CAR) at 14.8%, within which the tier-one capital ratio stood at 11.2%; the one-month and three-month liquidity ratios were reported at 52.3% and 66.0% respectively. Renminbi (RMB) businesses of local banks also registered notable growth. At end-2013, RMB deposits amounted to RMB85.8 billion, which represented an annual rise of about 110.0% while the cross-border RMB trade settlement business hit RMB149.2 billion, a year-on-year increase of 53.5%. As regards insurance business, the total gross premium reached MOP6.8 billion in 2013, a year-on-year rise of 25.5%. Within this total, the life insurance premium stood at MOP5.0 billion, an annual increase of 32.8%, while the non-life insurance premium reached MOP1.8 billion, a year-on-year increase of 9.3%. To uphold financial safety and stability in the MSAR, the AMCM continued to supervise authorised institutions on an on-going basis through offsite surveillance, onsite examinations and thematic reviews. In order to promote sustainable development of the local financial sector and to cope with enhancing international financial supervisory requirements, regulatory regimes and financial infrastructure in the MSAR have continuously been refined. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  With regard to regulatory framework, on the banking front, the “Guideline on Disclosure of Financial Information” was made effective in 2013 in order to fulfil the requirement for market disciplines laid down by Basel II. For the revision of credit risk-weighted capital adequacy requirements, the AMCM kicked off a consultation with practitioners and a quantitative impact study. To strengthen the security of automatic teller machines (ATMs) and bank cards, the AMCM issued the “Requirements for Automatic Teller Machine and Bank Card Security”. In particular, in the light of financial-market developments and enhancing international supervisory requirements, the AMCM has been conducting a comprehensive review of the “Financial System Act” (FSA) through concluding past regulatory experiences as well as making references to international regulatory standards and supervisory regimes in other jurisdictions. As regards insurance supervision in the year under review, progress was made in the revision of some articles contained in the legal framework for employees’ compensation insurance, which has entered into the legislative stage. Furthermore, after prior consultation with the industry, “Guidelines on Corporate Governance of Authorised Insurers” was promulgated and became effective in January 2014. On financial infrastructure, the launch of MOP Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system in January 2013 was a milestone in the modernisation and digitalisation of the MSAR payment system. With the aim to achieve convenient, efficient and stable cross-border capital flows, we are working on expanding capacity to deal with other currencies at this stage so as to prepare for connection with neighbouring jurisdictions’ payment systems. The Exchange Reserve and Fiscal Reserve are important components of the public financial resources of the MSAR. As these two reserves serve different statutory and policy functions, the AMCM has all along followed relevant legal requirements and international standards, upholding the principles of safety, stability and prudence in managing these reserves. Taking into account various internal and external factors, including the global political, economic and investment environments as well as financial market dynamics, the AMCM has stricken a reasonable balance of risks while carrying out appropriate diversification of asset allocation. At end-2013, the Exchange Reserve stood at MOP129.0 billion, while the Fiscal Reserve amounted to MOP168.9 billion. As regards regional financial cooperation, with the gradual implementation of the “Framework Agreement on Cooperation between Guangdong and Macao”, financial cooperation between Guangdong and Macao has been deepened and broadened with steady concrete results and progresses. In 2013, in addition to existing cooperation mechanisms such as “the Financial Cooperation Meeting between Guangdong and Macao” and “the Working Group on Financial Cooperation between Guangdong and Macao”, Zhuhai and Macao also established a Steering Group and a Working Group on Financial Cooperation between Zhuhai and Macao, and a Working Group on Coordinating Financial Policies between Zhuhai (Hengqin) and Macao to strengthen the financial cooperation, including financial innovation in Hengqin. These initiatives serve to enhance communications and realise financial cooperation in a gradual fashion. Meanwhile, in accordance with the “Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on Financial Cooperation between Shanghai and Macao” signed between the AMCM and the Financial Services Office of the Municipal Government of Shanghai in 2012, the “1st Financial Cooperation Meeting between Shanghai and Macao” took place in Shanghai in 2013. During the meeting, consensus on various issues was reached and expected results were achieved, including the proper use of Macao as a trade and commerce platform between Mainland China and Portuguese-speaking countries (PSCs). As far as we recognise, the MSAR financial sector has entered into a stage where opportunities are abundant. In the current situation, I believe that the local financial sector should look at it from a broader perspective, think more innovatively, make full use of various policy initiatives, try actively and seize the opportunities. On the basis of maintaining a reasonably prudent balance between business development and risk management, the local financial sector could reach new highs in the future, while making greater contribution to appropriate economic diversification. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Finally, on behalf of the AMCM, I wish the MSAR continuous prosperity and stability, Macao’s financial sector steady development, everyone a prosperous Year of the Horse, good health and a happy family! Thank you very much! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Haruhiko Kuroda: Overcoming deflation with quantitative and qualitative monetary easing Remarks by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the International Financial Symposium, hosted by the Institute for International Monetary Affairs, Tokyo, 19 March 2014. *      *      * Introduction It is my honor to be an invited panelist at the International Financial Symposium hosted by the Institute for International Monetary Affairs. The theme of the symposium is the important issue of challenges and policies for world economic growth. Looking at the current situation of the global economy, it has finally overcome the financial crisis following the Lehman shock and has recently been heading toward recovery on the whole. However, the pace of recovery remains moderate and a risk of the euro area and other advanced economies tumbling into deflation has been noted. I do not think that such risk is significant because medium- to long-term inflation expectations are anchored at the levels central banks are aiming at. Inflation expectations is the key term in Japan’s experience of deflation and challenge toward overcoming deflation, which I am going to talk about now. Long fight against deflation In retrospect, a series of events since the second half of the 1990s – such as banks’ nonperforming loan problems, the Asian currency crisis, the Lehman shock, and the Great East Japan Earthquake – weighed strongly on Japan’s economy. In addition, a variety of factors put direct downward pressure on prices, such as low-priced imports from emerging economies and firms’ low-price strategies to counter intensifying competition stemming from deregulation. In response, the Bank of Japan implemented a series of unconventional monetary policies ahead of other central banks around the globe, such as the zero interest rate policy, the quantitative easing policy, and forward guidance. With these policies serving to stimulate economic activity, the economy headed toward recovery from time to time. However, these policies failed to put an end to the trend of a price decline. Rather, people’s inflation expectations declined as deflation became protracted, and deflationary expectations – a sense that prices would not increase – became entrenched. In a world in which deflationary expectations are entrenched, the holding of cash or deposits becomes a relatively better investment strategy, and firms’ incentives to launch new initiatives through investing in business facilities and in research and development become reduced. Thus, Japan’s economy was deprived of vitality and this generated a vicious cycle in which the low vitality made it more difficult to overcome deflation. Due to its long persistence, deflation has become a challenge that is more and more difficult to overcome. In order to escape from such a situation, it has become necessary to pursue a policy that quickly and drastically changes people’s sense that prices will not increase. To that end, what was introduced as a prescription last April was quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE). This policy differs from the Bank’s past monetary easing policies, as well as monetary easing policies implemented by major central banks overseas, in that its policy effects focus on dispelling deflationary expectations by directly working on people’s expectations; in other words, on raising people’s inflation expectations. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The QQE The QQE comprises two elements. First, to eliminate deflationary expectations that were entrenched among firms and households, the Bank showed its determination that it would definitively overcome deflation through a strong and clear commitment. The Bank clearly stated that it would “achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years,” and thus clearly specified the period in which it would achieve the target. Second, given that deflation had continued for a long period, even with a strong commitment, it was difficult for the Bank’s strong determination to be viewed as convincing without any underpinning measures in place. The Bank therefore decided to double the monetary base in two years, and to achieve this it decided to massively purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs), including those with longer remaining maturities. So far, the Bank has been pursuing the decided provision of the monetary base, and the year-on-year rate of increase in the monetary base was about 55 percent in February. The monetary base is expected to reach about 56 percent of nominal GDP at the end of this year. This far exceeds the current ratio of 22 percent of the Federal Reserve in the United States and 22 percent of the Bank of England in the United Kingdom, and is an unprecedented monetary easing. The key to the QQE’s transmission mechanism is the lowering of real interest rates. By raising inflation expectations through a clear commitment and underpinning large-scale monetary easing on the one hand and containing nominal interest rates through massive purchases of JGBs on the other, real interest rates will be lowered, thereby generating the effect of powerfully stimulating economic activity. As the real economy improves due to such stimulus, the actual inflation rate will rise, which will lead to a further rise in inflation expectations: such a virtuous cycle can be expected to operate. Is such a mechanism actually at work? So far, the QQE has been steadily exerting its intended effects. Surveys on various economic entities and break-even inflation rates have suggested a rise in inflation expectations on the whole. As for nominal interest rates, in contrast with other advanced economies in which long-term interest rates have been rising in tandem with economic recovery, Japan’s long-term interest rates have been hovering in a stable manner at an extremely low level of around 0.6 percent. Under such financial conditions, Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately in association with a virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending. On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding fresh food was negative when the QQE was introduced but has since improved, registering a positive figure of around 1¼ percent in the latest data. One year has passed since the introduction of the QQE, and we have reached the midpoint of “about two years” that we specified. So far, Japan’s economy has been following the path toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target as expected, and we have become increasingly confident that the anticipated transmission mechanism of the QQE is actually working. In Japan, two rounds of consumption tax hikes are scheduled. Based on the experience of the economy going into recession when consumption tax was raised last time, in 1997, there are some concerns that the same might happen again. However, looking at the economic conditions of that time, the economic growth rate plunged immediately after the tax hike but subsequently showed signs of recovery. The economy seemed to have instead been affected substantially by a series of failures of Japanese major financial institutions and by the Asian currency crisis that took place just when the economy showed nascent recovery. By contrast, at present, Japan’s financial system has been maintaining stability and emerging economies have become more resilient against negative shocks. The current conditions are quite different from those in 1997. Taking these differences into account, the Bank believes that, even assuming two consumption tax hikes, the virtuous cycle in the economy will not be interrupted and Japan’s economy will continue to grow above its potential growth rate as a trend. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Challenges ahead to achieve the 2 percent To conclude, let me briefly touch on one of the challenges that lies ahead; namely, how prices and wages will be set when we achieve 2 percent inflation in a stable manner. The Bank is committed to continue with the QQE as long as it is necessary for maintaining the 2 percent price stability target in a stable manner. We are aiming at an economy and society in which actual inflation rates will be around 2 percent on average, and in which firms and households will behave on the assumption that prices will increase by about 2 percent. In the United States and Europe, people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations have been anchored at about 2 percent, and the setting of prices and wages based on these expectations has been firmly established. We would like to achieve this in Japan as well. On this point, there have been encouraging developments in annual wage revisions for next fiscal year. We are paying close attention to how the wage decision framework based on the assumption of price rises will be created. Concluding remarks The QQE, which I have talked about today, holds the huge challenge of raising inflation expectations through monetary policy. So far, with the policy exerting its intended effects, Japan’s economy has been stepping toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target as expected. Of course, we are only halfway there. The Bank will steadily pursue the QQE to overcome as soon as possible the deflation that has continued for nearly 15 years. It will examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments if necessary to achieve the price stability target. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Andreas Dombret: Regulatory reform – unresolved issues and the need for international cooperation Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Harvard Law School Symposium on “Building the Financial System of the 21st Century – An Agenda for Europe and the United States”, Armonk, New York, 28 March 2014. *      *      * 1 Introduction Ladies and gentlemen Thank you for the opportunity to speak today at the Harvard Law School Symposium on Building the Financial System of the 21st Century – An Agenda for Europe and the United States. It is a great pleasure to be here. In November 2008, just a few weeks after Lehman Brothers failed, the leaders of the G20 met in Washington D.C. In their meeting they took far-reaching decisions – not only to combat the current crisis but also to prevent future crises. A central passage of their declaration was as follows: “We pledge to strengthen our regulatory regimes, prudential oversight, and risk management, and ensure that all financial markets, products and participants are regulated or subject to oversight, as appropriate to their circumstances.”  Today, more than five years later, we have made good progress. Nevertheless, we must be aware of what Mark Roe from Harvard University calls the “regulatory confidence cycle”. He writes: “Regulators react to an explosion by creating new rules. The economy recovers; the regulators conclude that they did their job well, and the regulated then resist further tightening. […] As the recovery continues and the memory of the financial crisis grows faint, the appetite for regulatory change dissipates. Why fix something that is no longer broken?”. On a superficial level it appears that the financial system has been mended. However, we have to ensure that it will not break again – and this is an objective we have not yet achieved. There are still issues we need to address in order to create a stable financial system. In my speech today, I would like to highlight three of these issues: the too-big-to-fail problem which has already been discussed this morning, the shadow banking system, and the market for OTC derivatives. Let us begin with the too-big-to-fail problem. 2 Taming the beast – the too-big-to-fail problem Leaving aside all the nitty gritty, there is one thing we have to do to resolve the too-big-to-fail problem: we need to introduce more “market” to the financial markets – that is, we have to restore the fundamental principles of a market economy. The most important of these principles is the principle of liability. Everywhere it is common sense that people should be held responsible for their actions. Everywhere but in the world of banking, it would appear. During the crisis, governments around the world spent billions of dollars out of taxpayers’ pockets to save the banks. This indicates that the too-big-to-fail banks, at least, play by a different set of rules. They are woven so deeply into the fabric of the financial system that their failure might tear everything apart. The consequence is this: whenever a too-big-to-fail bank runs into trouble, the government might be compelled to bail it out in order to prevent a full-blown financial crisis. This means that these banks are implicitly insured. Whatever happens, the government is likely to stand ready to help. And this has consequences for the nature of the game. First, according to a recent study by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, “too-big-to-fail” banks have a funding advantage 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  over smaller banks. Second, the implicit insurance provides incentives to engage in risky business that promises high returns. If things turn out well, the bank wins. If things go wrong, the taxpayers lose. The principle of liability has obviously been violated. The crucial question at this juncture is the following: what do we need to do to restore it? Well, the decisive point is that banks must be able to fail without dragging the entire financial system down with them. What we need are effective resolution mechanisms for banks. This is common sense at the conceptual level. However, when it comes to implementation, things turn out to be a little more complex. Putting practicable resolution procedures in place is a difficult endeavour, especially in the international context. Systemically important banks have large numbers of entities in many countries, each of which has its own procedures and supervisory traditions. In the absence of a sound legal basis and close cooperation, resolution measures executed in one country might not always be recognised by other countries. Thus a well-coordinated approach between authorities is needed. The purpose is to maintain systemically important activities while resolution procedures are applied. Coordination and advanced planning of resolution measures enable authorities to consider financial stability from an international point of view, not merely from a national perspective. To this end, a new international standard on the recovery and resolution of systemically important institutions has been developed by the Financial Stability Board. Having this new standard is a big step forward. At the European level, a central pillar of the envisaged banking union is the Single Resolution Mechanism. This instrument will allow authorities to restructure or resolve banks without putting taxpayers’ money at stake. In the future, whenever a bank fails, resolution costs must be borne first by shareholders and creditors. After that, a bank-financed resolution fund is to come into play, and only as a last resort are public funds to be used and the taxpayers made to pay. 3 Bringing light to the shadows – the shadow banking system We have made good progress at the global and the European level in addressing the too-big-to-fail problem. However, discussions have mainly centred around the banking system. Yet there are other parts of the financial system that might become a source of systemic risk. One of them is the shadow banking system. According to the Financial Stability Board, the shadow banking system comprises “credit intermediation involving entities and activities outside the regular banking system”. What I think is relevant from a financial stability perspective is that such entities create bank-like risk without being subject to bank regulation. The overall effects of the shadow banking system on financial stability are ambiguous. Theoretically, non-banking financial institutions that perform bank-like activities are associated with diversification and specialisation benefits. Therefore, it could be assumed that they contribute to making the financial system more efficient and more resilient. However, developments in the run-up to the financial crisis revealed something else: activities and entities in the shadow banking system can pose a threat to financial stability. These potential threats are mostly the result of maturity and liquidity transformation, the build-up of leverage and credit risk transfer conducted outside the perimeters of bank regulation. All these activities are not evil per se, but the ensuing systemic risk needs to be contained. All activities must be made transparent, in particular vis-à-vis supervisory authorities, and they need to be adequately regulated. In that regard, I welcome the global regulatory initiative on shadow banking – again under the leadership of the Financial Stability Board. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  And here too, international cooperation is essential for establishing effective regulation. A central feature of the shadow banking system is regulatory arbitrage: activities are shifted from the banking system to the shadow banking system in order to evade regulation. A geographically fragmented approach to regulation would not curb regulatory arbitrage but just take it to another level. Against this backdrop, it is to be welcomed that the G20 have placed the shadow banking system high up on their agenda. 4 Structuring the market – OTC derivatives and CCPs The third issue I would like to raise relates to the structure of the market – the derivatives market, to be precise. Trading in derivatives certainly has the potential to cause massive losses, to disrupt markets and to threaten financial stability. But it is not just during trading that financial stability can be put at risk; it can also be jeopardised at the back office level when transactions are cleared and settled. And this might pose a problem for all market participants, be they part of the banking system or the shadow banking system. The G20’s decision to require OTC derivatives to be cleared centrally was an important cornerstone in regulating OTC derivatives markets. Central counterparties, or CCPs in short, are able to mitigate systemic risk and act as risk buffers in global financial markets. This appears particularly striking when we consider two sources of potentially huge losses: first, extremely one-sided derivatives positions and, second, the high degree of opacity surrounding the interconnectedness of global financial players. In this regard, CCPs will help to better solve another problem I already mentioned: the too-big-to-fail issue. However, CCPs themselves are becoming more systemically important. This harbours potential side effects which need to be monitored. Furthermore, effective recovery and resolution regimes need to be in place for CCPs. To shield taxpayers’ money, potential losses have to be distributed among clearing participants, which are often globally active banks. This gives rise to potential contagion risks and domino effects. Therefore, a careful calibration of recovery and resolution regimes is crucial. Against this backdrop, international coordination is again essential. The regulation of OTC derivatives markets should be the same across all jurisdictions – in spirit, in wording, and in terms of its outcome. This would allow the corresponding national regulators to defer to each other’s rules when cross-border transactions occur. Otherwise, regulatory arbitrage, market fragmentation and liquidity disruptions might be the consequences. Some progress has been made over the past year towards resolving these cross-border issues. One example is the ‘Path Forward’, a joint statement which was agreed upon by the European Commission and the CFTC in July 2013. This statement is a necessary foundation for further cooperation. However, some cross-border matters are still unresolved and urgently need to be addressed. Major differences between the US and EU regulations can be found, for instance, in the methods used to compute the initial margin coverage of CCPs. And they can also be found in the scope of reporting requirements to trade repositories. Let us take a brief look at these two examples. First, the rules used for calculating the minimum initial margins of CCPs differ between the US and the EU. Generally speaking, CCPs ask for initial margins in order to hedge the market risk of a derivatives position during the liquidation period in case a clearing member defaults. Under the existing EU and US regulation, risk managers at CCPs have to take into account different minimum liquidation periods and confidence intervals when calculating adequate initial margins. As a result, the initial margins requested by CCPs may vary considerably, depending on the location of a CCP. This might eventually drive business 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  towards those CCPs with less strict initial margin calculation requirements. To prevent such regulatory arbitrage from happening, it might make sense to agree on consistent and strict international standards in detail and thus reduce national leeway. Second, the mandatory reporting rules differ significantly in terms of timing and scope. In the US, only CFTC-registered “Swap Dealers” and “Major Swap Participants” are required to report their transactions to trade repositories in real time. In the EU, meanwhile, transactions have to be reported by the end of the next business day by both contracting parties. Furthermore, exchange traded derivatives, market prices and collateral levels have to be reported in the EU, but not in the US. It remains to be seen whether these differing reporting rules can be recognised as being equivalent. And – more importantly – it also remains to be seen how a meaningful and accurate global aggregation of trade repository data can be brought about. 5 Laying the groundwork – cooperation and harmonisation Ladies and gentlemen, I have briefly discussed the too-big-to-fail problem, the shadow banking system and the market for OTC derivatives. Each of these issues highlights the need for international cooperation. If we do not coordinate our approaches towards regulation we will create a fragmented financial system. A financial system with vast opportunities for regulatory arbitrage and ample sources of systemic risk. Against this backdrop, recent regulatory initiatives in the US worry me. They seem to contradict the need for international cooperation. A “Balkanisation” of the regulatory space represents a genuine risk, and any regulatory decision should be taken with that consideration in mind – in Europe as well as in the United States. And this not only applies to regulation itself but also to the foundation on which it rests. Regulating and supervising financial institutions requires information. And to satisfy the need for international cooperation, this information has to be internationally comparable. Unfortunately, this is not always the case. It is not an entirely new insight that differences in accounting standards across countries hamper the international comparability of balance sheet data. This in turn can potentially impede financial regulation. A prominent example is the treatment of derivatives and how this affects balance sheet ratios which are subject to regulation. Derivatives netting rules under US GAAP allow US financial institutions to net their derivatives positions to a large extent. In Europe, the IFRS accounting rules are far more restrictive in this regard. That is why derivatives volumes appear to be much larger at European banks than at their US counterparts. Going one step further, regulatory balance sheet ratios which relate to total assets differ between US and European banks. The leverage ratios of US banks, for instance, generally appear much lower than those of European banks. Hence, in this particular case, distortions arising from different accounting rules may make it easier for banks in the US to comply with a given regulatory leverage ratio than for their European peers. So far, standard setters have only agreed to harmonise the information disclosed in the notes of financial statements. Nevertheless, global harmonisation of accounting standards is needed in order to create a regulatory level playing field and avoid regulatory arbitrage. In my view, this is certainly something that has to be moved higher up the agenda of global regulation. 6 Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen, we have made good progress in adjusting financial regulation. Nevertheless, we have not reached our destination; regulatory reform has to continue. I have discussed some of the outstanding issues in my speech: too-big-to-fail banks, shadow 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  banking, OTC derivatives and accounting standards. I also highlighted the need for international cooperation. At the beginning of my speech I cited a passage from the G20’s Washington declaration. Let me close my speech by quoting another passage: “Our financial markets are global in scope, therefore, intensified international cooperation among regulators and strengthening of international standards, where necessary, and their consistent implementation is necessary to protect against adverse cross-border, regional and global developments affecting international financial stability.” That is the spirit, ladies and gentlemen. To reach our destination – a stable financial system – we will have to walk together. Thank you very much.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Manuel Sánchez: Evolving global challenges and policy options for Latin America Remarks by Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the 2014 IIF (Institute of International Finance) Latin America Economic Forum, Bahia, Brazil, 29 March 2014. *      *      * It is certainly a pleasure to be invited to the stunningly beautiful Brazilian coast to participate in the 2014 IIF Latin America Economic Forum. I would like to thank the Institute of International Finance for the chance to share some thoughts with you on the challenges and opportunities faced by Latin America in the current economic environment. I will organize my remarks as follows. First, I will comment on the changing global context for emerging markets; second, I will highlight some policy options that our countries may entertain to confront likely external financial headwinds; and finally, I will make a few comments on the Mexican economy. Evolving global challenges Two trends are particularly noticeable in recent world economic developments. The first is decreasing growth since 2010, especially for emerging economies, amid modest post-crisis global improvement. Softening commodity prices and the economic deceleration of China have contributed to this tendency, affecting some Latin American commodity exporters. In particular, grains and metals have seen moderately falling prices, if from high levels. The second trend is a reversal of fortune in global financial conditions for emerging economies. Whereas in the wake of the Great Recession, these countries drew substantial capital inflows, especially portfolio funds, and saw the prices of their financial assets rise, in 2013, the tables turned. In particular, the expectation and eventual beginning of the tapering of asset purchases by the U.S. Federal Reserve sharpened global risk aversion. Since May of last year, portfolio capital inflows to emerging economies, previously the darling destination for foreign funds, have contracted and in some countries, even become outflows. At the same time, the prices of many financial assets seen as risky have fallen abruptly. Emerging-market bonds, equities and currencies were affected by the change in market sentiment. Also contributing to lower asset holdings and values has been a weaker relative outlook for growth in emerging economies. However, not all countries have been treated equally. Investors have differentiated among destinations according to macroeconomic fundamentals and prospects for economic expansion, among other factors. Nations with large financial imbalances, whether internal or external, have been hit hardest, including countries in the Latin American region. More recently, political tensions and uncertainty on the ability of some governments to resolve external financing and inflation problems have turned up the pressure on various nations to act swiftly. For almost a year, negative spillover effects to other emerging economies have resulted. Moving forward, the foreseeable real and financial environment for emerging economies will continue to be challenging. Specifically, the world economic upturn will remain muted. One reason is that the recovery is now being led by advanced countries.1                                                 1 See, for example, Consensus Economics (2014), Consensus Forecasts, March; and Consensus Economics (2014), Latin American Consensus Forecasts, March. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Higher growth for developed nations is good news. But support from them will be moderate. Mature economies by nature only grow so fast. Also, output will probably remain below secular trends given the fact these countries need to continue fiscal consolidation measures in the wake of past expansionary cyclical postures and given increasing long-term government obligations. Another factor calling for prudent expectations on global recovery is economic change undertaken by China, where the authorities are making efforts to adjust to developments. Rapid credit growth has fed real estate price pressures and affected bank balance sheets; shadow banking operations may pose stability risks; and signs of swift expansion in certain sectors may require restrictive policies. For all these reasons, some commodities are likely to see lower demand from China, which may dampen commodity price growth. Furthermore, conditions in financial markets will probably continue to be bumpy. A major reason is the uncertainty surrounding the process of reversing the extraordinary monetary stimulus in advanced countries, above all in the United States. As it reflects better economic prospects, unwinding is a welcome development. But central banks are nonetheless sailing in uncharted waters. Unconventional monetary policies, including asset purchases and forward guidance, are unprecedented; changes in the use of these instruments compound uncertainty related to the eventual decision to raise policy interest rates. Authorities will no doubt withdraw monetary expansion in the most cautious way possible. However, dissonance between their communication and public perceptions of future actions may give rise to sharp market fluctuations, as occurred in 2013. In any case, even without future turbulence, financing for emerging economies will likely become tighter, chilling enthusiasm somewhat from portfolio investors for their assets. Policy implications In the context of a modest recovery and less favorable financial conditions, what can policy makers in Latin America do to make the best of things for their economies? As always, there is no valid one-size-fits-all response, and desirable measures necessarily depend on each country’s circumstances. But two separate situations may help us identify a few policy options. First, in cases of significant market stress, emergency measures, such as those oriented toward managing the foreign-exchange market and capital flows, might be considered. In particular, the use of international reserves to attenuate market volatility may be helpful, as shown by recent responses in various severely stressed economies, which also tightened monetary policy. However, evidence on the effectiveness of foreign-exchange market intervention is mixed, and the impact is almost always temporary. In addition, use of this policy should not impede adjustment to any existing large external imbalances. Moreover, the imposition of capital controls has limited short-term success, usually affects only the composition of flows, and may harm prospects for future financing.2 In cases of homegrown economic stresses, the limitations of emergency measures are more obvious. For example, some nations have experienced over-leveraging and price bubbles either from capital booms or loose fiscal and financial policies, which may have weakened                                                 2 Empirical evidence on the effectiveness of policy interventions on foreign exchange markets and capital flows can be found in Broto, C. (2013), “The effectiveness of forex interventions in four Latin American countries,” Emerging Markets Review 17; and Forbes, et. al. (2013), “Capital Controls and Macroprudential Measures: What Are They Good For?” DIW Berlin, German Institute for Economic Research, Discussion paper 1343. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  banks’ balance sheets. Tackling underlying problems as soon as possible is a necessary condition to regain stability. Available tools include fiscal and monetary tightening, micro and macro prudential policies and exchange rate adjustment. In the short term, some tradeoffs may be involved. For example, more restrictive monetary policy to counteract capital outflows may weaken a cyclical upturn and result in disorderly deleveraging, but keeping monetary policy loose could trigger inflation and exacerbate balance-of-payment problems. Second, even if no significant imbalance is evident, preventive policies are always called for to prepare for potential financial strain. Possible fragilities to watch for and correct preemptively include rapidly rising external debt and foreign currency mismatches, as well as domestic asset price bubbles. All in all, the best strategy is to strengthen macroeconomic foundations, fortify the financial system through better regulation and oversight, and promote reforms that enhance economic efficiency and hence potential growth. The Mexican economy During recent years, Mexico has been an important recipient of foreign portfolio funds among emerging economies. The country has also fared relatively well in the current less favorable external financial environment. In particular, since May 2013, the Mexican peso has depreciated less than many other emerging-market currencies. This is noteworthy as in this period Mexico has not resorted to any type of foreign exchange intervention, a policy that has become more pervasive in several other countries. The freely floating exchange rate regime in Mexico is clearly in force.3 Since last May, the yield curve has steepened in tandem with that of the United States. Shifts in the yield curve have mainly reflected higher term premiums, stemming from anticipated unwinding of the expansionary monetary stance in the United States. Possible effects from domestic expected inflation, currency risk and future policy interest rate hikes do not seem to have played an important role. Also, country risk indicators, such as the Mexican government’s credit default swaps, rose less than those of many other emerging economies.4 Moreover, capital flows have continued to increase, albeit at a slower pace, particularly those oriented toward fixed-income assets. Foreign holdings of peso-denominated government bonds have reached new highs, although portfolio duration has dropped slightly. This contrasts with the reductions of holdings observed in emerging markets as a whole. Mexico’s ability to weather recent market turmoil may reflect several factors, including the flexible exchange rate regime that has long served as a buffer to external shocks, transmitting global financial signals to the domestic economy efficiently. Also, no clear imbalances built up during the capital boom years. Current account and fiscal deficits have remained moderate relative to GDP. Furthermore, the ratio of private-sector credit to output, if anything, stayed too low if international comparisons are taken into account. The growth in this ratio during the last few years has been one of the lowest among emerging economies, which poses challenges for making credit more available in Mexico. Longstanding prudential regulation and more adequate business models have made the banking system solid, with healthy levels of capital, provisions and asset quality. Bank rules designed to forestall foreign currency mismatches cover deposits, net liabilities, net open positions and liquidity ratios.                                                 3 Pursuant to regulation issued by the Bank of Mexico in accordance with its law, the Federal Treasury and Pemex must carry out all of their foreign currency transactions with the central bank. Proceeds from Pemex transactions have largely been the source of international reserves accumulated by the Bank of Mexico. 4 See Banco de México (2014), Informe Trimestral, Octubre – Diciembre 2013, February, pp. 50–53. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Mexico needs to stay the course, buttressing its economy through effective monetary policy to keep inflation subdued, as it has been in the last decade. A list of sound economic fundamentals does not imply that the economy is free of risks. Stability cannot be taken for granted, and authorities will have to continue monitoring conditions for signs of any weaknesses in order to prevent any potential market disarray. Finally, the Mexican economy is undergoing a period of low cyclical growth that began in the middle of 2012. Some factors should be of a temporary nature, such as a slowing of Mexican exports due to the previous deceleration of the U.S. economy, lower government spending tied to the beginning of a new federal administration and the restructuring of the housing developers market in the wake of the failure of the three largest firms in the sector. Thus, improvement in these factors should lead to an upturn. In particular, close linkages with the U.S. economy could make future growth more solid than that derived from the dependence of exports on commodity prices.5 Other more lasting problems center on the stagnation of total factor productivity, which contributes largely to Mexico’s disappointing long-term economic performance. Current momentum on structural reforms, which seek to generate greater efficiency, is highly promising. The agenda is ample, covering many sectors of the economy. Although the full effects of the reforms may take years to materialize, their direction and the confidence that comes with positive expectations have likely already helped to attract continued capital inflows, and should fuel a sustained recovery.6 Concluding remarks The present environment is a challenging one for all emerging economies, including those of Latin America, but challenges, of course, always carry with them potential opportunities. The expected global economic rebound is good news, especially for those countries poised to benefit from strong ties with the world’s biggest consumers. Future market conditions may be rocky, posing risks in particular to nations with financing vulnerabilities. The best ring-fencing strategy is to correct imbalances as efficiently as possible. In any case, a preemptive approach to strengthen macroeconomic and financial foundations is imperative. Furthermore, structural reforms to foster productivity may show the way to more sustainable long-term economic growth.                                                 5 Commodities make up less than 20 percent of Mexico’s total exports, while the average share in other Latin American countries surpasses 60 percent. Source: own calculations with data from Banco de México and the World Trade Organization Statistical Database. 6 For a summary of some salient structural reforms see Sanchez, M. (2013), “Mexico’s prospects for economic growth,” presented at the United States‐Mexico Chamber of Commerce, N.Y., October. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Providing better access to banking in Uganda Speech by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the official opening of Imperial Bank Uganda Limited, Acacia Mall Branch, Kampala, 10 March 2014. *      *      * The Shareholders of Imperial Bank Uganda Limited Members of the Board of Directors;  Senior Management and staff;  Distinguished Customers; Invited Guests; Ladies and Gentlemen. I am greatly honoured to be invited as chief guest at this official opening of a new branch of Imperial Bank at Acacia Mall. Let me begin by congratulating the Directors and the Management of Imperial Bank for the progress they have made in expanding the bank’s foot print in the Ugandan banking market. This is the fifth branch that the bank has opened since it began its operations in Uganda three years ago. It will provide better access to premier banking services for the bank’s customers in this vibrant business location in the city.  Uganda currently has 25 commercial banks in operation, compared to only 15 at the end of 2007. In the last six years, 12 new banks have entered the market in Uganda, of which Imperial Bank is one of the most recent. It is pertinent to ask what benefits has the almost doubling of the number of commercial banks operating in Uganda delivered to bank customers in this country. I would like to spend a few minutes addressing this question.  For many years, during the colonial period and in the three decades after independence, our banking markets were dominated by a relatively small number of banks, mostly foreign or publicly owned. Competition was not very vigorous and access to banking services was very limited for the majority of the Ugandan population. This began to change in the 1990s, with new privately owned banks entering the market. Since the mid 2000s, new entry into the banking market has gathered pace, comprising for the most part banks which are subsidiaries of African banks, especially banks from Nigeria and Kenya. Imperial Bank is part of this trend; its parent bank is Kenyan.  The new entry into our banking market has spurred a dramatic expansion of the physical presence of banks in Uganda. The number of commercial bank branches has expanded from 194 in 2007 to the current level of 544. The 12 new entrants to our market in the last six years contributed 152 of these new branches. The expansion of banking has also brought many new customers into the banking system. In 2007 there were 2.2 million bank accounts held in commercial banks. This number has now risen to 5.5 million.  But perhaps what is more important than the increase in the number of branches or bank accounts is the fact that many of the new entrants into the banking market, all owned by the private sector and predominantly from other African countries, are bringing unique attributes to banking in Uganda. In particular, they are able to draw upon expertise in serving the specific needs of businesses and households which has been gained in the markets of their parent banks, particularly with regard to new products or innovative ways of delivering services to customers. For example, Imperial Bank offers banking products such as structured warehouse financing, supply chain financing and asset financing to a wide range of its clients in the Small and Medium Size Enterprise and Mid-Corporate segments of the business sector.  
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Competition within the banking market takes many different forms. If new banks are to expand their market share, they must be able to carve out a viable niche in the market and offer their customers financial products and services which cannot be obtained from their competitors. New entrants must grow in order to survive in the banking market, because there are important economies of scale to be realised in banking. With the implementation of the common market in the East African Community, competition will intensify and efficiency and quality of service will be paramount for success in the market place. To survive, banks will have to find ways of reducing their costs and passing these reductions onto their customers and seek to develop innovative quality products for the market.  With these remarks, I once again thank the Shareholders, the Board of Directors and Management of Imperial Bank for demonstrating their commitment to serve the people of Uganda through the expansion of the branch network. This will also contribute to advancing the Bank of Uganda’s financial inclusion agenda, which involves spreading access to formal financial services to those sections of the population which currently lack access.  It is now my honor and great pleasure to declare the Imperial Bank’s Acacia Mall Kampala Branch officially inaugurated.  Thank you for listening.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Koji Ishida: Economic activity and prices in Japan and monetary policy Speech by Mr Koji Ishida, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Saitama, 26 February 2014. *      *      * I. Monetary policy A. Introduction of the price stability target and the joint statement by the government and the Bank of Japan First, I would like to describe the status of the Bank of Japan’s monetary policy conduct in January 2013. At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held on January 21 and 22, 2013, the Bank decided to introduce the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI). At the same time, it released a joint statement with the government, which clearly stated that the government and the Bank would strengthen their policy coordination and work together to overcome deflation early and achieve sustainable economic growth with price stability. In the statement, the Bank announced that, under the price stability target, it would pursue monetary easing and aim to achieve this target at the earliest possible time. Concurrently, the government announced that it would not only flexibly manage macroeconomic policy but also formulate measures for strengthening the competitiveness and growth potential of Japan’s economy, and promote them strongly. The government also announced that it would steadily promote measures aimed at establishing a sustainable fiscal structure with a view to ensuring the credibility of fiscal management. B. Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) Now I would like to talk about the Bank’s current monetary policy measures. At the MPM held on April 3 and 4, 2013, the Bank introduced QQE to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. The features of this new monetary policy measure are as follows. First, with a view to pursuing quantitative monetary easing, the Bank changed the main operating target for money market operations from the uncollateralized overnight call rate to the monetary base, which is the total amount of money the Bank directly supplies to the economy. On this basis, the Bank is increasing the monetary base – defined as the sum of banknotes in circulation, coins in circulation, and current account deposits held by financial institutions at the Bank – at an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion yen. Second, the Bank is purchasing Japanese government bonds (JGBs) as the primary means of increasing the monetary base, so that their amount outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen. Moreover, the average remaining maturity of the Bank’s JGB purchases has been extended from slightly less than three years to about seven years – equivalent to the average maturity of the amount outstanding of JGBs issued. Third, in addition to JGBs, with a view to lowering risk premiums of asset prices, the Bank is purchasing exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 1 trillion yen and 30 billion yen, respectively. And fourth, the Bank will continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary to maintain the target in a stable manner. It will examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. So far, I have explained the basic framework of QQE. Almost a year has passed since QQE was introduced in April 2013. The amount outstanding of the monetary base has increased from 138 trillion yen at the end of 2012 to 202 trillion yen at the end of 2013, and has been accumulating smoothly toward 270 trillion yen, the amount projected at end-2014. The 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  amount outstanding of JGBs has also been accumulating smoothly toward 190 trillion yen, the amount projected at end-2014, increasing from 89 trillion yen at the end of 2012 to 142 trillion yen at the end of 2013. C. Loan support program In addition to implementing QQE, the Bank has been employing the Loan Support Program to promote financial institutions’ use of the large scale monetary base – supplied by the Bank through its aggressive monetary easing – for their efforts to increase the amount of bank lending and strengthen the growth potential of Japan’s economy. At the MPM held on February 17 and 18, 2014, the Bank decided to double the scale of the Loan Support Program and to extend its application period by one year. The Loan Support Program consists of two measures: the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank lending (hereafter the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility) and the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth (hereafter the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility). Specifically, under the former, the Bank decided to enable financial institutions to borrow funds from the Bank up to an amount that is twice as much as the net increase in their lending. As for the latter, the Bank decided to double the maximum amount of its fund-provisioning under the main rules from 3.5 trillion yen to 7 trillion yen. Under these facilities, financial institutions will be able to borrow funds at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent per annum for four years. Thus far, the Loan Support Program has supported financial institutions’ efforts to increase the total amount of their lending and has produced positive effects as a catalyst in regard to firms’ and financial institutions’ efforts to strengthen the foundations for Japan’s economic growth. The Bank expects that the enhancements made at the February MPM will further promote financial institutions’ actions as well as stimulate firms’ and households’ demand for credit, with a view to encouraging banks’ lending and strengthening the foundations for economic growth. D. Developments in financial conditions and financial markets Reflecting such policy measures, financial conditions in Japan are accommodative. Firms’ funding costs have been hovering at low levels, with long-term average contract interest rates on new loans and discounts recording a historic low. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds have also been favorable. In addition, in a situation where the year-on-year rate of change in bank lending continues to increase, loans provided by shinkin banks have also been recording year-on-year positive growth since summer 2013. Firms have continued to see financial institutions’ lending attitudes as improving. Firms’ financial positions have also improved regardless of firm size. This was evidenced by the diffusion index for financial positions of small firms: the proportion of firms responding that their financial positions were “easy” exceeded the proportion of those responding that they were “tight” for the first time since the bubble period of the early 1990s. Turning to developments in financial markets, yields on 10-year JGBs – the benchmark long-term interest rate – have been stable at a low level of around 0.6 percent as the Bank proceeds with its JGB purchases. Given that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is currently around 1¼ percent, long-term real interest rates are presumed to be in negative territory. As for foreign exchange rates, the yen has been depreciating, albeit with some fluctuations. Stock prices have been trending upward. Meanwhile, according to the money stock statistics, the growth rates of investment trusts and pecuniary trusts have been at high levels, indicating that money holders such as households have been increasing their risk assets. As I have described, accommodative financial conditions seem to have recently been effectively stimulating private demand, and such conditions appear to be forming the basis 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  for Japan’s economy to overcome the negative effects of the consumption tax hikes and for a virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending to operate firmly. II. Developments in economic activity and prices A. Overseas economies Next, I will talk about developments in economic activity and prices. Overseas economies – mainly advanced economies – are starting to recover, although the performance remains lackluster in some parts. The growth rate of the global economy in 2014, released in January by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), is projected to accelerate to 3.7 percent from 3.0 percent for 2013. Naturally, the growth rates in emerging and commodity-exporting economies are higher than those in advanced economies. However, advanced economies are projected to show stronger growth momentum than emerging and commodity-exporting economies in 2014, compared to a year earlier. Among advanced economies, the growth rate of the U.S. economy is projected to accelerate in 2014 compared to the previous year. Inevitably the growth rate of the U.S. economy in the January–March quarter of 2014 will be adversely affected by the record winter snowstorm since December 2013. However, in a situation where balance-sheet adjustments in the household sector seem to have mostly been completed and the fiscal drag has faded, production and private demand are expected to remain firm and the economic recovery is expected to become widespread from the spring. With regard to the employment situation, although some current data showed weakness reflecting the effects of the winter snowstorm, the improving trend remained, as evidenced by a declining trend in the unemployment rate. As for the euro area, in 2014 the economy is projected to emerge from negative growth. Concerns persist over further disinflation, but business and household sentiment continues to improve in a situation where financial markets have stabilized, and production has been picking up, albeit moderately. Whereas improvements are observed in advanced economies as I described, the situation varies among emerging and commodity-exporting economies. First, the Chinese economy has continued to see stable growth, albeit at a slower pace than before, maintaining a year-on-year growth rate of 7.5–8.0 percent in the October–December quarter of 2013. The Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) for manufacturing activity has recently shown some weakness, but the Chinese economy is expected to basically maintain stable growth at around the current pace under state control. Among other emerging and commodity-exporting economies, economic developments in the NIEs are picking up, particularly in exports, as the effects of the economic recovery in advanced economies spread to them. In contrast, growth momentum in the ASEAN countries has remained weak because of their relatively limited ability to profit from the recovery in advanced economies. In particular, there are concerns about the impact of unstable political situations in some of these countries on trade with Japan, for example. Among emerging and commodity-exporting economies, some of them – which have structural vulnerabilities such as current account deficits – saw nervousness in their markets at one point as the Federal Reserve proceeded to reduce the pace of its asset purchases, but the situation recently regained stability. B. Japan’s economic activity and prices 1. Current situation a. Economic activity Now, I will discuss Japan’s economic activity. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The Bank’s current assessment is that Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately. Moreover, a front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike has recently been observed. Real GDP for the October–December quarter of 2013, released on February 17, 2014, showed quarter-on-quarter growth of 0.3 percent, representing the fourth consecutive quarter of positive growth. By component, private demand for the quarter, including private consumption and business fixed investment, recorded a higher growth rate than in the July–September quarter. As for private consumption, consumption of goods such as durable goods increased partly reflecting the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike amid the improvement in the employment and income situation evidenced by the increase in winter bonus payments. Business fixed investment, which had previously been lacking momentum compared to firms’ annual fixed investment plans and the improving trend of their profits, rose noticeably at last in the October–December quarter. In contrast, exports have lacked momentum to date despite the recovery trend in overseas economies, mainly advanced economies, and movements in the foreign exchange market. As imports grew substantially, net exports continued to significantly push down the GDP growth rate, as they had in the July–September quarter. Although only a handful of economic indicators have been released for the period starting in January 2014, the seasonally adjusted number of new passenger-car registrations – a consumption-related indicator – increased rather substantially by 6.9 percent for January on a month-on-month basis, suggesting the possibility that the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike is becoming pronounced. Meanwhile, real exports for January declined by 2.3 percent overall, presumably due to a drop in exports to China. Indices of industrial production for January, which reflected these developments in domestic and external demand, are scheduled for release on February 28. According to the Survey of Production Forecast in Manufacturing released in January, production for January was expected to show relatively stronger growth led by production to meet domestic demand. b. Prices Regarding developments in prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) for December 2013 climbed from the previous month to 1.3 percent. Through the latter half of 2013, rises in prices of energy-related items such as petroleum products – reflecting movements in crude oil prices and foreign exchange rates – contributed to the rise in prices. However, price increases have gradually been observed in other items recently, while private consumption has remained resilient, indicating that such increases are steadily becoming widespread. In fact, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less food and energy) rose to 0.7 percent for December 2013, representing the strongest growth since August 1998. 2. Outlook for economic activity In terms of economic activity, while domestic demand, particularly private consumption, is likely to maintain firmness as external demand is expected to increase – albeit moderately – a virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending is likely to be maintained. As for prices, whereas the upward contribution from price movements in energy-related items is likely to diminish gradually, the boosting effect of an improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance accompanied by an economic recovery is expected to spread. Consequently, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food), excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, is likely to be around 1¼ percent for some time. As I mentioned, Japan’s economy is likely to continue a moderate recovery as a trend, while it will be affected by the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the consumption tax hike. For the time being, I will pay attention to the following points. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  a. The effects of the consumption tax hike The first point for attention is the effects of the consumption tax hike. The front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike has already been observed to a considerable extent in durable consumer goods, mainly houses, passenger cars, and white goods. If the scale of the front-loaded increase in demand is greater than expected toward the end of fiscal 2013, the subsequent decline in April and beyond will be all the more substantial. It is inevitable that the consumption tax hike will have adverse effects on households’ real income. Nevertheless, while the economy as a whole will be underpinned by the government’s economic measures, an increase is likely in exports and business fixed investment – which have lacked momentum to date. Therefore, even if the economy temporarily posts negative growth for the April–June quarter of 2014, the recovery trend itself is unlikely to dissipate. Meanwhile, I consider it necessary to carefully assess the underlying trend of various indicators scheduled for release over the period through the first half of fiscal 2014, given that they are likely to show large fluctuations, both upward and downward, due to the consumption tax hike. b. Risks for overseas economies and developments in exports The second point for attention is risks for overseas economies and developments in exports. Overseas economies – mainly advanced economies – are starting to recover, but a high degree of uncertainty is likely to remain over the outlook for some emerging and commodity-exporting economies with structural vulnerabilities such as fiscal and current account deficits. Although the markets are currently calming down, it is necessary to monitor whether such risks in these economies will materialize and affect the global economy. Exports are expected to offset a temporary fallback in demand that is likely to be observed from April 2014 following the consumption tax hike, and are expected to play their traditional role as the trigger of a virtuous economic cycle. However, they lack some momentum at the moment. As background to this lack of momentum, a number of issues have been raised for discussion concerning both cyclical and structural problems, such as the pace of the recovery in overseas economies and the shift of manufacturing firms’ production sites to overseas. I am also monitoring whether exports, which have significant spillover effects on business fixed investment, will act as a driving force of Japan’s economy as expected from fiscal 2014 onward. c. The employment and income situation The third point for attention is developments in the employment and income situation of households. With regard to the recent situation, supply and demand conditions in the labor market have continued to improve steadily, as shown by the fact that the active job openings-to-applicants ratio rose to 1.03 in December 2013. Employee income has also picked up moderately because, while total cash earnings per employee have generally bottomed out, the year-on-year rate of increase in the number of regular employees has expanded. For domestic demand, particularly private consumption, to maintain its firmness concurrently with a rise in prices, it is essential that the virtuous cycle of improvement continue in the employment and income situation supporting consumption. I intend to monitor the results of this spring’s wage negotiations and the extent to which employee income as a whole improves, including the degree to which the number of employees increases. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  III. Achieving the price stability target A. Forecasts for prices through fiscal 2015 Thus far, I have outlined the Bank’s assessment of Japan’s recent economic activity and prices. Based on this assessment, the Bank compiled and released the Policy Board members’ forecasts for economic activity and prices through fiscal 2015. In terms of the medians of the members’ forecasts for prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is expected to register 0.7 percent for fiscal 2013. Excluding the effects of the consumption tax hikes, it is projected to reach 1.3 percent and 1.9 percent for fiscal 2014 and 2015, respectively. It is likely to reach around 2 percent – the price stability target – toward the latter half of the projection period, that is, through fiscal 2015. B. The price stability target and price indices The Bank judges that the basic indicator used to express the price stability target must be a price index that comprehensively covers goods and services consumed by households and that the general public at large is accustomed to. To this end, the Bank views the CPI for all items as important. However, since the CPI for all items can be affected by temporary fluctuations of some of its components, the Bank uses the CPI (all items less fresh food) to identify the underlying trend of inflation; fresh food is excluded from the index because it is a highly volatile component. To grasp the underlying trend in the CPI, the Bank also examines reference indices such as the CPI (all items less food and energy), the Laspeyres chain index (all items less fresh food), and the 10 percent trimmed mean. As for other price indices, the CPI (all items less imputed rent) is used as a deflator to convert nominal figures into real ones in statistics relating to household consumption expenditures. This price index was adopted because it was considered to be the one most suitable for measuring actual household consumption expenditures, given that imputed rent on owner-occupied homes is not actually paid. In the long run, each of these price indices shows the same movements as the overall index, but at each point in time they could move somewhat differently, reflecting temporary factors. For example, the year-on-year rates of growth for December 2013 in the CPI (all items less fresh food) and the CPI (all items less food and energy) were 1.3 percent and 0.7 percent, respectively – as I mentioned earlier – while that in the CPI for all items was 1.6 percent, the Laspeyres chain index (all items less fresh food) was 1.2 percent, the 10 percent trimmed mean was 0.8 percent, and the CPI (all items less imputed rent) was 2.0 percent. The Bank judges it necessary to assess price developments comprehensively by monitoring a wide range of price indices such as those just mentioned. It seeks to achieve the price stability target at the earliest possible time and maintain it in a stable manner. In this way, it seeks to fulfill its mission of “achieving price stability, thereby contributing to the sound development of the national economy”, as stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  William C Dudley: US monetary policy and emerging market economies Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Roundtable Discussion in Honor of Terrence Checki “Three Decades of Crises: What Have We Learned?”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 27 March 2014. *      *      * The scaling back of the Federal Reserve’s asset purchase program – both the prospect and the actuality – has created significant challenges for many emerging market economies. Although this shift in U.S. monetary policy was inevitable at some point, it seems to have triggered a broad-based sentiment shift in global markets. Recent events are a reminder that U.S. monetary policy can have powerful effects abroad. What lessons should we draw from these events? That will be the general theme of my brief remarks today. Before I go on, though, I first would remind you that the thoughts I offer today are my own, and should not be interpreted as representing the position of the Federal Reserve System. I also want to call attention to Terry Checki, who is being honored today and has been at the center of events in global finance for more than three decades, and who has done so much to shape them. I can’t think of a better way of recognizing his many contributions – and kicking off what I know will be an exciting and fulfilling next stage of his career – than this roundtable which brings us together here today. Let me begin by highlighting some of the key points I will be making. First, what we’ve seen recently is not new. Changes in Fed policy, and especially moves in the past to tighten monetary policy, have often created challenges for emerging market economies (EMEs). Second, these countries, as a group, are better equipped today to handle those challenges than at perhaps any time in the past. This reflects the fundamental improvements and stronger policy frameworks that many emerging market economies have put in place over the past 15 years. Third, given the role of the dollar as the global reserve currency, the Federal Reserve has a special responsibility to manage policy in a way that helps promote global financial stability. Fourth, I believe we need better international mechanisms to cushion the adjustment process for when capital flows abruptly change direction. Like other central banks, our monetary policy mandate is domestic. But, our actions often have global implications that feed back into the U.S. economy, and we need to always keep this in mind. We also need to be careful not to underestimate the consequences of our actions. Focusing only on direct channels, the effects that one would expect to ripple back to the United States from problems in one or two EMEs typically look quite small. But, when all of the indirect channels of feedback are aggregated properly – which admittedly is difficult to do – the effects may be considerably larger. My point is that we tend to underestimate these feedback effects. For most of us, the market volatility of this past spring and summer still remains fresh in our minds. EME financial markets were hit hardest, with declines in equity prices, a widening in sovereign debt spreads, and a sharp increase in foreign exchange rate volatility. In the U.S., we saw a spike in Treasury yields, with 10-year rates rising by roughly 100 basis points from early May to early July, and rising by roughly another 30 basis points before peaking in early September. Most commentary has focused on the shift in expectations with respect to U.S. monetary policy – and, in particular, to uncertainty about the timing and implications of Fed tapering – as the catalyst for these moves. This focus seems generally right, although other factors also played a role. Market participants also had to evaluate the possibility that growth in China and other EMEs might be slowing even as growth in the U.S. and other advanced economies 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  was picking up. The subsequent market movements as investors withdrew funds from EME investments were an abrupt shock for EMEs generally, especially after the long earlier period of abundant liquidity and ample inflows. From one perspective, the unconventional nature of recent U.S. monetary policy adds little that is fundamentally new to the challenges now facing EMEs. These policies simply represent a way of easing, driven by our coming up against the zero lower bound. Central bankers have managed differences across countries in cyclical positions and policy stances many times in the past. But, from another perspective, we have less experience operating with unconventional monetary policy and this creates more potential uncertainties. This puts a premium on continued dialogue among central bankers, between central bankers and the market, and keen listening skills on our part. In my view, the fact that our large scale asset purchase programs affect the size of term risk premia globally is important. This set of monetary policies affects financial asset prices in a different way compared to changes in short-term interest rates, and we should be humble about what we claim about understanding the importance of this distinction. For the period ahead, it seems likely that markets will remain focused on vulnerabilities they might have ignored a year ago. The greater premium on strong fundamentals, policy coherence and predictability will likely remain. There will be no one right answer in managing the trade-offs that come with the changed environment, and adjustment will sometimes be difficult. Moreover, we will undoubtedly experience further bumps in the road. The renewed volatility we saw in January is proof enough of that. Yet, I think we can remain generally optimistic on the outlook so long as market participants continue to appropriately discriminate across countries, rather than treating EMEs as a homogenous group. Furthermore, many EMEs generally appear better equipped today to handle the Fed’s prospective exit from its exceptional policy accommodation than they were in past tightening cycles. This reflects the fundamental reforms these EMEs have put in place over the past 15 years, as well as the hard lessons learned from past periods of market stress. Among the positives are: • The absence of the type of fixed exchange rate peg regimes that often were undermined violently in the past during periods of stress; • Improved debt service ratios and generally moderate external debt levels; • Larger foreign exchange reserve liquidity cushions; • Clearer and more coherent monetary policy frameworks, supporting what are now generally low to moderate inflation rates; • Generally improved fiscal discipline; and • Better capitalized banking systems, supported by strengthened regulatory and supervisory frameworks. Of course progress has not been uniform across EMEs and more work remains to strengthen institutional structures further in some countries. In particular, vulnerabilities have built up recently in several important EMEs. Still, the fundamental improvements I’ve cited leave many EMEs better positioned than in the past to weather those times in the cycle when the external environment turns from welcoming to wary. The impact that changes in Fed policy can have beyond our borders has led to calls for us to do more to internalize those impacts, or even that policymaking be internationally coordinated. As I’ve already noted, Fed policies have significant effects internationally, given the central place of U.S. markets in the global financial system and the dollar’s status as the leading global reserve currency. In pursuing our policy responsibilities, we seek to conduct policy transparently and based on clear principles. We are mindful of the global effects of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Fed policy. Promoting growth and stability in the U.S., I believe, is the most important contribution we can make to growth and stability worldwide. There is, of course, the argument that Fed policy has been too accommodative for too long, creating risks for financial stability worldwide. Here, I think, it’s important to consider carefully the counterfactual. Would countries beyond our borders really have been better off with a weaker U.S. economy? The fundamental issue is whether U.S. monetary policy has helped support our dual objectives of stable prices and maximum sustainable growth and whether this is consistent with a healthy global economy. Moreover, it is far from clear that explicitly coordinated policy would produce better outcomes for the global economy generally, or the EMEs specifically. Central banks have challenges enough in tailoring policies to their domestic circumstances. I believe that it would be taking on too much to attempt to collectively fashion policy in reference to global conditions. Moreover, our last system of explicit coordination – the system of fixed exchange rates under Bretton Woods – broke down for a reason. Monetary policy meant to suit everybody is likely in the end to suit nobody. Similar considerations underlie the widespread move in the emerging world away from fixed exchange rate regimes. Policymakers worldwide have learned that a framework capable of responding in a disciplined but flexible manner to changing domestic conditions works best over the long run. While explicit coordination looks neither feasible nor desirable, there is more that central banks in general, and the Fed in particular, could do to be better global stewards. One thing recent events demonstrate is the importance of effective Fed communication. It is clear in retrospect that our attempts last spring to provide guidance about the potential timing and pace of tapering confused market participants. In particular, markets seemed to conflate tapering with monetary policy tightening and raised their expected paths for policy rates. Lately, we seem to have done better: markets now seem to understand that policy rates will likely remain exceptionally low for a considerable period of time even after tapering is completed. As you know, we’ve taken a number of steps in recent years to increase transparency and improve our communications. This includes regular press conferences following Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings by the Fed chair; the publishing of growth and inflation forecasts of FOMC participants; and a concerted attempt to lay out the guideposts that the FOMC will look at to assess progress toward our mandate. This last element, of course, goes along with our move to explicit forward guidance, as part of our efforts to provide stimulus at the zero lower bound. We are, though, still learning how to more effectively communicate, especially given our new and expanded set of policy instruments. A second area in which we can and must do better is safeguarding financial stability. Simply put, we failed to act either early enough or decisively enough to stem the credit excesses that spawned the financial crisis and the Great Recession. The United States was not alone in this, but given our position in the global financial system, we especially should have done better. We’ve taken important steps, reflecting both new legislative mandates and a broader effort to rethink our regulatory and supervisory framework. Systemically important banking organizations must now hold amounts of capital and liquidity that are better aligned with their risk profiles, compensation schemes for these institutions will be more focused on rewarding long-term results and the official sector is making progress in solving the too-big-to-fail dilemma. All of this remains very much a work in progress. But, these efforts should help us to avoid repeating the mistakes of the recent past, and to take a more proactive stance toward mitigating potential future vulnerabilities. Of course, we at the Fed are not alone here. Since the recent financial crisis, central banks worldwide have been engaged in a broad rethinking of how better to fulfill their mandates. I also think there is another area we need to work on, an area where very little has been done to date. We need to collectively devise a better international mechanism for facilitating 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  adjustment when the direction of capital flows changes abruptly. The current regime strikes me as inefficient and often ineffective. Holding large cushions of foreign exchange reserves is expensive, drawing down those reserves is often unattractive because of the potential adverse signal that this sends, and EMEs are loath to turn to the International Monetary Fund for resources to cushion the adjustment process. It seems to me that we could design a better global solution of collective insurance – access to liquid resources in times of stress that were not stigmatized and that could and would be used to facilitate adjustment. This could help reduce market volatility and dampen the size of foreign exchange and other adjustments. This is a topic, in my opinion, that deserves greater attention from central bankers around the world. Let me close with a final thought. The largest problems that countries create for others often emanate from getting policy wrong domestically. Recession or instability at home is often quickly exported. Equally important, growth and stability abroad makes all our jobs easier. This means that there are externalities in the work we do, so that more effective fulfillment of our domestic mandates helps to bring us to a better place collectively. Ensuring global growth and stability is and will remain our joint and common endeavor. This is what Terry Checki has worked for over his distinguished career. We have been very fortunate for his service and must carry the mantle forward. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Már Guðmundsson: Recent economic and financial developments in Iceland Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the 53rd Annual General Meeting of the Central Bank of Iceland, Reykjavík, 27 March 2014. *      *      * Mr. President, Prime Minister, Minister of Finance and Economic Affairs, Chairman of the Supervisory Board, former Governors, Directors, Ambassadors, Ladies and Gentlemen: This Annual General Meeting is the Bank’s sixth one since a large part of the Icelandic financial system collapsed, ushering in the deepest economic contraction Iceland has seen since measurements began after World War II. It is also the last Annual General Meeting in my current term as Governor. For this reason, and because we stand at a turning point in the resurrection of Iceland’s economy and financial system, it is appropriate to look back, assess the progress made, and identify the challenges ahead. Iceland’s financial crisis was part of the global crisis that peaked in September 2008, when the US investment bank Lehman Brothers failed, triggering a worldwide run on banks’ foreign funding. Had it not been for the coordinated response by leading central banks around the world, which provided collateralised US dollar liquidity to international banks, both directly and through foreign currency swaps, many of those banks would have gone under. Iceland was a participant in this cooperative effort only to a very limited degree. But its commercial banks were highly dependent on foreign funding, which was much shorter-term than the foreign assets in which they had invested. On its own, the Icelandic Government was in no position to provide Icelandic banks with the FX liquidity facilities that their foreign counterparts were receiving at the time, and it would have placed itself in real peril had it tried to provide them with enough assistance to prevent them from defaulting on their FX liabilities. In addition, there were a number of other weaknesses in their balance sheets – weaknesses that would probably have posed serious problems for them in any case, albeit later on. But even though the situation developed as it did in Iceland, it is important for us to remember that it was this coordinated international response that prevented the financial crisis on both sides of the Atlantic from mushrooming into a tidal wave of national and international bank failures. And it was this response that kept the economic recession from developing into a full-blown depression like that in the 1930s. Central banks played a key role initially, providing massive liquidity facilities and coordinated monetary easing on the home front and, not least, negotiating FX swaps that actually entailed a global extension of the US Federal Reserve’s role as lender of last resort. In addition to mitigating the imminent contraction, these measures were an attempt to interrupt the vicious cycle of fire sales of illiquid assets, falling asset prices, and evaporating liquidity, thus reducing the risk that banks’ equity would plunge below regulatory minimums and banks around the world would start falling like dominoes. Such a turn of events would have had severe effects on the real economy. In this respect, it is important to refrain from drawing too-sweeping conclusions from the banking collapse in Iceland, as the international part of Iceland’s banking system was so large and domestic banking operations were actually kept up and running at considerable cost. International cooperation on crisis management grew markedly in scope, particularly through collaboration among the G20 countries and at the International Monetary Fund. It encompassed a common perspective on fiscal measures to support the banking system and stimulate demand, and the provision of support to specific countries. Later on, emphasis shifted to the reform of the financial regulatory framework. That work is still underway. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  But in spite of these measures, by late 2008 and early 2009 the recession on both sides of the Atlantic had become the deepest since the interwar years, and on a global level it was the most extensive and synchronised contraction in history. All of this affected the Icelandic economy, of course, but added to it were the collapse of Iceland’s banks, the plunge in asset prices, and the inevitable adjustment of domestic demand following the overheating in 2005–2007 – an adjustment that had begun before the banks fell. The contraction from the peak in Q4/2007 to the trough in Q1/2010 was the deepest Iceland has seen, at least in the post-war period. GDP contracted by nearly 12½%. In this context, we must remember, though, that the peak was utterly unsustainable, combining as it did a wide positive output gap and an enormous current account deficit. Iceland’s economic recovery began in Q2/2010. We are well on our way towards recouping our lost GDP, and forecasts indicate that this year we will have recovered it in full. The difference, though, is that the domestic economy is in much better balance than it was then. We are running a current account surplus, and inflation is on target. One might ask how much of a success this actually is, given that a number of other countries have already recovered their lost output. It has been pointed out that Iceland’s investment level is low, but this has been true of most developed countries recently, apart from major commodity producers such as Australia, Canada, and Norway. If we compare Iceland’s recovery to the experience of other countries that have suffered a twin banking and currency crisis, we see that it is far from anomalous, not least in view of the fact that, among comparison countries, recoveries have often taken place in a much more favourable global economic environment than we are facing today. In assessing the recovery, it must also be borne in mind that the room for manoeuvre for stimulating demand was limited. From 2010 onwards, fiscal policy had to focus on gradually eliminating the fiscal deficit, which was a prerequisite for reinstating the sovereign’s access to foreign capital markets. Early on, the Monetary Policy Committee had to focus on stabilising the exchange rate in order to stop the collapse of asset prices and the automatic increase in private sector debt, most of which was either exchange rate-linked or indexed to the CPI. The scope to cut interest rates in order to stimulate demand was therefore limited, although it began to develop over the course of 2009. The capital controls that were introduced in late 2008 provided some room for manoeuvre and enabled the Central Bank to allow real interest rates to fall faster than would otherwise have been possible. Inflation, which had skyrocketed after the currency collapsed, began to subside gradually, but the inflation spike caused by contractual wage increases and excessively high inflation expectations cut into that room for manoeuvre from mid-2011 onwards. In order to understand the economic recovery in the face of these headwinds, two points are important. The first point centres on the nature of the recession. To some extent, the recession represented the inevitable adjustment of domestic demand to the fact that it was no longer possible to fund the country’s massive current account deficit and to the abrupt contraction of two sectors – financial services and construction – that had grown exponentially during the upswing. When the dust settled, the domestic economy still rested on other sturdy foundations, and the low real exchange rate stimulated some of Iceland’s tradable sectors. The second point is that Iceland is a small, open economy, where domestic demand is often less of a driver of GDP growth than foreign demand than is the case in much larger economies. There is a tendency in Iceland to forget this in discussions of economic policy. Honoured guests: We are at a turning point with respect to monetary policy implementation. For most of last year, inflation and inflation expectations were well above the inflation target, and the economic recovery was gaining momentum, while inflation forecasts suggested that it would remain above target for a sustained period, provided that the exchange rate remained close to the level prevailing at the time. It would have been possible to conclude from this that the monetary stance was too loose. Actually, several critics maintained that the monetary stance was too tight, but economic developments have shown no signs to support 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  that argument, nor is it consistent with common measures of the appropriate stance of monetary policy. The Monetary Policy Committee considered the monetary stance sufficient to bring inflation back to target in the near future. In February, we were gratified to see inflation subside to target for the first time since early 2011. As far as monetary policy is concerned, there are three factors that have contributed to this achievement. The first is the interest rate hikes between August 2011 and November 2012, a response to the foreseeable inflation spike following the spring 2011 wage settlements. Although controversial at the time, these rate hikes have proven their value in containing inflation without derailing the economic recovery. Second, the Monetary Policy Committee’s warning – that the same would happen this year if wage increases should prove excessive – appears to have been credible, which probably would not have happened without the previous rate increases. Third, the foreign exchange market intervention policy introduced by the Bank in mid-May has proven effective. The outlook is for inflation to stay close to target this year if the króna holds relatively stable. This positive outlook is due to a number of factors: favourable inflation developments during the first two months of the year, signs that wage cost increases have been smaller in the recent term than previously thought, the fact that the recent wage settlements – which provided for pay increases consistent with the inflation target – appear to have set the tone for subsequent wage negotiations, and the fact that global inflation looks set to be somewhat lower than previously forecast. Looking beyond this year, however, inflation could rise again when the slack in the economy disappears and the effects of increased investment and the Government’s debt relief measures on domestic demand come to the fore. The impact this has on inflation will depend on how inflation and inflation expectations develop this year, and on other factors that could affect demand in the near term. It will be the Monetary Policy Committee’s task to decide how to respond to these different short- and long-term prospects, with the aim of keeping inflation close to target. Monetary policy instruments are currently being revised, with an eye to improving liquidity management and preparing for a tightening of banking system liquidity concurrent with the Central Bank of Iceland Holding Company’s domestic asset sales and other possible measures related to capital account liberalisation, which will cause short-term market rates to move closer to the centre of the Bank’s interest rate corridor. This could increase the Bank’s net interest income. The monetary policy currently being pursued is different than that prevailing before the crisis, owing to the presence of the capital controls and a managed float rather than the virtually free-floating exchange rate regime that was in place before the crisis struck. The policy described in the Bank’s December 2010 report “Monetary Policy in Iceland After Capital Controls” has therefore been implemented in part. It is possible that we could go even further in the near future and create a monetary policy framework that would supplant the joint declaration of March 2001, confirming some of the changes already in place and paving the way for others. If that is done, it is important to remember that there are limits to what monetary policy can achieve. In the long run, monetary policy can affect inflation, and in the short run it can smooth out cyclical fluctuations, particularly when it is credible; i.e., if inflation expectations remain close to target even during attempts to mitigate recessions. Once the slack disappears, however, monetary policy cannot deliver output growth beyond the growth potential of the economy, and any attempts to do so will ultimately lead to inflation persistently above target. By law, the Central Bank of Iceland has two main objectives. The first is to promote price stability, the main task of monetary policy. The second is to promote financial stability. As regards monetary policy implementation, the Central Bank is independent and stands alone. It is also independent as regards its contribution to financial stability; that is, its own analysis and decisions on the prudential rules it is tasked with setting; i.e., concerning liquidity and 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  foreign exchange risk. In addition, like other central banks, it plays a key role in crisis management through its liquidity facilities and its role as lender of last resort. But it is emphatically not alone in this regard, as there are other bodies that make important contributions – the Financial Supervisory Authority in particular, but also the relevant ministries. The legislature also plays a larger role here than in monetary policy, as the statutory framework for monetary policy seldom changes, while amendments to financial system legislation are much more frequent. As a result, financial stability is more of a collaborative task undertaken by various administrative bodies. The division of tasks in the area of financial stability varies from one country to another, but in the wake of the recent financial crisis, there has been a shift in attitude towards that division. Before the crisis, there was the tendency to believe that financial and monetary stability were well enough served if monetary policy focused solely on the inflation target, with interest rates as its primary tool, and if financial supervision and the regulatory framework aimed primarily at ensuring that individual financial institutions were sound. The market would then take care of the rest. Experience has shown that this view was too narrow, and in many places it is being abandoned. To a degree, this entailed a compartmentalisation of central banks’ previous tasks. Some countries – the UK, for instance – are addressing this problem by reverting to central banks with a wide-ranging role covering monetary and financial stability. But this is not the only viable response. Here in Iceland, the Financial Supervisory Authority and the Central Bank have stepped up their collaboration on systemic risk analysis and exchange of information. These efforts have borne fruit, and the collaboration between the two institutions is good, but it would be imprudent to let success rest mainly in willingness to cooperate, which could change with a change of actors. As a result, it is important to strengthen the statutory framework so that it can provide better support for these efforts. This is why I welcome the introduction of a legislative bill on a financial stability council, which aims to provide a stronger foundation for systemic risk analysis and response and to guarantee access to the necessary information. Time will tell whether further steps are necessary. On 9 April, the Central Bank will publish its annual Financial Stability report, including a detailed analysis of the financial system and the risks affecting it. I will therefore be brief on that topic. The big picture is this: since Iceland’s outward-oriented banking system collapsed, a great deal has been achieved in terms of building up a financial system with a domestic focus. The banks’ balance sheets have grown stronger, non-performing loans are on the decline, foreign exchange mismatches have been reduced, equity has increased, and liquidity is strong. Corporate and household debt levels are falling. The regulatory framework for banking operations has also been improved based on the experience gained from the financial crisis, both with implementation of international rules deriving from the important cross-border collaboration that developed during the crisis, and with implementation of rules based more Iceland-specific risk. A good example of this is the new liquidity rules adopted by the Central Bank in December, which are based on the Basel III principles but include special ratios for foreign-denominated liquidity. There are a number of tasks ahead, however, as regards the implementation of rules such as the Basel III capital adequacy rules and special prudential rules that are to be adopted before the capital controls are lifted, so as to address foreign exchange risk and volatile capital movements more effectively. An effective financial system is an important ingredient of economic progress. It is therefore important to ensure that the regulatory framework does not impede the system’s effectiveness unduly. Regulatory provisions may not go further than is needed to safeguard against actual risk. This is why accurate risk analysis is so important. For this reason, among others, the Bank has emphasised working effectively with financial institutions on drafting rules. The capital controls and their removal remain the most important risk to financial stability in Iceland. The Bank has presented an in-depth analysis of the problem we face, and updated figures related to it will be included in the upcoming issue of Financial Stability. The big 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  picture has changed little in the recent term, however. Iceland is facing a balance of payments crisis and this is the main reason for the capital controls. It means that borrowers other than the sovereign and the Central Bank have limited access to foreign capital markets. At the same time, the foreseeable current account surplus over the next several years will not be large enough to cover contractual foreign debt repayments, other things being equal. Furthermore, volatile ISK assets held by non-residents currently total perhaps a fifth of GDP and could rise to almost half of GDP if the failed banks’ ISK assets are recovered in full and paid out to creditors. Iceland has no excess foreign exchange revenues with which to unwind these ISK positions, however. The solution lies in spreading out repayments of foreign loans, solving the ISK problem related to the settlement of the failed banks’ estates in a manner that does not exacerbate the balance of payments problem, and opening up market access to resident entities. A number of possible scenarios that could achieve this are under scrutiny at this time, but there is no need to discuss them in detail here. But if such measures generate the results we are aiming at, it is important to ensure that the impact on foreign debt service, whether in domestic or foreign currency, is manageable; to safeguard Iceland’s public debt position, sovereign credit ratings, and access to capital markets; and ultimately, to provide domestic entities with access to foreign credit on acceptable terms. Some of these goals may conflict with one another, and this should be considered when a course of action is chosen. In addition, it is important that economic policy and incentives of public systems promote national saving and that attempts be made to safeguard the current account surplus in the years to come, as this will expedite the resolution of the balance of payments crisis, enhance confidence in Iceland, and reduce the likelihood that Iceland will emerge from the process facing economic imbalances. Because these are irrevocable actions, we have only one chance to settle the estates, not a general lifting of the controls, and therefore it is critical that we do it successfully. But as I have said before, that does not change the fact that the cost of the capital controls rises over time and that it is important for progress and high-quality GDP growth that they be lifted sooner rather than later. It is also important that we learn, from our experience and others’, that unrestricted capital flows are accompanied not only by benefits but also by risks. Appropriate prudential rules and other measures must be in place to address those risks when that step is taken. This speech has centred primarily on two of the Central Bank’s main tasks: monetary policy and financial stability. But the Bank’s functions are actually much broader than this. And many of those functions have grown in scope in the wake of the financial crisis – for instance, the investment and management of larger foreign exchange reserves and a dramatically increased need for legal services. Still other tasks have been added on, such as capital controls surveillance and the recovery of claims that reverted to the Bank after the crash. The Central Bank has gained strength as an institution in recent years, as it has grappled with older projects and newer challenges. In order to deal with them successfully, it has been necessary to expand our staff, but nowhere near as much as one might expect or as much as might have been done in other countries. We have been able to contain our staff levels because we have an exceptional team of highly qualified employees. If the Central Bank is to succeed in its role of safeguarding monetary and financial stability, it is of key importance in the changes that may lie ahead for the Bank that it remain professionally strong and productive. A competent and dedicated staff is vital in this regard. I wish to thank the Bank’s employees for their excellent work in recent years. Honoured guests: In closing, I would like to thank the Central Bank’s many collaborators for a successful cooperative relationship over the past year. First among them are the Financial Supervisory Authority and the ministries with which the Bank works most closely – in particular, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs, which now administers the affairs of the Central Bank on behalf of the Government. I would also like to thank the financial institutions with which the Bank interacts for their cooperation. And finally, I would also like to thank the Parliament of Iceland, particularly the Economic Affairs and Trade Committee, for their collaboration.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Andreas Dombret: What is going on in Europe? The view from within Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the New York Stock Exchange, New York, 26 March 2014. *      *      * 1. Introduction Ladies and gentlemen Thank you for inviting me to speak at the New York Stock Exchange. It is a great honour and pleasure to be here today. In 1792, a few stock brokers gathered under a buttonwood tree at the lower end of Wall Street. In this meeting, they signed an agreement which, in effect, marked the birth of the New York Stock Exchange. Today, more than 200 years later, the buttonwood tree is long gone; it fell during a storm in 1865. However, the New York Stock Exchange is still going strong and has become a guiding light in the financial and economic universe. In this role, it has witnessed its fair share of ups and downs, booms and busts, tranquillity and turmoil. However, the last seven years have mostly been characterised by downs, busts and turmoil. Since 2007, we have lived through a succession of crises: a global financial crisis, a worldwide recession, a sovereign debt crisis in the euro area and, most recently, turbulence in some emerging markets. These episodes have once again underscored how closely interconnected the global economy has become. What drives growth and prosperity in good times can easily turn the other way in a crisis. In a globalised world, a problem at one side of the globe can quickly spread to the other side. To paraphrase Winston Churchill: “a financial crisis gets halfway around the world before policymakers have a chance to get their pants on”. In a globalised world, what happens in the United States is relevant to Europe and what happens in Europe is relevant to the United States. Against this backdrop, I wish to shed some light on the situation in the euro area and offer you an inside view. 2. There is light at the end of the tunnel For nearly four years now, the state of the euro area has been defined by the sovereign debt crisis. However, I have good news for you – there is light at the end of the tunnel. Most importantly, the euro area as a whole has finally left recession. By now, we have seen three consecutive quarters of positive growth, and looking ahead, the outlook for this year and next year is also quite encouraging. Projections by the ECB suggest that euro-area GDP will grow by just over 1% in 2014 and by 1½% in 2015. And this recovery is not only driven by the “core euro-area” countries such as Germany. Some of the crisis-hit countries have also finally embarked on the path to recovery. And those which have not can at least see the light at the end of the tunnel. It seems that the efforts to implement structural reforms are gradually bearing fruit. Competitiveness has improved in most peripheral countries over the past few years. Almost everywhere, unit labour costs have fallen substantially. Improving competitiveness in turn drives exports higher. All peripheral countries – except Cyprus – are projected to see some export growth this year. These achievements are reflected in current accounts increasingly reverting to positive balances. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  And Germany is part of this rebalancing equation. Since 2007, Germany’s current account surplus vis-à-vis the euro area has shrunk continuously from 4½% of GDP to 2% of GDP. As business investment in Germany is projected to pick up in 2014 and 2015, this rebalancing should continue. The progress that these abstract figures reflect is also visible in more concrete events. For example, Ireland and Spain have exited their financial support programmes without any friction. And Portugal is planning to leave its adjustment programme in the first half of this year. All three countries recently returned to the sovereign bond markets at relatively low yields. It seems that international investors are increasingly acknowledging the countries’ efforts and achievements. In the case of Ireland and Portugal, international investors have bought more than 80% of the newly issued bonds. At the same time, stock markets in these economies have been rising for some time now. These developments underscore the progress that some peripheral euro-area countries have made in adjusting their economies. However, due to different starting points some countries are naturally more advanced in their adjustment process than others. Especially in Greece further efforts are necessary to manage the turnaround. 3.  The role of monetary policy Now, what is the role of monetary policy in this process? Monetary policy certainly helped to prevent the crisis from escalating. Still, there is one thing we should be clear about: monetary policy cannot solve the underlying causes of the crisis. Nevertheless, some observers propose an even more expansionary monetary policy. They are worried about the risk of deflation in the euro area. It is certainly true that current inflation rates are rather low but, in my view, the risk of deflation is limited. And on this issue, the Bundesbank and the ECB agree. The argument rests on three pillars: • First, around two-thirds of the drop in inflation is due to falling prices for energy and food. These are exogenous factors and their effects are likely to be temporary. • Second, low inflation rates in the euro area are partly the result of necessary adjustments in the crisis-hit countries. These should also be one-off effects. • Third, there are no signs of a self-enforcing downward spiral of prices and wages. Long-term inflation expectations are firmly anchored at a level that is in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability. Private households do not seem to be postponing expenditure in expectation of a further drop in prices. There are no indications of a substantial increase in the savings rate. Fears of a fate similar to that of Japan are therefore misplaced. Moreover, the notion of Japan’s “lost decades” needs to be seen in perspective. The weak growth in Japan is partly a natural consequence of the country’s changing demographics, as the working-age population there has been shrinking since the mid-1990s. That, incidentally, is an economic policy challenge that awaits some euro area economies in the years to come – most notably Germany. 4.  There are still some obstacles to overcome So, even after taking into account the issue of deflation, we can still see the light at the end of the tunnel. However, we have not reached it yet. There may still be some obstacles that could block the way – some of them we can already see, others we cannot see. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  The latter are what Frank Knight, one of the founders of the Chicago school of economics, called “unknown unknowns”. A recent example is the political crisis in Ukraine. However, while this is an example of an “unknown unknown”, it has only limited potential to prevent us from reaching the end of the tunnel. Ukraine contributes only a quarter of a percent to global economic output. Furthermore, the exposure of European banks to Ukraine is relatively small. According to data from the Bank for International Settlements it stands at about US$23 billion. A known obstacle that could block our way, on the other hand, is the prolonged period of very low interest rates. But please do not misunderstand me: the current status of monetary policy is certainly adequate. Nevertheless, when interest rates stay very low for a very long time, we may experience unwanted side-effects. One of these side-effects is the search for yield. Investors may eventually increase the risk of their investments to make up for the shortfall in yields caused by low interest rates. And, indeed, it seems that investors already began their search for yield. In corporate debt markets, for instance, valuations are already somewhat stretched. And in the global low-interest rate environment, ambitious valuations may well spread to other market segments. In this regard, the strong recovery in the property markets of some euro-area countries should set us thinking. Take the German housing market, for example. Between 2009 and 2012, prices in large cities rose by almost 25%. And, in 2013, they increased by another 8.9%. Calculations by the Bundesbank already point to overvaluations in urban areas. Nevertheless, when looking at the German market as a whole, the situation seems less dramatic. In 2013, prices rose by an average of 4.5% – a figure that does not give too much cause for concern. Overall, prices in Germany have not yet moved away from fundamentals. For me, warning bells would start ringing if there was a rapid increase in housing prices accompanied by a significant rise in lending. And even more warning bells would be ringing if this rise in credit was accompanied by deteriorating lending standards. Having said that, I can assure you that at this point in time I am surrounded by silence. But it is not only bond markets and housing markets we have to look at. Since we are at the NYSE, let us take a look at stock markets. In 2013, there was only one way for most stock markets to go and that was up. The EuroStoxx 50 increased by 18%, the FTSE 100 by 14%, the Dow Jones by 28%, and the Nikkei skyrocketed by as much as 57%. Market volatility decreased, too. After years of risk aversion, sentiment switched to a “risk on” mode. Did financial markets enter a new phase of “irrational exuberance”? Such a verdict is certainly debatable. But financial markets are at least anticipating significant further improvements in economic fundamentals and prospects. And they are anticipating that governments around the world will continue to implement the necessary reforms. These expectations create vast scope for confidence shocks. This, in turn, interacts in an unfavourable way with another risk arising from a prolonged period of low interest rates. A prolonged period of low interest rates could set the wrong incentives. It could encourage banks to postpone necessary balance sheet adjustments. And it might induce governments to postpone necessary structural reforms and the consolidation of public finances. In my view, this could be the biggest threat to the recovery process. The improved outlook together with low interest rates could lead to complacency and reform fatigue. We cannot let this happen. We cannot let it happen because there is still a lot to do to put the euro area back on a solid footing. Reform at the national level must continue and, looking to the future, reform at the European level is equally important. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  5.  How do we get to the end of the tunnel? At the European level, the most important project is the banking union. The banking union is most certainly the biggest step since the introduction of the euro. And it is the most logical step to take. A single currency requires integrated financial markets and this includes the supervision of banks. Consequently, one of the pillars the banking union rests upon is a Single Supervisory Mechanism – that is European bank supervision for the largest banks. Centralising supervisory powers in such a way can foster a comprehensive and unbiased view upon banks. It also enables policy action that is not held hostage by national interests. Thus, it will contribute to more effective supervision and better cross-border cooperation and coordination. However, the banking union does not rest on one pillar alone. A second pillar is necessary to keep everything in balance. This second pillar is the Single Resolution Mechanism. European bank supervision requires European bank resolution – otherwise there would be an imbalance between liability and control. In a wider sense, resolution mechanisms are essential to solve the too-big-to-fail-problem. Large banks must be able to fail without endangering the stability of the whole system. Otherwise, the government would have to step in to prevent a systemic crisis. This would create an asymmetry: If everything goes well, the bank wins. If everything goes downhill, the taxpayers lose. This creates moral hazard for banks, endangers financial stability and threatens public finances. The Single Resolution Mechanism will solve this problem. It will allow authorities to restructure or resolve banks without putting taxpayers’ money at risk. In the future, whenever a bank fails, resolution costs will have to be borne first by shareholders and creditors. After that, a bank-financed resolution fund will come into play, and only as a last resort are public funds to be used and the taxpayer made to pay. And there is even more to do before the banking union starts. One of the biggest preparatory steps is undoubtedly the Comprehensive Assessment of those banks which will fall under European supervision. This Comprehensive Assessment consists of two elements: a backward-looking Asset Quality Review and a forward-looking stress test. The objective of the Asset Quality Review is to uncover legacy assets in banks’ balance sheets that were accumulated while the banks were under national supervision. The objective of the stress test is to assess how resilient banks are to stress scenarios. Any capital shortfalls revealed by the Comprehensive Assessment have to be rectified before the banking union starts. Ideally, this would primarily involve private funds. If private funds should not be available and the bank has a sustainable business model, the respective government could step in. Ultimately, it is a question of who is responsible for past failings in banking supervision – and that is the individual member states. The Comprehensive Assessment will allow the banking union to start with a clean slate. At the same time, it will support the necessary deleveraging of European banks. Balance sheets will eventually be “cleaned up” and any doubts regarding their quality will be removed. This will improve banks’ capacity to lend to the real economy and thus support economic growth. Against this backdrop, it is crucial that the Comprehensive Assessment is conducted in a tough and thorough manner. In this context, let me briefly compare the European stress test with the corresponding stress tests for the United States. One question might be: which of the two is stricter? Well, comparing the strictness of these two stress tests is not that simple. In the United States, a threshold of 5 per cent of capital relative to a bank’s risk weighted assets is stipulated, in Europe, it is 5.5 per cent. Does this mean the European stress test is stricter? In my mind, such a comparison is inadequate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  A meaningful comparison should not only include the threshold for the capital, but also the macro scenario. However, the macro scenarios for the European stress test have yet to be finalised; they are due to be published at the end of April. But even if we knew the scenarios, a comparison would still be difficult: The scenarios do not take into account just one variable, such as GDP growth, but – in the case of the US stress test – 28 variables. What’s more, the horizon of both stress tests is not one year, but more or less three years. A large number of variables therefore have to be compared over a three-year horizon. In all likelihood, any comparison between the two stress tests would therefore be ambiguous. Sound stress testing methods are essential to correctly determine banks’ capital needs, and I am certain that the European stress test will fulfil this requirement. 6.  Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen, I have covered a lot of ground in my speech today. Nonetheless, the central message is straightforward. The situation in the euro area is improving and there is light at the end of the tunnel. However, there is no time for complacency. Risks remain, among them reform fatigue and the side-effects of low interest rates. Thus, we must continue our efforts to put the euro area back on a sound footing. Two weeks ago, ECB president Mario Draghi said that 2012 and 2013 were years of stabilisation for the euro area and that 2014 and 2015 may be years of recovery. If we continue down the path of reform, his expectation will prove correct. But as I said at the beginning, the world has become closely interconnected and so, too, have risks and problems. The prolonged period of low interest rates is as much a global problem as it is a European one. And one thing is certain: interest rates will rise again at some point. However, managing this turnaround will prove a formidable challenge that requires careful policy design and adequate communication. The recent turbulence in emerging markets in response to the Fed’s tapering decision was a case in point. It was a case in point which needs some qualification. In the end, it was domestic problems and a lack of progress in reforms that made some emerging markets vulnerable. To restore investors’ confidence, they should address domestic vulnerabilities by strengthening macroeconomic policies and reinvigorating structural reform efforts. Although the turbulence in emerging markets does not have the potential to derail the global recovery it shows how sensitive markets are at the moment. There is still considerable scope for negative confidence shocks. Therefore, the ball is now in the court of policy-makers – in the euro area, in the United States and in emerging economies. If they press ahead with the necessary reforms, we will eventually be able to leave the times of downs, busts and turmoil behind us. Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Javier Guzmán Calafell: Level and volatility of food prices: challenges and prospects Remarks by Mr Javier Guzmán Calafell, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the panel on “Level and volatility of food prices: challenges and prospects” at the “Food security in a context of high food price volatility and low productivity in Latin America and the Caribbean: challenges and opportunities” international seminar, Guadalajara, 27 March 2014. *      *      * First of all I would like to thank our three speakers, for having accepted the invitation to share with us their perspectives on the key aspects related to the high level and volatility shown by food prices in the last years. Given the importance of the topic, not only to Mexico but at the global level, and the quality and experience of our speakers, I have no doubt that this session will be of great interest to all of us. After having shown a pronounced decline for several decades, international food prices started to increase at the beginning of this century, abruptly spiking in 2007–2008. Prices for these products fell at the end of 2008 within the context of the global economic crisis, but rose again to hit levels in 2011 that were even higher than those posted before the crisis. Although in the wake of this spike food prices have diminished, they still remain at very high levels. In addition, forecasts for the next few years suggest a complex scenario. For example, the OECD and the FAO estimate that food prices for the period 2013–2022 will be above, in real terms, those seen on average in 2003–2012.1 The increase in food prices in the last few years has been accompanied by great volatility. According to calculations of International Monetary Fund staff, long-term volatility of food prices reached in 2009 its highest level in almost 30 years.2 Naturally, price fluctuations for these products heighten challenges for economic policy and complicate significantly consumption and investment decisions by families and businesses. Some analysts have even emphasized that, viewed from a very long-term perspective, challenges stemming from the volatility of food prices could be more acute than those related to their level.3 The level as much as the volatility of food prices have significant repercussions for all economies, advanced or not, by affecting economic growth, inflation, public finances, the balance of payments, income distribution, poverty, and in some cases even political stability. However, the magnitude of the corresponding challenges has an inverse relationship with the level of development. Allow me to provide some additional information in this regard: • The International Monetary Fund estimates that the median food share in total spending in advanced economies is 17 percent, compared to 31 percent in emerging and developing countries.4 In addition, it is important to keep in mind that in a number of these countries, or in specific sectors of the population, the corresponding figure is much higher.5                                                 1 OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2013. 2 Shaun K. Roache, “What Explains the Rise in Food Price Volatiliy?”, IMF Working Paper, WP/10/129, May 2010. 3 S.K. Roache, Op. Cit. 4 International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, September 2011. 5 K. Anderson, M. Ivanovic and W. Martin, “Food Price Spikes, Price Insulation and Poverty”, Policy Research Working Paper, WPS6535, The World Bank, July 2013. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  • In this context, it is not surprising that, according to World Bank calculations, the rise in food prices in 2010–2011 resulted in a net increase of 44 million in the number of people living in extreme poverty in developing nations.6 • Additionally, some recent studies conclude that increases in international food prices may give rise to a significant deterioration of democratic institutions, and to a higher number of internal conflicts, in poorer countries.7 This underlines the importance of clearly understanding the factors that affect both the level and the volatility of food prices, as well as the challenges that public policy must confront in this respect. Clearly, fluctuations in food prices are largely determined by supply and demand factors inherent to these markets, such as the pace of world economic activity, demographic changes, the implications of higher income levels in some countries for eating habits, climate related factors, and the availability of water and arable land, among others. However, the analysis becomes more complicated given that there are events outside the strict sphere of food markets which are affecting food price developments. It is worth to highlight in this regard that developments in energy markets affect food prices through a more intense use of energy in the production, processing, storage, and transportation of these commodities, as well as through the more widespread production of biofuels and the resulting rise in the use of food and agricultural inputs for this purpose. Second, a growing interconnection is being observed between financial and food markets, as reflected by the larger number of financial investors in primary product markets and the proliferation of financial derivatives tied to these products. It is likely that this also has had an impact on food price trends.8 In this context, it is clear that the design of policies oriented toward moderating increases in the level and volatility of agricultural and food prices, and dealing with their consequences when they are inevitable, faces significant challenges. I would like to highlight four of them, which from my point of view are particularly relevant. First, the design and implementation of the policies required to deal with the macroeconomic impact and the social costs of food price fluctuations. Second, the setting in motion of actions oriented toward overcoming structural difficulties that are affecting food production, such as low investment levels, infrastructure deficiencies, modest storage facilities, and the high concentration in brokerage markets. Third, the need to take into consideration that some of the policies that have been adopted to attenuate the effects of food price increases, such as export restrictions or tariff reductions in several countries simultaneously, price controls and subsidies, frequently end up having the opposite effect. Fourth, the importance of taking actions focused on improving transparency, the availability of information, and in general the functioning of markets for these products, in such a way as to provide adequate incentives for the adoption of schemes that stimulate productivity and competitiveness in this sector, contributing in this manner to a lower disparity in food prices, both across countries and regions, as well as through time.                                                 6 World Bank, Food Price Watch, February 2011. 7 R. Arezki and M. Brückner, “Food Prices and Political Instability”, IMF Working Paper, WP/11/62, March 2011. 8 Nakaso, Hiroshi et al., “Report of the G20 Study Group on Commodities”, November 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mario Draghi: A consistent strategy for a sustained recovery Lecture by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at Sciences Po, Paris, 25 March 2014. *      *      * The euro area has been through a crisis of almost unprecedented drama and severity. Like the Great Depression of the 1930s, this will most likely provide rich material for economic historians for decades to come. It will be studied and analysed, its causes and consequences debated and revised. So it is interesting for us to imagine, when the dust has settled, where the various accounts of the euro area debt crisis will locate its turning point.  Some historians may locate it in individual policy measures taken during the crisis; others may place it in a future that we have not yet reached. In my view, the turning point has passed, and it came in the summer of 2012. What changed at that point was that crisis management shifted towards the development and execution of a consistent recovery strategy. It is this strategy that I am going to outline in my remarks today. I will organise my remarks as follows. First, I will describe the initial development of the crisis, illustrating how policy choices made under the pressure of events and that were commendable by themselves, but that were sequenced in the wrong order, made dealing with the consequences of the debt overhang more difficult. This interacted with features of the euro area’s institutional structure to postpone the recovery. Thereafter, I will describe how the right sequence of steps after June 2012, when the banking union project was first agreed, has put the euro area back on a trajectory towards recovery. The first step was ‘rebooting’ the financial system, which is a necessary condition of a sustained recovery, not least because it helps monetary policy to manage aggregate demand. But it is not a sufficient condition: policies of structural reform that lift the level of potential growth are an equally important part of the recovery strategy. In describing this strategy, I am not only talking about the past, but also about the present and the future. The crisis is not over. To be successful, the recovery strategy is being, and must continue to be, executed with commitment and perseverance. Looking back at the crisis The early phase of the crisis followed roughly the same pattern across advanced economies. Most had been through a long period of excessive debt accumulation, with private debt levels in several jurisdictions reaching historical highs. In some countries this fuelled over-investment in unproductive sectors, including real estate, which is the sector associated with most of the severe financial crises in history. The mirror image of this development was a credit bubble in the banking sector, as banks financed both housing supply, i.e. loans to real estate developers, and housing demand – that is, mortgages. When the crisis broke out, this debt build-up quickly became a debt overhang. Many advanced economies entered a prolonged period of deleveraging as firms, households and banks attempted to reduce their debt levels. For firms, this meant less investment. For households, less consumption. And for banks, less credit. Moreover, the collapse of Lehman Brothers sent shockwaves through the global financial system leading to an unprecedented rise in uncertainty and risk aversion. This led to a further retrenchment in investment, trade and hiring and a globalised “Great Recession”. Government budgets went deep into deficit to offset this massive shock to nominal spending.  These events were not only shared across major economies, but they were also largely consistent with historical experience. There have been several episodes in economic history 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  of large build-ups followed by periods of debt deleveraging. Serious financial crises tend to be followed by slow economic recoveries. Nevertheless, by mid-2010, most advanced economies were showing signs of returning to growth, albeit at a slow pace. At this point, however, the trajectory of the euro area departed from others. While the recovery gained ground in the US in particular, the euro area entered into a second recession that lasted until the second quarter of 2013. Why did this divergence happen?  For two reasons that were specific to the euro area. First, the sequencing of policy responses after the first bail-out for Greece aggravated concerns about bank and sovereign debt sustainability. Second, these concerns interacted with an incomplete institutional framework in a self-reinforcing way. In addressing the situation in mid-2010 – and with the benefit of hindsight – one could have legitimately expected the following sequence of actions. First, agree on a solid backstop for dealing with sovereign and banking sector problems. Thereafter, conduct a stress test and recapitalise banks where necessary. Then, with banks in a stronger position to absorb losses and a sovereign backstop in place, construct a consistent framework for dealing with sovereigns with excessive debt. Finally, apply that framework to countries that were deemed to need it. For example, this sequence from backstop to stress test to recapitalisation was applied in the US, once the lessons from the Lehman Brothers shock had been drawn, and it accelerated the clean-up of the country’s banking system. However, in 2010 and 2011 it was almost the reverse sequence that took place in the euro area. The Deauville agreement on private sector involvement in October 2010 and the Greek debt restructuring in July 2011 were announced while an effective backstop for solvent governments was still being constructed. And the initial stress testing of banks in 2011 and the capital raising exercise in October that year were conducted without any clear backstop for solvent banks. The effect was to cause many banks and some governments to come uncomfortably close to losing market access, or to lose it altogether. As a consequence, instead of acting as a shock absorber, both banks and governments began to act pro-cyclically. This situation then interacted negatively with two features of the euro area’s institutional structure. The first was the euro area’s incomplete financial integration. While prices had converged in many asset classes prior to the crisis, it turned out that the euro area had not in fact created the conditions for deep cross-country financial integration. Integration was largely based on short-term interbank debt, rather than on equity or direct cross-border lending to firms and households, and under stress it quickly unravelled. Indeed, the build-up of financial imbalances in the euro area periphery had in part been financed by short-term lending from banks in the core. Those banks then quickly reversed their exposures in what amounted to a “sudden stop”, analogous to crises experienced by emerging economies. This contributed to the fragmentation of the euro area banking sector and economy along national lines, a phenomenon which had not been visible in the early stages of the crisis.  The second feature was the euro area's fiscal framework, which was not strictly enforced. That framework was explicitly designed to ensure fiscal responsibility, with two resulting benefits. First, if strictly applied, it would create fiscal space ex ante for governments to absorb exceptional shocks, such as the one experienced worldwide. And second, by anchoring confidence in the medium-term soundness of public finances, it would allow governments to run those counter-cyclical policies while retaining market access. In such a situation, there is no need for fiscal risk-sharing or a fiscal backstop.  Yet, as the fiscal framework was not strictly enforced, the two benefits were reversed: a number of governments either did not have the fiscal space to absorb the shock they faced in the early stage of the crisis (consider Belgium or Italy); or they were unable to maintain the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  trust of the market while doing so (consider Portugal or Ireland). Fiscal policy in these countries therefore had to switch from providing a counter-cyclical buffer to convincing investors of debt sustainability. Under these circumstances, it was unavoidable that fiscal consolidation was front-loaded. But it also meant that fiscal policy changed from being a tailwind to a headwind, and added to the drag coming from deleveraging across the private sector. In particular, as the banking sector had not yet been cleaned up and strengthened, lower growth produced a further deterioration in balance sheets and added to pro-cyclicality. In managing the crisis, European policymakers faced an unprecedented set of circumstances. They were making decisions in real time in the face of political and institutional constraints. So the aim of my comments is not to criticise. Rather, it is to highlight the fact that the sequencing and consistency of policy decisions matter. Policymakers dealt with the immediate situation without simultaneously addressing all its consequences. It was only when this began to change in June 2012 that we returned to the path of recovery. The beginnings of a consistent strategy What happened at this time was that European policymakers acknowledged the need to complete the euro area’s institutional architecture, the initial stage of which was setting up the banking union. And in doing so, they initiated what I believe was the necessary first step of a consistent strategy for a sustained recovery.  The banking union had to be the first step of a longer sequence, for two reasons. First, because it was necessary to consolidate the single currency. Second, because it provided an opportunity to “reboot” the euro area banking system, which in turn is a pre-condition for the recovery. Let us consider the two in sequence. Restoring the singleness of money Money, it has to be remembered, is a liability of the banking system. Banknotes represent only a fraction of the money we use daily. The bulk of money is deposits, which are a liability of commercial banks. So for there to be a truly single money among sovereign countries, there has to be fungibility of deposits across borders.  Yet, this fungibility came under threat during the crisis. It was threatened initially by the fragmentation of financial markets in the euro area, and then exacerbated by the emergence of redenomination risk in financial prices. Those unfounded fears of redenomination put price stability at risk, which the ECB had to alleviate through the creation of its Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) programme. Our actions underlined the irreversibility of the single currency and were decisive in restoring confidence.  But the underlying drivers of fragmentation still remained, especially the emergence of credit risk premia at the national level that mirrored the perceived credit risk of sovereigns, in particular after the Greek debt restructuring. This link between sovereign and bank risk reflected, first and foremost, the perception that the ultimate guarantor of deposits in the banking system is the state. Hence, where perceptions of sovereign creditworthiness diverged, so did confidence in their respective banking systems.  In essence, what these developments were highlighting was that we did not have a truly single banking system in the euro area; we had a juxtapositionof national banking systems, which is why they fragmented so easily. To ensure that the single currency truly is single, therefore, the only realistic option was to bring together those national systems into one single system, so that the fungibility of deposits was re-established. This is where the banking union comes in. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Banking union means three things: it means a single supervisory framework that minimises equally the risk that a euro area bank takes excessive risk and runs into failure. It means a single resolution framework, so that if a bank does still fail, it can be resolved in the same way, with limited use of taxpayer money, irrespective of where the bank is located or the fiscal strength of its government. And it means a system of deposit protection that provides depositors with equal confidence that their deposits are safe, regardless of jurisdiction.  We are now well advanced in the process of unifying the banking system in this way. The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) will begin operating in November. A deal was reached last week on a Single Resolution Mechanism and Single Resolution Fund. And a harmonised approach to the level and funding of deposit guarantee schemes across the euro area has been agreed, as a first step towards a single deposit guarantee scheme. Deposits of individuals and small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) will also have seniority in any future bank resolutions. Together, this goes a long way towards creating a genuine banking union, although some important details, such as the backstop for European resolution financing, still need to be clarified. By reinforcing the singleness of money, the banking union provides the conditions for a lasting reintegration of the single financial market. It is therefore a pre-requisite for the recovery. It does not, however, by itself generate a recovery, nor does it put banks in a position to properly support that recovery. This brings me to the second step in the sequence of events required to achieve that goal: the role of the SSM in cleaning up the banking system. Cleaning up the banking sector Prior to the crisis, euro area banks had entered a rapid period of balance sheet expansion. From the start of that expansion in 2005 to its peak in 2012, banks assets increased by more than 60 percentage points of GDP. This was associated with the development of unsustainable bank business models. Banks relied too much on debt to finance their lending, and that debt depended too much on wholesale market funding and too little on deposits.  This model was only able to develop because of the perception of an implicit state guarantee for bank debt – a perception that reinforced the link between sovereign and bank risks that I described above. The deterioration of sovereign credit, on the one hand, and the clarification of the rules regarding bail-in of bank debt, on the other, have both helped to bring to an end a funding model that was neither desirable nor sustainable. The euro area banking system is therefore now undergoing a process of restructuring and deleveraging. As this is a necessary correction, it is not a process that policymakers should seek to prevent. However, it is a process that needs to be properly managed. Deleveraging can essentially take two forms: a “good” form and a “bad” form. The “good” type is where banks quickly carve out non-performing or non-core assets and raise equity, allowing them to restart lending to new, creditworthy clients. The “bad” type is where they sell good assets and hold on to non-performing assets in the hope that their value recovers. This tends to create so-called “zombie banks” and leads to a prolonged period of low credit growth. And this can be even more damaging if, due to fears about counterparty credit and liquidity hoarding, liquidity dries up and banks have to sell assets at distressed prices. Such an interaction of market risk and funding risk can cause a systemic crisis, with an outright credit crunch as the consequence. Historical precedents suggest that – all other things being equal – a quick, “good” deleveraging tends to bring about an earlier recovery. In the euro area we have largely avoided the worst form of deleveraging, thanks to ECB interventions to provide liquidity to banks at key moments of the crisis, notably our move to unlimited liquidity provision in 2008 and our two longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) in late 2011 and early 2012. In this environment banks have made progress in deleveraging 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  and restructuring. However, as late as last year there was still uncertainty as to the true extent and quality of this deleveraging. This was shown by persistent investor doubts about bank asset valuations, and low credit growth for the real economy. It was in this context that the creation of the SSM became critical. The SSM provided a catalyst for the clean-up of the banking system to take place more quickly and more comprehensively than would otherwise have been the case. Why was this? Introducing a joint supervisory framework requires us to conduct a thorough health check of bank balance sheets, using harmonised methods, so that any legacy issues are recognised, and that all banks enter the new supervisory regime with sound levels of capital and liquidity. We are currently conducting this comprehensive assessment in cooperation with national supervisors. To illustrate its scale, the total amount of risk-weighted assets (RWA) being reviewed amounts to €3.7 trillion, or just below 60% of total RWA for the 128 participating banks. The nature of the assessment, which includes an asset quality review, is conducive to achieving the “good” type of deleveraging. It will shed light on the composition and valuation of bank assets, which ought in turn to trigger fresh equity raising where appropriate, and a carving-out of assets where necessary, either by selling to the market or via “bad banks”. Raising equity and strengthening balance sheets is in the long-term interests of bank shareholders, even if it implies an initial dilution of their claims.  In fact, the cleaning-up of bank balance sheets does not need to wait for the end of this assessment. The best outcome is one where banks are forward-looking and take any corrective action before the end of the process. And indeed, we have seen in many cases that banks have revised asset valuations, raised equity and disposed of assets. Bank balance sheets declined by around 20 percentage points of GDP in 2013 alone, partly in anticipation of the assessment. Increasing robustness has been mirrored in banks’ share prices, which increased by around 40% in 2013 relative to average market growth of 20%.  Over time, I expect this process, together with the new regulatory framework which is now being completed by the Basel Committee, to result in a euro area banking system with a more streamlined balance sheet structure and higher levels of capital. We should be wary of situations where bank assets are many multiples of GDP, as we saw in countries like Ireland and Cyprus before the crisis. Bail-in ability will likely also mean that senior unsecured bank debt plays a lesser role in the future relative to deposits. In other words, this will be a banking system that comes closer to its traditional role of taking deposits and making loans. However, a permanent shrinking of the banking system raises some questions about how finance will be intermediated in the euro area. If intermediation between savings and investment is taking place less through banks, then it must take place elsewhere, through capital markets. Capital markets are already increasingly complementing banks in the euro area: as bank credit to corporates has fallen, it has been approximately matched by issuance of corporate bonds. However, the substitution is not perfect, in particular for smaller firms, for which it is more costly for investors to obtain adequate information. This means that, absent policy action, SMEs are at risk of losing some access to finance.  If we are to continue with a consistent set of steps to support the recovery, cleaning up the banking system therefore has to be accompanied by policies to facilitate the development of capital markets, especially for smaller firms. It is for this reason that we have frequently highlighted the importance of creating conditions that support capital market deepening, including by removing regulatory obstacles to the least risky models of securitisation. Moving towards a sustained recovery This “rebooting” of the financial system, together with the construction of the banking union, had to be the first step in a consistent strategy, as a healthy banking system is a necessity for a sustained recovery. Yet it is still only an enabling factor. What it achieves, essentially, is 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  to create an environment where “normal” macroeconomic management can resume. It is this that generates the recovery. The banking sector supports this process through two channels. First, it facilitates the ability of monetary policy to maintain price stability and help economic growth return to its potential. Second, it ensures an adequate supply of financing for investment, and an efficient allocation of credit between productive and non-productive firms, thus also supporting potential growth.  Let me explain these two points in more detail. Maintaining price stability and closing the output gap The task of stabilising output around its potential to maintain price stability falls within the responsibility of the central bank. This has been especially true in the current crisis as, due to the unavoidable consolidation of public finances that I described earlier, the contribution of fiscal policy to economic stabilisation could not be as significant as in normal circumstances. A larger burden was therefore placed on monetary policy to achieve price stability by managing aggregate demand.  To illustrate this, we have not only cut interest rates to our lowest level since the creation of the euro, but we have also introduced forward guidance, whereby we commit to keep our policy interest rates as low as they are currently or even lower for an extended period of time. This supports the economy today by steering expectations about the future. In particular, our forward guidance implies that short-term real rates, which are negative today, will become even more negative in the foreseeable future. This is because our policy rates will remain low or lower in nominal terms, while inflation is projected to gradually pick up. In turn, expectations of lower short-term real rates are reflected in the level of medium-term real rates, those that are most relevant for investment decisions by entrepreneurs. In this way, our guidance on the level of rates tomorrow, and the day after tomorrow, supports investment today.  However, these stimulatory effects have been hindered by impairments in the transmission of our monetary policy to all parts of the euro area during the crisis, in particular as regards the bank lending channel. The responsiveness of bank lending rates to cuts in our main interest rates has been uneven across jurisdictions, with lending rates in some countries falling more or less in tandem, and in others reacting barely at all. The main explanation for this is the fragmentation of banking systems and bank deleveraging I described above. With funds no longer flowing freely within the euro area, banks had to pay higher rates to attract deposits, pushing up their funding costs. Higher funding costs meant higher lending rates. Banks in the process of rebuilding their capital also required greater compensation for loans that carried higher risk weights, such as those to non-financial corporations. And they needed to rebuild profit margins to cope with a high-risk environment. This again implied that low ECB interest rates could not be fully passed on to borrowers.  Yet this also implies that as the effects of our OMT announcement feed through, and as policies to reverse fragmentation accelerate, and bank deleveraging and restructuring proceeds, monetary policy should become increasingly effective. In fact, we are already seeing evidence of that process. Deposit rates in the euro area have been converging towards our policy rate. And banks that are more advanced in their balance sheet adjustment have been better able to reflect our policy impulse in their lending volumes and rates. If bank lending rates in the euro area periphery ultimately converge with those in the core, this would effectively represent a significant additional monetary easing. As such, I expect monetary policy to regain influence over the economic cycle, and our accommodative stance to support a gradual closing of the output gap in the coming years. This is reflected in the current ECB staff projections, which foresee inflation rising to 1.0% in 2014, 1.3% in 2015 and 1.5% in 2016. If any downside risks to this scenario appear, we 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  stand ready to take additional monetary policy measures that ensure our mandate is fulfilled. In other words, we will do what is needed to maintain price stability. Our accommodative monetary policy has an ancillary advantage in the current situation: it facilitates the ongoing process of deleveraging. It both reduces the numerator of debt ratios, i.e. the nominal interest rate, and raises the denominator – that is, the nominal growth rate. And this is again facilitated by the reduction in financial fragmentation, which tends to increase nominal rates while decreasing growth rates. Raising the potential Returning output to its potential is one part of the recovery story; but equally important is the level and trend of potential itself. In the initial stages of the crisis, the euro area, like most advanced economies, received a substantial downward shock to potential growth. While measuring potential growth is complicated, the projections of all the major economic institutions put the euro area’s rate of potential growth lower than before the crisis. Low potential growth creates several problems. It implies stagnant real incomes, thus limiting welfare gains and complicating the management of the debt overhang for firms and households. It is accompanied by high levels of structural unemployment, which is both socially very costly and creates a drag on aggregate demand. And it reduces the amount of stimulus that monetary policy can provide to the economy without generating inflation. For all these reasons, engineering a boost to potential output is the key policy challenge facing the euro area today – and it is an essential part of a consistent recovery strategy. However, raising potential growth is not a task for monetary policy. Monetary policy can act on the output gap, but it is structural policies that act on potential output. And given the euro area’s weak demographics, this has to be principally achieved by policies that raise productivity, which in turn comes down to raising investment. Investment is crucial because it is today’s demand and tomorrow’s supply. Yet, investment in the euro area has fallen by 18% during the crisis, and 35% in stressed countries.  This is where the process of repairing the banking sector can help lift potential growth as well. Evidence from euro area firms shows that financial constraints have strongly affected firms’ investment decisions during the crisis. This has come both from the supply side – banks that will not lend to firms – and the demand side, i.e. firms that do not want to borrow because their balance sheets are too leveraged.  With better capitalised banks, we should see a steady resolution of both these issues. Financing should resume for firms with profitable investment opportunities, which should benefit in particular young firms that create most net jobs and are most reactive to changes in investment opportunities. At the same time, acknowledging losses and raising capital is a pre-requisite for banks to restructure loans to distressed borrowers, thus facilitating a gradual workout of private sector debt. In turn, this will allow the banking sector to support the Schumpeterian process of creative destruction that is key to productivity growth – that is, allocating and reallocating resources towards those firms and sectors that most generate innovation. Recent micro-level research by the Eurosystem’s CompNet network has revealed that the distribution between the most and least productive firms in euro area countries is very large, which implies that reallocation could provide a significant boost to productivity. Completing the picture Yet this is not the end of the story. The rebooting of the financial system is necessary but not sufficient to achieve higher investment. Investment is also low because demand is low and there is slack in the economy. This will partially unwind as the economy recovers, but we cannot exclude that investment will not return to its former level as certain sectors have permanently downsized as a result of the crisis. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  This raises the question of whether policy is doing enough to compensate for these structural changes – in particular, whether it is creating the framework conditions for new business models to emerge that require higher levels of productive investment.  For example, is regulation in all countries conducive to investment? 45% of fixed investment in Europe is estimated to be concentrated in sectors where governments have significant regulatory influence, implying that regulation could play an important role in boosting investment demand. Even at the firm level, regulation can influence whether the most productive firms are allowed to grow. One well-known distortion in this regard is the change in status and requirements for firms in this country when they have 50 employees or more. Is the tax code conducive to investment? What matters for investment demand is the after-tax return that firms receive, meaning tax incentives can improve the risk-return profile of investment projects, and even more so in a lower growth environment. In this country, several official reports have suggested that high corporate and labour tax rates hinder investment. The focus of the current government on this issue is therefore fully justified. Is the education system conducive to investment? Europe’s comparative advantage, like all advanced economies, is increasingly located at the high-end of the value chain. Yet investment can only flow there if the workforce has the skills to match. Around half the countries in the euro area rank below the OECD average for student performance in mathematics, reading and science, implying standards could still rise. Indeed, educational attainment is no longer only a factor in income, but also in employment prospects: at the end of 2012 18% of workers with low education levels were unemployed, compared with only 6% of highly educated workers.  All this underscores that, when we think about how to restore competitiveness in the euro area, we should not only think in terms of lowering wages relative to productivity. This may be a necessary short-run measure in some jurisdictions, but it is a zero-sum game: some countries benefit at the expense of others. The ultimate source of competitiveness for the euro area has to be productivity gains built on investment, and this is a positive-sum game. It raises welfare for the euro area on aggregate. What I am saying here is not new. The need for a continuous rise in productivity performance has long been recognised in Europe; it was the context for the launch in 2000 of the Lisbon Agenda, which aimed to make Europe “the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world” by 2010. As we know, most of its targets were not reached. But the objective was, and remains, fundamentally the right one. What is different today, compared with a decade ago, is that weak productivity can no longer be hidden by increasing private leverage or rising public sector debt. There are no levers that can be pulled to raise real growth other than those that address the structural barriers in our economies. Fiscal policy can support growth by ensuring that consolidation has a better composition – less focused on raising taxes, more on prioritising expenditure – but it makes no sense to unwind consolidation now that the hard work has been done. This is why I reiterate that there is no bigger policy challenge for the euro area than raising potential growth. Conclusion Let me conclude. The point I have tried to emphasise today is simple: to navigate through a debt crisis such as the euro area has experienced, the sequencing and above all the consistency of policy choices is everything.  We need to be consistent across space, and we need to be consistent across time. There are indeed two inescapable lessons from the account of events that I have presented to you today. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  First, a full recovery will be achieved when – and only when – we complete in full the sequence of steps I have highlighted. With each step in this sequence, we should not ask “Have we done enough?”. It will be clear when we have done enough: when debts are reduced, when potential output has been raised and when unemployment has come down – while all along preserving the integrity of money, meaning price stability. This means, ultimately, looking hard at whether our economies are fit for purpose in a specialised, globalised knowledge economy. This is something that national governments, businesses and social partners have to do together. What is being done here in France is important in this respect, as a strong euro area needs a strong French economy. The second lesson is that the recovery stems from joint action. We have seen the effects of the fragmentation of financial markets across national lines. We have experienced the consequences of confidence diverging across countries. We have suffered from the resulting loss of growth and rise in unemployment. No one who has experienced either this crisis, or the economic volatility of the 1970s and early 1980s, can credibly conclude that a return to a mere juxtaposition of national policies will improve the situation of any of our countries. Rather, it is by making our policies consistent across borders that we have achieved positive results, and it is by heeding this lesson that we will continue to do so. In some areas, such as the banking union, this means formulating policy centrally. In other areas, such as fiscal policy or structural reform, it means accepting effective scrutiny from peers. In both cases, this is not a loss of sovereignty. In fact, I regard it as a recovery of sovereignty, because it is the means to provide once again, and sustainably, the stability and the opportunities that citizens demand from policymakers. Winston Churchill said that “to achieve great things, two things are needed: a plan, and not quite enough time”. I hope that I have made clear today that we do have a plan. And since we certainly have no time to spare, I trust that, if we remain resolute, great things for the euro area and its citizens can become possible. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Philip Lowe: Some implications of the Internationalisation of the renminbi Opening remarks by Mr Philip Lowe, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Centre for International Finance and Regulation Conference on the Internationalisation of the Renminbi, Sydney, 26 March 2014. *      *      * I would like to thank Michelle Wright for assistance in the preparation of these remarks. I would like to thank the Centre for International Finance and Regulation (CIFR) for the opportunity to open today’s conference on the internationalisation of the renminbi. This topic is an extremely important one and the Reserve Bank is a strong supporter of CIFR’s work in this area. In my own view, the internationalisation of the renminbi (RMB) – and the changes that accompany it – could ultimately prove to be as transformative for global capital markets as was the earlier opening up of China’s borders for the global trading system. Even if this turns out to be only half correct, then we need to better understand the process of internationalisation of the RMB, including the pitfalls and the opportunities. This conference is another important step in that journey of understanding. Internationalisation of the RMB and capital flows At the outset, I think it is useful to be precise about what we mean when we talk about “internationalisation”. In my view, for a country’s currency to be viewed as internationalised there are two key conditions that need to be met. The first is that the country’s currency is used for transactions between its residents and non-residents. The progress that China is making in this area is significant, particularly on the trade side. Over the past few years, the share of China’s international trade that is denominated in RMB has risen significantly and this trend is expected to continue. On the investment side, there has been an expansion in the schemes that permit approved foreign residents to invest RMB in China. Indeed, over recent times a number of central banks (including the Reserve Bank) have invested some of their foreign currency reserves in RMB. The market for offshore RMB-denominated bonds has also grown strongly, with Chinese residents accounting for the majority of issuance. Further, plans have been announced to allow Chinese residents to invest RMB in approved offshore destinations. The second condition is that the currency is used in transactions between non-residents. In particular, a truly internationalised currency is one where: i. non-residents are willing to raise funds in that currency despite ultimately being in need of another currency; and ii. there are non-residents who are willing to hold an unhedged exposure to that currency. China has made some progress in this area, but, to date, that progress remains relatively limited. There have, for example, been some reports of non-residents issuing RMB-denominated bonds in the offshore market and swapping the proceeds into their home currencies. But in general, there is still a fair way to go here, including in the development of markets that would support the use of the RMB in this way. Ultimately, further progress in internationalising the RMB is inextricably linked to China’s transition towards capital account liberalisation and a more flexible exchange rate. Experience elsewhere around the world, including here in Australia, suggests that extensive 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  exchange controls and a highly managed exchange rate are unlikely to be consistent with an internationalised currency. The Chinese authorities understand this and have signalled their intention to further liberalise the capital account and move to a more flexible exchange rate. We saw the latest step in this transition just last week when the daily trading range for the RMB against the US dollar was widened from ±1 per cent to ±2 per cent. While the journey is clearly a gradual one, I suspect that over the years ahead, the further liberalisation of the Chinese capital account could turn out to be one of the really significant events in global capital markets. To date, much of the capital outflow from China has been intermediated – indirectly – by the People’s Bank of China through its intervention in the foreign exchange market and its accumulation of over $US3½ trillion of foreign reserves. At some point, as controls on capital outflows are lifted, this model is likely to change. As it does, the non-official sector will become increasingly responsible for managing the foreign assets of Chinese residents. As CIFR’s report notes, this transition is likely to be associated with an increase in outflows of private capital.1 This is likely to lead to a change in the type of foreign assets that Chinese entities hold and could have significant implications for some of the asset markets in the countries that receive these inflows. The increase in private capital outflows is also likely to lead to an increase in demand for hedging products by Chinese entities, as at least some of these entities will want to hedge their currency and other risks on their new offshore investments. This growing demand can be expected to support the development of foreign exchange markets in China. The ability to hedge foreign exchange risk is – alongside the ability to denominate foreign liabilities in local currency – an important ingredient in helping ensure that the benefits associated with a more open capital account and flexible exchange rate are not outweighed by potential financial (in)stability costs. Indeed, the development of deep and liquid hedging markets is one of the reasons why Australia’s experience with capital account liberalisation and exchange rate flexibility has worked out well. When we first moved from a fixed, to a managed, to a floating exchange rate regime in the 1970s and 1980s, these markets were not particularly well developed, but they have since matured significantly. In large part, this occurred organically in response to the increase in demand for hedging products that arose once the exchange rate became more variable. This may well be the case for China too. This positive feedback loop between liberalisation and market development is also an important lesson from our own experience: if liberalisation does not occur it is hard for markets to develop, and if markets are not developed it is hard to liberalise. But a gradual process of liberalisation can promote market development and stability which makes it easier to liberalise further. One element of this positive feedback loop is that greater use of RMB for trade invoicing by Chinese firms can allow these firms to reduce currency mismatches on their balance sheets and thus alleviate potential vulnerabilities that could otherwise arise from a more flexible exchange rate regime. Another is that, as capital account liberalisation proceeds, the entry of non-residents to China’s domestic financial markets will increase the depth of these markets. And as non-residents become more willing to take on RMB exposures, the pool of potential counterparties for Chinese entities seeking to hedge their foreign currency liabilities will also increase.                                                 1 Centre for International Finance and Regulation (2014), “Internationalisation of the Renminbi: Pathways, Implications and Opportunities”, Research Report, March. Available at <http://www.cifr.edu.au/site/Research/Targeted_Research_RMB_Internationalisation.aspx>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Nobody knows precisely how this whole process of RMB internalisation will play out. This is partly because there is no historical precedent for an economy of China’s size and relative stage of development integrating itself into a global financial system that is as complex and interconnected as we see today. There are, as Professor Eichengreen highlights in his paper, an array of challenges, risks and uncertainties inherent to China’s transition to an open, more market-based economy. In some ways the task for China is more difficult than it has been for other countries that have made this same journey, including Australia. First, there is much more international scrutiny and the rest of the world has a very strong interest in the outcome. And second, China’s financial sector is already very large relative to GDP meaning that setbacks in the reform process could have significant effects on the broader Chinese economy. That said, if Australia’s experience is any guide, the journey can turn out to be a positive one. For us, financial reform and the integration of our capital markets into the global system delivered the basis for sounder macroeconomic policy, more diversified portfolios for Australian investors and the development of tools for hedging risks. But the journey was not without its troubles and there was much learning by doing along the way. At the beginning, the risk management skills of the Australian banks were inadequate to cope with a world in which there was much freer access to foreign capital and credit was no longer rationed. Regulators were also ill-equipped to provide effective supervision. The combination of these institutional weaknesses and intense competition among banks manifested itself most prominently in a bubble, and eventual bust, in commercial property prices in the late 1980s. Today, China is going through its own adjustment pains. But we should not forget that internationalisation of the RMB holds out the promise of the same benefits that internationalisation of the Australian dollar has delivered for us here in Australia. The effects will not only be felt in China itself, but throughout the world. Amongst other things, the opening up of China’s capital account and the process of RMB internationalisation may well elevate the RMB to international reserve currency status. While this still looks to be some way off, it would represent a profound change in the nature of the international monetary and financial system. Some of the potential impacts of all of this are explored for us in Prasanna Gai’s paper for this conference. Some implications for Australia I would now like to briefly touch on some of the implications of RMB internationalisation for us here in Australia. It is perhaps stating the obvious to say that we have a strong interest in China’s financial reform journey being a successful one. Financial reform can play a significant role in promoting economic and financial stability in our major trading partner. Furthermore, over time, a change in the structure of Chinese capital flows could have significant implications for our own capital and asset markets. And, an increased demand for hedging products and other financial instruments could open up new opportunities for our financial institutions. In the immediate future, Australia’s already strong trade links with China and the growing financial linkages between our two countries mean that there are mutually beneficial opportunities from RMB internationalisation.2 Some of these are explored in CIFR’s research report, and will be discussed by Geoff Weir later today. For example, Australia’s funds management industry can benefit from increased investment opportunities within China as inward capital flows to China increase. It can also benefit from sharing its expertise with                                                 2 I have previously discussed some aspects of this deepening financial relationship in Lowe P (2013), “The Journey of Financial Reform”, Address to the Australian Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai, Shanghai, 24 April. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Chinese funds managers and/or providing direct funds management services to Chinese investors as private outward capital flows from China increase. Similarly, the use of RMB for trade settlement in commodity markets may also be mutually advantageous. In this context, the results of the survey that CIFR has conducted of Australian and Chinese firms’ attitudes towards the use of RMB as a trade invoicing currency are particularly relevant. The CIFR survey is an extended version of an earlier RBA survey of Australian firms that was conducted, with the help of local banks, in the lead-up to the inaugural Australia-Hong Kong Renminbi Trade and Investment Dialogue held in Sydney in April last year.3 The more recent survey – which Kathy Walsh will present later today – highlights the fact that many Chinese firms still are not aware that RMB can be used as a trade settlement currency. More positively, some of the impediments to RMB trade settlement that were evident in the RBA’s initial survey in 2013 – in particular, those related to administrative burden and payment delays – appear to have recently lessened somewhat. With the second Australia-Hong Kong Renminbi Trade and Investment Dialogue coming up in May, the survey results highlight the importance of efforts to educate firms in both Australia and China about both the RMB trade settlement process and the RMB banking and hedging products that are already available. In this regard, I welcome the Australian financial sector’s efforts to support the development of an RMB market here in Sydney, in particular, by ensuring that the current and future RMB product needs of Australian corporates are met, and that clients have ready access to information. Another encouraging sign is the recent announcements by two Chinese banks operating here in Sydney regarding RMB clearing services. Conclusion The internationalisation of the RMB – and China’s associated move towards a liberalised capital account and more flexible exchange rate regime – has the potential to create a seismic shift in the international monetary and financial landscape. And while China clearly has an interest in getting this process right, the rest of the world – including Australia – also has a strong interest in the outcome. History teaches us that financial deregulation is an inherently risky process, but that there are substantial payoffs if it is done well. Conferences like this are an important part of understanding this whole process and I wish you all the best in exploring the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead.                                                  3 For an overview of the results of this survey, see Ballantyne A, M Garner and M Wright (2013), “Developments in Renminbi Internationalisation”, RBA Bulletin, June, pp 65–74. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Deepali Pant Joshi: Strengthening and revitalising rural cooperative credit delivery system Speech by Dr Deepali Pant Joshi, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the National Meet of CEOs of State Cooperative Banks, Mumbai, 21 March 2014. *      *      * Assistance rendered by Shri A.G. Ray, GM, Smt. Mangaladevi Ashok Kumar AGM and Shri D K Nalban.d AGM is gratefully acknowledged. 1. I am extremely happy to be with you today and thank Dr. Harsh Kumar Bhanwala, Chairman, NABARD and the organizers of this National Meet of State Cooperative Banks for inviting me to share the Reserve Bank’s perspectives. 2. Since inception the Indian Cooperative movement was initiated by the Government to align the rural credit system with the objectives of development planning. The RBI played an important role. The RBI’s concern and involvement in the sphere of rural credit stemmed from its very statute of incorporation. Specific provisions were made in the Reserve Bank of India Act 1934 for the establishment of an Agricultural Credit Department and for extending refinance facilities to the cooperatives. RBI laid emphasis on strengthening and ensuring viable provincial cooperative bank, central cooperative banks, marketing societies and primary agricultural credit societies in each province for seasonal agricultural operations. Role of cooperatives 3. The cooperative movement in the country, originated as a measure against rural poverty, agrarian disturbances in 1875 in the Deccan against moneylenders led to the enactment of Taccavi legislation in 1892. Sir Frederick Nicholson recommended the establishment of cooperative societies on the Raiffeisen model popular in Germany. Thus, cooperatives as people’s institutions have a long legacy and a rich tradition in India. The founders of Planning in India considered cooperation an instrument of economic development combining the advantages of private ownership with public good. 4. Rural credit cooperatives in India were originally envisaged as a mechanism for pooling the resources of people with small means and providing them access to cheap and cost-effective financial services. Democratic in features, the movement was also an effective instrument for development of degraded waste lands, increasing productivity, providing food security, generating employment opportunities in rural areas and ensuring social and economic justice to the poor and vulnerable. In light of this, the cooperatives occupy an important position in the Indian financial system. Cooperatives were the first formal institutions to be conceived and developed to purvey credit to rural India and have been a key instrument of credit delivery to enable farmers to meet their production needs and so increase production and productivity in the rural areas. Evolution of cooperatives in India 5. In the first Phase (1900–1930), the cooperative movement originated due to the initiative of the colonial government in the early 20th century. The idea of establishing cooperatives of the type that worked successfully in Germany was mooted in the late 19th century. These cooperatives were seen as a means to liberate the poor farmers from the clutches of usurious money-lenders. The Government passed the Cooperative Societies Act in 1904 followed by a more comprehensive Cooperative Societies Act later in 1912. In 1915, the Maclagan Committee advocated that “there should be one cooperative for every village and every village should be covered by a cooperative.” The Royal Commission made the observation “if cooperation fails, there will fail the best hope of rural India”. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  6. In the second Phase (1930–1950), by virtue of the provisions of the RBI Act, the Reserve Bank was given a mandate to closely associate with matters relating to rural credit and banking. RBI Act provided for both the establishment of an Agricultural Credit Department in the bank and extension of refinance facilities to the cooperative credit system. RBI introduced credit facilities to provincial cooperative banks for seasonal agricultural operations and marketing of crops from 1942. 7. In the third Phase (1950–1990), a major initiative for pursuit of the mandate given to the Reserve Bank was taken with sponsoring of All India Rural Credit Survey in 1951–52. The study recommended an integrated approach to cooperative credit and emphasized the need for viable credit cooperative societies by expanding their area of operation, encouraging rural savings and diversifying business. The Committee also recommended government participation in the share capital of the cooperatives. The National Commission on Agriculture (1976) recommended setting up of Farmers Service Cooperative Societies with the active collaboration of the nationalized banks. The involvement of commercial banks was institutionalized through nationalization of major commercial banks in 1969, causing unprecedented penetration of commercial banks in the rural sector. The State has used co-operatives to channel its development schemes, particularly subsidy-based programs for the poor. As these institutions have a wide reach in the rural areas and also deal with finances, the choice was natural. 8. By 1982, to consolidate the various arrangements made by the RBI to promote / supervise institutions and channel credit to rural areas, NABARD was established based on the recommendation of the CRAFICARD (Sivaraman Committee 1981). The Agriculture Credit Review Committee (Khusro Committee, 1989) stressed the importance of encouraging members’ thrift and savings for the cooperatives. It also emphasized the need for better business planning at the local level and for strategies to enable cooperatives to be self-sustaining. To this end, the Committee was in favor of serving non-members, if it made business sense. The 1990s witnessed more concerted attempts by both the government and non-official organisations and cooperators, to explore ways to revitalize the cooperatives. 9. In the Fourth Phase (1990s and onwards), there has been an increasing realization of the deleterious impact of intrusive State patronage, politicization, and the consequent impairment of the role of cooperatives in general, and of credit cooperatives in particular, leading to a quest for reviving and revitalizing the cooperative movement. Several Committees were set up to suggest cooperative sector reforms during this period. Short Term Cooperative Credit Structure (STCCS) 10. Since inception, cooperatives have made available institutional credit at affordable cost particularly to the agricultural sector. The Short-term Rural Cooperative Credit Structure (STCCS) provides mainly short term and medium-term production credit besides other financial services. At present, there are nearly 92,432 Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS), 371 District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCB) with 13,233 branches and 32 State Cooperative Banks (SCB) with 992 branches. On an average, there is one PACS for every 8 villages. These societies have a total membership of more than 120 million rural people making it one of the largest rural financial systems in the world. 60% of population still depends upon the agricultural income. Performance of rural cooperative banks in extension of agriculture credit 11. Institutional lending to agriculture and allied activities has recorded a significant growth during the last two decades due to the aggressive policy of the government in expanding credit to agriculture. The following figure depicts the growth in agricultural credit distributed by the STCCS: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3   12. Lending by cooperative credit institutions grew much faster than that by other banks during the 1990s. Thereafter, their share has been declining since 2007–08. Despite this fall, cooperatives clearly remain the major source of agricultural credit to small and medium farmers in terms of the number of borrowers and size of individual loans.  Problems of cooperatives 13. Despite the phenomenal outreach and volume of operations, the health of a very large proportion of rural credit cooperatives has deteriorated significantly. The institutions are beset with problems like poor governance infrastructural weaknesses, operational inefficiencies and the consequent impairment of their financial health. Several factors such as low borrowing membership, low resource base, lack of democratization and professionalism, high incidence of overdues and almost stagnant recovery performance have led to the deterioration in the financial soundness of cooperatives. There is an urgent need to find ways for strengthening the cooperative movement to meet the credit needs of rural India, especially the resource-poor and resource-less poor farmers. The revitalization and strengthening of cooperative institutions at all levels should therefore be considered not only desirable but expedient. The thrust has to be four-fold, financial, operational, organizational and systemic. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Poor governance 14. Cooperatives operate within the legal framework formulated by state governments. However, compliance with the legal provisions of the State Cooperative Societies Acts has not been ensured. Governance, connected lending, transparency in grant of loans, audit, internal checks and control, recovery of dues, recruitment of qualified persons are issues trammeling the efficient functioning of cooperatives. 15. As dominant share holders, state governments interference in the management of cooperatives. Supervision and guidance by the elected Boards is lax. Delay in conduct of elections, frequent supersession of the Boards, lack of participation by members in the management and decision-making process have impaired functioning of cooperatives on sound business lines. In the absence of professional management, accountability and uncertain tenures, the Board members are not able to provide dynamic leadership to the organization. Restoring and strengthening autonomy, mutual help and self governance are the cornerstone of the cooperatives. Absence of prudent interest rate policies 16. Cooperatives have access to huge deposits from public but there is no system to ensure prudent deployment of these funds. They have not taken advantage of the freedom given to them to decide on the interest rates on deposits and advances. While deposits are accepted at unsustainably higher rates, loan pricing is done in imprudent manner without factoring in cost of funds. Many cooperatives are unable to generate enough revenue or surplus to sustain their operations and boost capital formation on account of very thin or negative margins. As a result, there are frequent demands for recapitalization which causes pressure on the limited resources of governments which could have been used for productive investments benefitting the society in large. Lack of HR policies and professionalism 17. The quality of human resources is an important determinant of the success of any organization. This aspect, however, has not received due importance in the cooperative institutions. The cooperative banks are headed by a committee of elected members who are not professionals and do not possess sound knowledge in banking functions. The Committee takes crucial business decisions involving sanction of loans, investments, interest rates on deposits and loans, etc. which require a minimum degree of skill and expertise. Often, the role of Chief Executive Officers in these areas is minimal. 18. Cooperatives do not have well defined capacity building and HR policies in crucial areas like recruitment, placement, training, career progression, succession planning, etc. Recruitments are done without any objective and systematic manpower assessment. All these have led to inefficiency and lower productivity. Though there is a system of training in place in many cooperative banks, there is no need-assessment to align training with the current and future staff requirements. Training programs should be designed to achieve skill upgradation in areas related to audit and expenditure, management and aptitude development. It is also necessary to keep the staff sufficiently motivated through periodic job rotation, job enrichment and recognition of performance. Poor recovery performance 19. Frequent loan waiver announcements by governments aimed to garner electoral support have vitiated the credit discipline among the borrowers and affected the recovery atmosphere. The resultant weak finances, growing NPAs and poor resource base have contributed to the declining performance of the cooperatives, particularly at the grass root level. Since these grass root institutions depend on liquidity support from higher financing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  agencies like State and Central Cooperative Banks, non-payment of dues impairs the financial health of the entire chain. Inadequate internal control and audit 20. Cooperatives do not pay attention to implementation of adequate and foolproof internal checks and control. Balancing of books and reconciliation of entries are in arrears for unduly long periods. As a result, there is frequent incidence of frauds involving the staff who game the system. Very often, these cases are held up due to protracted litigation in Courts of law and the guilty are not brought to book .There is absence of effective audit mechanism. There are delays in the conduct of audits and submission of reports. Quality of audit leaves much to be desired in as much as it fails to address the gaps in the systems and processes and improve efficiency of operations of the cooperatives. Lack of member participation 21. The cooperative structure should be member-driven. However, members having a voting right do not take active part or show interest in the affairs of the cooperatives since the control and management is vested in a few members .Besides, depositors, whose money is intermediated by the cooperatives, have no voting right or any say in the management. Not keeping pace with changes 22. Cooperatives have been unable to adapt themselves to the rapid pace of changes in the financial sector. Cooperatives have lagged behind in designing of new products and services and in adoption of technology and advanced management practices that have changed the face of financial sector in the post economic-liberalization era. As a result, they are unable to cope with the stiff competition posed by other banks in rural finance and retain their market share. Duality of control 23. Under the Constitution, ‘Cooperation’ is a state subject governed by the respective State Cooperative Societies Acts. Registration, incorporation, management, election, and audit are governed by the State Acts. Some aspects relating to banking activities are regulated and supervised by the Reserve Bank of India / NABARD under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As Applicable to Cooperative Societies). There is an urgent need to remove the overlapping controls and endowing functional autonomy and operational freedom to cooperatives. Banking functions should be brought completely under the Banking Regulation Act. The provisions of the Banking Regulation Act should override the provisions of the State Acts/bye-laws/rules which run counter to it. This will lead to clear demarcation of the areas of activities of cooperative banks. Need for revival of the cooperative credit institutions 24. It is pertinent to mention that in the first place, India is a country with a population of more than 110 crore, of which around 70 crore reside in a little over 6 lakh villages. As there are a little over ninety two thousand PACS in the country, every 8th village, on an average, has an existing cooperative credit outlet. It is in this context that the role of cooperatives assumes importance. A number of Committees were set up to suggest reforms in the sector. Based on the recommendations of the Vaidyanathan Committee, the Government of India rolled out in January 2006, a package for revival of the Short-Term Rural Co-operative Credit Structure. The Task Force also suggested wide-ranging reforms in the governance and management of STCCS including crucial amendments to the respective State Cooperative Societies Acts 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  that were to precede the recommended one-time capitalization jointly by the Central government, the state governments and the STCCS of the state itself. 25. Twenty-five state governments signed the MoU with Government of India and NABARD to participate in and implement the package. As on December 2012, 21 states had amended the respective State Cooperative Societies Act. An amount of Rs. 9,002 crore was released by NABARD as the Government of India’s share, while the state government released Rs. 856 crore as their share for recapitalisation of 53,202 eligible PACS in 17 States. Recapitalisation assistance could not be released in many cases as the states did not complete all the necessary benchmark activities within the stipulated period. Licensing of rural cooperative banks 26. The Committee on Financial Sector Assessment set up by the Government of India in September 2006, under the Chairmanship of Dr. Rakesh Mohan, looked into the financial health of all the banks including the cooperative banks and made recommendations for improvement of financial health and systems for attaining and maintaining financial stability. A major recommendation of the Committee was to prohibit unlicensed banks from functioning beyond March 2012. 27. As there were a large number of cooperative banks (17 out of 31 State Cooperative Banks and 296 out of 371 District Central Cooperative banks) functioning without license, the Reserve Bank of India relaxed the licensing norms to grant license to these banks. The relaxed norms were i) Capital to Risk-weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR) – Minimum 4 %, and ii) Compliance with CRR and SLR for the last one year (default on one or two occasions were permitted). Consequent upon relaxation of licensing norms, 50 banks qualified for issue of license reducing the number of unlicensed banks from 73 as on February 29, 2012 to 43 as on March 31, 2012 and further to 23 as on June 30, 2013.  Recent policy initiatives Implementation of core banking solution 28. The Reserve Bank of India has granted permission to StCBs and CCBs to participate in the payment system and offer RTGS/ECS/NEFT facilities to their customers/members. Since IT infrastructure is the prerequisite for offering these services, Core Banking Solution (CBS) is being implemented in StCBs and CCBs. Several banks have joined the NABARD assisted 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  project and made significant progress in implementation of CBS. Some banks have undertaken implementation of CBS on their own. Full implementation is expected to be achieved by March 31, 2014.  Prudential norms on capital adequacy 29. Rural cooperative banks have been kept out of Capital to Risk-Weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR) framework for a long time on the grounds that there is an in-built accretion to capital every time a loan is availed of by a member. In view of the high level of default characterizing the STCCS and the risk posed by higher concentration of loan portfolios of these banks in a single sector with defined areas of operation, the Vaidyanathan Task Force recommended for bringing all tiers of the STCCS under the CRAR framework. The Reserve Bank of India recently reviewed the position of CRAR in StCBs and CCBs and has introduced the minimum CRAR requirement for these banks. A roadmap has been laid down for achieving CRAR of 7% by March 31, 2015 and 9% by March 31, 2017. 30. Since these banks have limited avenues of mobilizing additional capital resources, permission has been granted for issue of Long Term (Subordinated) Deposits and Innovative Perpetual Debt Instruments. State / Central Co-operative Banks (StCBs / CCBs) are now allowed to issue Long Term (Subordinated) Deposits (LTD) with the prior permission of the respective Registrar (RCS) granted in consultation with the Reserve Bank. LTD can be issued to members and non-members, including those outside the area of operations of the StCBs / CCBs concerned. There is no prohibition on existing shareholders subscribing to LTD. The amounts raised through LTD will be eligible to be treated as lower Tier II capital, subject to certain conditions. 31. State / Central Co-operative Banks are also allowed to issue Innovative Perpetual Debt Instruments (Innovative Instruments). The instruments may be issued as bonds or debentures to qualify for inclusion as Tier I Capital for capital adequacy purposes. Banks are required to obtain prior approval of the Reserve Bank of India, on a case-by-case basis, for issue of innovative instruments. Innovative instruments shall not exceed 15 per cent of total Tier I capital. Innovative instruments in excess of the above limits shall be eligible for inclusion under Tier II, subject to limits prescribed for Tier II capital. However, investors’ rights and obligations would remain unchanged. Membership of credit information companies 32. Under the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005, all co-operative banks are credit institutions and every credit institution has to be a member of at least one Credit Information Company (CIC). State and Central cooperative banks are required to take membership of at least one CIC. In developing economies, lending, especially to retail, has been made possible by credit information companies, which perform the vital task of collating and distributing reliable credit information to the specified users. Reports from CICs contain information about the payment behaviour of consumers and commercial entities, including data on timely fulfillment of or delinquency in meeting the financial obligations. It helps credit institutions in making an informed decision about a credit applicant. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  State cooperative banks – guiding role 33. State Cooperative Banks are the apex level institutions in the federal structure of STCCS. They accept huge deposits from the affiliated / member societies and also from non-members. They provide liquidity support and financial accommodation to the member societies down the chain. Large volume of funds in the form of governmental assistance under various welfare and subsidy schemes, grants and refinance from higher refinance agencies are channeled through state cooperative banks to the lower tier institutions. Hence, it is the responsibility of the state cooperative banks to provide guidance and direction to the member societies and ensure that the valuable resources are not frittered away and diverted to investments in risky assets. Weaknesses in lower tier institutions would eventually move up the chain and bring down the entire edifice of the federal cooperative credit structure. Even strong state cooperative banks would face threat to their survival if the structural weaknesses are not addressed in a timely manner. 34. State cooperative banks have a larger role in the development of the state economy. They should rise above the self-interest and work for serving the economic interests of the society at large. It need not be emphasized that these banks should keep their own house in order and conduct themselves with unquestionable integrity and social responsibility. Way forward 35. Cooperatives have inherent advantages as member-owned and member-controlled institutions. Successive governments have acknowledged their role in improving the productivity and eradication of poverty among the rural masses and contribution to development of rural economy and provided support and assistance as a part of State-promoted policies. However, cooperatives have to make sustained efforts to address the constraints and inadequacies discussed above. 36. To sum up, cooperatives should practice good corporate governance and social responsibility. These institutions should be purely “member-driven” keeping the principle of cooperation in letter and spirit. Professionalism should be introduced in staffing and adequate training opportunities should be provided to the employees of cooperatives for skill upgradation. They should frame sound and prudent policies for loans and investments and conduct themselves in the larger interests of the depositors and the general public. Cooperatives should overcome their inertia and resistance to change and emerge as technology-driven, well-managed institutions to inspire confidence in the public and secure their survival. Thank you for a patient hearing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Philip Lowe: Opportunities and challenges for market-based financing Speech by Mr Philip Lowe, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the ASIC (Australian Securities and Investments Commission) Annual Forum 2014, Sydney, 25 March 2014. *      *      * I would like to thank Ivailo Arsov, Mitch Kosev and David Wakeling for valuable assistance in the preparation of this talk.  When I was invited to speak at this conference, the ASIC organisers suggested the topic “Opportunities and Challenges for Market-Based Financing”. I was very pleased to be able to accept the invitation as this topic is an important one. It is currently also a highly relevant topic given the Australian Government’s recently commissioned inquiry into the Australian Financial System.  I would like to start with a quote from the final report of the previous inquiry into our financial system – the Wallis Inquiry which handed down its findings 17 years ago. In particular, the report observed:1 The evolution of financial systems has been characterised by a continuing struggle between financial intermediaries and financial markets. While the inquiry was wary about making precise predictions, there was quite a strong sense in the report that financial markets would inevitably win this struggle; that over time, markets – including the bond market – would become increasingly important in connecting savers to borrowers. It was thought likely that improvements in technology and access to information would allow better and more differentiated pricing of risk. And that this, combined with increased household savings in superannuation funds and a shift in investment preferences, would give markets the edge over the traditional financial intermediaries, namely the banks. While we have seen some steps in this general direction, including the financing of mortgages through residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS), things have not exactly turned out this way. Improvements in information technology have greatly improved access to information. However, the challenge turned out not to be so much in accessing the information, but in using the information well. It also turned out that households’ investment preferences did not change that much and that to the extent that they did change, it was mainly reflected in an increased appetite for equities. As a result, while market-based financing has developed over time, it has not grabbed the upper hand as some had thought likely at the time the Wallis Inquiry delivered its final report. One area that has attracted considerable attention is the non-financial corporate bond market. Some commentators have lamented the fact that the Australian market has not developed more rapidly, with most business borrowers still connecting with savers over the balance sheets of financial institutions. Some of these commentators have also lamented the fact that superannuation funds – who they see as a natural buyer of corporate bonds – seem to have had only a limited appetite for these bonds.                                                 1 See Financial System Inquiry (1997), Financial System Inquiry Final Report (S Wallis, chairperson), Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra, p 159. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Given this background, I thought it would be useful to briefly discuss recent developments in the Australian non-financial corporate bond market as well as the role that superannuation funds have come to play in intermediating between borrowers and savers. I would then like to discuss the role that market-based corporate financing can play in providing a form of insurance against stresses in the banking system and the possibility of a lack of competition in the banking system. The Australian corporate bond market By international standards, the Australian corporate sector makes relatively little use of the bond market, especially the domestic bond market. Since the mid 2000s, the available internationally comparable data suggest that average annual bond issuance by Australian corporations has been the equivalent of just under 1 per cent of GDP, with around two-thirds of total issuance taking place offshore, rather than in the domestic market (Graph 1). In most other countries with which we normally like to compare our financial markets, the corporate sector makes greater use of bond funding. Graph 1  The relatively high reliance of Australian issuers on the offshore market is evident in the data on the composition of corporate bonds outstanding (Graph 2). Currently, bonds that were issued offshore account for around 80 per cent of the outstanding value of bonds issued by Australian-based corporations. A decade ago, this figure was considerably lower at around 50 per cent. The offshore market is favoured by companies that want to raise foreign currency funding as a natural hedge against their foreign currency revenue. It has also proven easier to issue large amounts and at longer tenors in the offshore market than it has in the domestic market.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Graph 2  Another perspective on recent trends can be gained from looking at the data on the number and credit ratings of the individual bonds that have been issued domestically and offshore (Graph 3).  Graph 3  
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  A number of observations stand out: 1. The number of Australian companies issuing bonds is quite small. On average, over recent times, only around 30 bonds have been issued in the domestic market per year, with just a few more being issued in the offshore market. In terms of size, offshore issues tend to be substantially larger and they also tend to have longer maturities. 2. During the global financial crisis, issuance of bonds in the domestic market all but ceased, with only a handful of companies going to the market in 2008 and 2009. During this period, there was some issuance in the offshore market although the number of bonds issued was substantially lower than in the years both before, and after, the crisis.2 This partly reflected the very high spreads being demanded by investors at the time. 3. There was significant issuance of AAA securities in the domestic market prior to the financial crisis, although these securities were credit wrapped by bond insurers. During the crisis most of these insurers were wound down following large ratings downgrades, and this segment of the market has subsequently disappeared. 4. The publically available information indicates that not a single corporate bond with a credit rating below BBB- has been issued in the domestic market. In contrast, since 2000, around 30 bonds rated below BBB- have been issued in the offshore market by Australian corporations. 5. Recently, there has been a pick-up in both the number (and value) of BBB-rated issuers in the domestic market. Last year, a total of 16 BBB-rated bonds were issued, the highest number on record. In another positive sign, the average maturity of these bonds was noticeably longer than in previous years. Putting all this together, the Australian corporate bond market is relatively small in size and is less well developed than corporate bond markets in a number of other countries. Total outstandings in the domestic market amount to around $50 billion compared with total corporate debt outstanding of a much larger $920 billion. Notwithstanding this, regular activity is occurring in the market across much, although not all, of the credit spectrum. And over recent times, issuance appears to have picked up a little, particularly by lower-rated companies. The role of superannuation I would now like to turn to the issue of superannuation funds and their role in the provision of market based finance. This is obviously an important issue given the rising share of national savings being managed by these funds (Graph 4). In the late 1980s/early 1990s, a little less than 20 per cent of the flow of new national savings was being directed into superannuation. Today, the figure is almost double that.                                                 2 The value of issuance in the offshore market increased notably in 2009, primarily due to a small number of large bond issues by major diversified mining companies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Graph 4  According to the latest figures, superannuation funds currently hold around $7 billion of domestically issued corporate bonds (Graph 5). This represents around 15 per cent of the total outstandings in the domestic market, with Australian mutual funds and non-resident investors together holding a further 60 per cent of bonds on issue. All up, domestically issued corporate bonds account for less than 1 per cent of total superannuation assets.3 Graph 5                                                  3 Superannuation funds also hold some bonds in the offshore market issued by the Australian companies, although comprehensive data are not available. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  One reason that is sometimes given for superannuation funds’ relatively limited holdings of corporate bonds is that these funds have a strong preference for equities – currently, around 50 per cent of Australian superannuation funds’ assets are invested in equities, whereas in many other countries the comparable figure is less than 40 per cent. This apparent preference for equities is, however, only a partial explanation at best. Australian superannuation funds do hold a large portfolio of fixed-income securities. However, within this portfolio, there are just not many fixed-income securities issued by the corporate sector. In contrast to only modest growth in holdings of corporate bonds, superannuation funds have purchased very large volumes of bonds issued overseas and by authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs) based in Australia (Graph 6). Indeed, superannuation funds’ holdings of bank bonds have risen from around $8 billion a decade ago, to around $40 billion today. This suggests that the issue is not so much a lack of appetite for bonds, but rather the relative risk-return and liquidity characteristics of the corporate bonds on offer.  Graph 6  Interestingly, superannuation funds have also purchased significant volumes of bank liabilities other than bonds, including bank equity, bank short-term debt and, most notably, bank deposits (Graph 7). Indeed, bank deposits have been amongst the fastest growing asset classes for the superannuation sector over recent times. As a result of these developments, super funds currently hold $440 billion of liabilities issued by banks, representing 15 per cent of the banking sector’s total liabilities.  So as things have turned out, superannuation funds, rather than financing the corporate sector directly, have helped finance the banks, which in turn have financed the corporate sector. In effect, we have seen a lengthening of the chain of financial intermediation – from savers to superannuation funds to banks to borrowers. This is not quite the financial disintermediation that some had expected a decade and a half ago.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  Graph 7  Superannuation funds have, nevertheless, been an important source of market-based funding through another channel – namely through the purchasing of corporate equity (Graph 8). Over the past decade, superannuation funds have increased their net investment in Australian equities by the equivalent of around 2 per cent of GDP per year, which in current dollars is equal to an annual net new investment of around $30 billion. This suggests that there is not a natural reluctance by the superannuation sector for corporate exposure, but rather that equity represents a more attractive option than debt. Graph 8  In this context, one issue that is worthy of further analysis is that of liquidity. Given that balances in superannuation funds are essentially “at call” and can be moved at short notice, these funds need to ensure that they remain quite liquid at all times. This inevitably reduces 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  the attractiveness of relatively illiquid assets like corporate bonds. From one perspective it seems slightly curious that long-term retirement savings can be moved at short notice. Over time, there may be a benefit in exploring other arrangements that are more conducive to investments in illiquid assets. Does it matter?  With these facts as background, I would like to pose the question of whether any of this really matters: does it matter whether or not we have a corporate bond market and does it matter what the size of that market is? After all, the Australian economy and financial system have performed well over the past two decades and there does not appear to have been systematic difficulties for the corporate sector in accessing finance. In answering this question it is useful to think about the implications of the corporate bond market for both the overall stability of the economy and for the efficiency of financial intermediation. In terms of stability, one of the arguments for a vibrant corporate bond market is that it can effectively act as a “spare tyre” – if the banking system gets into difficulty, the bond market can take its place in providing credit to businesses and thus allow the economy to continue operating relatively normally. The available international evidence is broadly consistent with this argument, although the transition from bank finance to bond finance in times of stress is not a seamless one given that the events that cause problems for banks can also cause markets to freeze up for a time. Nevertheless, in severe downturns, markets do seem to recover more quickly than do banks, which because they are highly leveraged, can find it difficult and time consuming to get back to normal operations.4 Interestingly, the evidence also suggests that during milder downturns, banks tend to be more stable providers of credit than are markets. This partly reflects the tendency for banks with long-term clients to keep supporting those clients if they can, whereas markets can abruptly shut for a time. The recent experience in the United States and Europe provides an illustration of the constructive role that the corporate bond market can play during times of severe stress in the banking system. Banks in these areas have been capital constrained, have faced higher costs of raising funds and have had a diminished appetite for lending. As a result, at a time when bank credit outstanding has been unchanged or declining, the outstanding value of corporate bonds on issue has been rising, particularly in the United States (Graph 9).  In terms of efficiency of the financial system, the bond market can play the role of the competitive edge: ensuring that banks do not charge too high a price for financial intermediation. We saw a clear example of this in the 1990s in Australia. On that occasion, mortgage lenders were making very high returns on new mortgage loans, with the spread between the mortgage rate and the cash rate reaching around 4¾ percentage points. The RMBS market emerged partly in response to this and over time the extra competition led to mortgage spreads falling considerably. More broadly, the corporate bond market can improve the overall efficiency of the financial system through offering a broader range of maturities and loan structures than banks are able, or willing, to do.                                                  4 See for example Gambacorta L, Y Jing and K Tsatsaronis (2014), “Financial Structure and Growth” BIS Quarterly Review, March, pp 21–35. Available at <https://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1403e.htm>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  Graph 9  So, in effect, the bond market can be seen as providing a form of insurance – insuring that in times of banking system stress the process of financial intermediation can continue and, at other times, insuring that any lack of competition in the banking sector does not lead to excessively high prices for financial intermediation. Importantly, to play this role the corporate bond market needs to be able to come to life when it is most needed – when it is needed as the spare tyre or when it is needed to provide competition. In a perfect world, the market would be deep and liquid at all times, but I don’t think this is required for the market to play this important insurance role. Instead what is needed is that we have the general infrastructure that would allow the market to respond as necessary. Here, I think Australia is relatively well placed. The legal apparatus exists to issue corporate bonds. The trading arrangements are well established. We have a reasonable number of financial institutions that are able to assist companies in issuing bonds. We have businesses that have experience in the market. And we have superannuation and other funds that are willing to purchase bonds at the right price. This financial infrastructure means that we can have some confidence that there is capacity for the corporate bond market to fulfil this important insurance role. From this perspective, the fact that over recent times the corporate bond market in Australia has been relatively subdued compared with the markets in Europe and North America can, at least partly, be explained by the different outcomes in the banking sectors. In Australia, our banks are in sound shape and have been willing to lend. In contrast, many of the North Atlantic banks have had severe difficulties and have had little appetite for new loans. Indeed, lending rates charged by euro-area banks have often exceeded the cost of bond market finance for even fairly lowly rated companies (Graph 10). In this environment, it is not surprising that bond issuance has increased. 
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Graph 10  In contrast, in Australia, while a rise in the cost of bank funding over recent years has meant that some businesses have been able to raise funds in the bond market more cheaply than obtaining a bank loan, the number of businesses that have found themselves in this position is relatively small. By and large, the Australian banking system has been able to meet the financing needs of most of the corporate sector. Looking forward, we need to ensure that the infrastructure that supports the bond market remains in place and that it is strengthened over time. This strengthening is a gradual process and there have been some steps in this direction over recent times. These steps include: efforts to simplify prospectus requirements for retail vanilla bonds and ease the personal liability of company directors; improving market transparency through the RBA’s publication of new measures of corporate bond yields; the lengthening of the government bond curve; and the listing of certain fixed-income securities on the Australian Securities Exchange. These are all welcome developments. Conclusion In conclusion, let me try to briefly summarise. Bank-based finance remains the dominant form of finance for Australian companies. Superannuation funds have been prepared to finance banks and have effectively outsourced the credit assessment function for much of the corporate sector. Partly as a result, the development of a deep and liquid corporate bond market is still a work in progress. But an equally important observation is that we do have the infrastructure that could support a strong and very active bond market in times of stress or inadequate competition. In this way, this infrastructure provides a form of insurance. We need to make sure that we nurture this infrastructure so that we can continue to be confident that the corporate bond market will be there when it is most needed. Given this perspective, I think it is probably better to think of markets and institutions as being complements, rather than as being engaged in some type of struggle for supremacy. Thank you very much for listening.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Timothy Lane: Financial benchmarks – a question of trust Remarks by Mr Timothy Lane, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Osgoode Hall Law School and Schulich School of Business, Toronto, Ontario, 24 March 2014. *      *      * Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today on a subject that has been at the centre of much attention recently. This city, like all others, depends on trade and commerce to thrive. At the root of successful trading and commercial relationships is the trust that each party to a transaction will deliver what was agreed. Many institutions have been developed throughout history to support that trust. Among the most basic of these are standardized units of measurement. More broadly, that trust is founded on the rule of law and other elements of good governance. Trust is also of fundamental importance to the world of finance. That trust has been shaken recently by a series of headlines related to financial benchmarks such as the London Interbank Offered Rate, or LIBOR. Today, I will discuss why we use financial benchmarks, how we use them, why they have been in the headlines and what we are doing to re-establish the trust that is so vital to a well-functioning financial system. What are financial benchmarks? Financial benchmarks are used in a variety of contracts to specify what, or how much money, is to be delivered on particular dates. One example is floating-rate debt, where the borrower pays the lender an amount of interest based on a benchmark that varies from one period to another according to a selected measure of interest rates. Benchmarks are also particularly important for derivatives such as interest rate swaps, which are critical tools of risk management. When benchmarks function as they should, they are a straightforward and technical element in the world of finance. They are intended to provide an unbiased, arm’s-length measure of underlying market prices. What went wrong? But some financial benchmarks have recently made headlines – for the wrong reasons. These benchmarks include LIBOR and some foreign exchange rate benchmarks (commonly known as “FX fixes”). As alleged misconduct related to such benchmarks has been investigated, firms have paid multi-billion-dollar fines, and some high-flying traders have lost their jobs. These headlines have been damaging to trust. They raise doubt about whether some key financial benchmarks were in fact providing an unbiased, arm’s-length measure of actual market conditions. At the extreme, they could even be seen as raising questions about the integrity of the wider financial system. Let’s look at the problems that have arisen. LIBOR First, let’s take LIBOR. LIBOR emerged as the eurodollar markets developed in London in the late 1960s and 1970s. In particular, it was developed in response to the rise in the syndicated eurodollar loan market and demand for tools to manage risk exposures, including those that arose from 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  making those loans. These tools, known today as interest rate derivatives, needed a common benchmark so that they could be commoditized more easily, and LIBOR was this common rate. LIBOR was first officially published on New Year’s Day in 1986. As an interest rate benchmark, LIBOR is used as a measure of prevailing interest rates in a range of major currencies for maturities from overnight to one year. And, although originating in loan markets, it has come to be the dominant benchmark in a wide range of cash and derivatives markets. LIBOR – and its equivalents in some other currencies, collectively known as “IBORs” (interbank offered rates) – is used to determine the floating rate paid on over US$500 trillion dollars of interest rate derivatives contracts, as well as many trillions in floating-rate loans and securities. LIBOR is calculated based on submissions from a panel of banks: each bank is responsible for estimating the cost at which it could borrow in the unsecured interbank market from other banks, at various maturities and in various currencies. LIBOR is calculated as an average of these estimates, after dropping the highest and lowest figures. Banks’ individual quotes are also made public – to deter anyone from submitting a wild number to influence the average. The important thing to remember about LIBOR is that not every submission is based directly on actual transactions. For example, during the global financial crisis in 2008, when the interbank market essentially dried up, especially at longer maturities, banks still had to contribute to the benchmark. Now let me turn to the problems that have emerged regarding LIBOR. The first is signalling. In circumstances such as those during the height of the recent crisis, when interbank credit conditions were becoming increasingly difficult, a bank could become reluctant to report higher estimates than its peers for fear this would be interpreted as a signal that its own creditworthiness was deteriorating. The second problem is manipulation, the stuff of most of the headlines. The focus has been on LIBOR survey responses at some individual firms being biased, with a view to profiting on trading positions. Of course, to the extent that this kind of misrepresentation occurred, it is criminal behaviour and the authorities have been treating it as such. Foreign exchange fixes Now let me move to foreign exchange benchmarks. Foreign exchange benchmarks are typically calculated from actual spot trades over a short predetermined time period (or “window”) each day. It has been alleged that foreign exchange traders at some large financial institutions exchanged information about their clients’ orders with a view to positioning themselves advantageously in the market. The suspicion of such collusion – as suggested by some emails and chat-room discussions that have come to light – is being taken very seriously. The existence of collusion cannot be inferred, though, from the volume of trading during the fixing window. Banks may want to execute many of their own trades during the fixing window, for instance, because their customers want to transact at the fixing price, and banks therefore look to offset those positions around the fix so as to manage their market risk. Issues relating to how fixes are designed, and how they are used by banks and their customers, are now being examined by global authorities. What should be done? To address some of the problems associated with benchmarks, two options present themselves: reform or replacement. We can reform existing benchmarks to strengthen governance and enforce procedures that provide adequate checks against conflicts of interest and collusion. Or, we can replace them with more robust alternative benchmarks. In 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  fact, it is likely that neither of these solutions will be sufficient by itself. We will need to do some of both. Reforming benchmarks The first step in reforming benchmarks is clarifying governance. Who has direct responsibility for setting those benchmarks and assuring their integrity? What kind of governance exists within the financial institutions that determine the benchmarks? And who oversees those processes to make sure that the safeguards are appropriate? Last summer a group of financial market regulators from around the world, the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), released its Principles for Financial Benchmarks – a set of best practices aimed at answering these questions. These principles outline a framework for the governance and administration of financial benchmarks, including the roles, responsibilities and internal controls required of a benchmark’s administrator. Attention is paid to the additional controls necessary for survey-based benchmarks, which have been a particular cause of concern. Replacing benchmarks The second option, replacing existing benchmarks with new ones, is challenging for two reasons. First, it may be difficult to find a superior alternative benchmark, which is robust and also captures the relevant economic exposures. Second, even if a suitable alternative can be identified, making the transition may not be a straightforward matter. The IOSCO principles outline desirable features for robust financial benchmarks. Notably, they call for benchmarks to be anchored to observable transactions in active underlying markets. One could consider going further: relying only on actual market prices as benchmarks. Indeed, there are some cases – for instance, short-term repo markets – in which underlying markets are sufficiently liquid to reliably support benchmarks that are simply averages of the rates at which participants transact. In other cases, market prices could at least be used as a cross-check against a survey-based measure, even when they cannot be used directly to calculate the benchmark. In other cases, it may be hard to find a suitable market price that tracks the desired aspects of market conditions. If a replacement benchmark does not fully reflect the economic exposures that are being hedged, the hedgers will not be able to manage their risks as effectively. Moreover, in the absence of appropriate governance, controls and regulation, market prices can also be subject to manipulation. Benchmarks derived solely from transactions also face the challenge of how to determine the benchmark rate should there be no transactions in the relevant market on a particular day, or indeed over a whole series of days – for example during periods of stress. Even if a superior alternative benchmark could be found for some markets, several issues would need to be addressed before making a switch. Existing benchmarks are already written into an enormous number of contracts, some of which could still have years, if not decades, to run. These contracts would have to be closed out and/or rewritten, which raises issues of coordination and of legal risk. Taking these concerns into account, last year the Financial Stability Board (FSB) established a steering group of regulators and central banks to help coordinate upcoming reviews of existing benchmarks against IOSCO’s standards and to examine the feasibility of developing alternative benchmarks, at least for some markets. The main focus is on the major global interest rate benchmarks: LIBOR, the Euro Interbank Offered Rate (EURIBOR) and the Tokyo Interbank Offered Rate (TIBOR). This steering group has been working with market participants from around the world to evaluate possible 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  alternative benchmarks and to identify and look at ways of mitigating any issues that might arise during the transition. When this work is complete, its findings will help inform views as to possible alternative financial benchmarks in other currencies, including the Canadian dollar. Similar international work has recently been launched to examine foreign exchange benchmarks. CDOR – A Canadian case Moving closer to home, the main benchmark for Canadian-dollar interest rates is the Canadian Dealer Offered Rate (commonly known as CDOR). It is used to determine interest payments on Can$130 billion in floating-rate notes and payments on about US$9.3 trillion in Canadian-dollar interest rate swaps1 as well as over Can$750 billion in exchange-traded derivatives. Given CDOR’s importance, making sure it is robust is essential to the whole Canadian financial system. So where does CDOR come from? CDOR is the rate at which banks are willing to offer credit to companies against bankers’ acceptances (BAs). CDOR is determined through a daily survey of seven market participants held at 10:15 every morning. In a simple process, the highest and lowest rates are dropped and the final five rates are averaged. While the number of banks in the panel may look small, they represent the key players in the BA market, originating close to 99 per cent of the approximately Can$67 billion in outstanding BAs in Canada. Thus, although CDOR has some similarities to LIBOR, they are different animals. CDOR is a bank lending rate, rather than a bank borrowing rate. Another difference is that while it is not an average of secondary market transaction data, it is derived from an underlying market that remains sizeable. This is in contrast to some unsecured interbank markets, the basis of LIBOR, which have generally shrunk substantially since before the crisis. Also, since banks are committed to lending to companies with BA lines based on CDOR, and because borrowers choose when and at what maturity to borrow, it is less likely that these rates would be subject to the problems I discussed earlier. These features of CDOR do provide some reassurance – and indeed, no problems similar to those with other financial benchmarks have been reported. Nonetheless, given the vital role that CDOR plays in our financial system, Canadian authorities judged it essential to examine CDOR more closely in light of the new IOSCO principles and the experience with interest rate benchmarks elsewhere. Strengthening the governance of CDOR In 2012–13, as an initial step toward strengthening the governance of CDOR, the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada (IIROC) reviewed existing practices. The focus of this review was on the panel members’ supervisory practices: specifically, how CDOR submissions are calculated, who participates, who supervises, and who has regulatory jurisdiction. It was not intended to be an investigation into potential wrongdoing or manipulation of CDOR. The IIROC review noted some inconsistencies in procedures among different institutions, and a failure in some cases to document those procedures. IIROC also identified a need to strengthen independent compliance oversight of rate setting to complement business supervision procedures and conflict-of-interest protocols within institutions. Action is now underway, both by the official community and industry, to address the issues highlighted in the review. Given that CDOR is based on banks’ issuance of BAs, and with                                                 1  Bank for International Settlements, Triennial Central Bank Survey, “Statistical Release, OTC Derivatives Statistics at End-June 2013,” November 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  CDOR submissions now coming entirely from banks rather than dealers, the relevant authorities have agreed that banks’ CDOR submission processes are most appropriately regulated by the banks’ regulator, the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI). Accordingly, in January, OSFI announced that, consistent with its mandate and expertise, it will supervise the effectiveness of governance and risk controls surrounding banks’ CDOR submission processes.2 Subsequently, in its recent budget, the federal government announced its intention to include a regulation-making authority in the Bank Act covering bank submissions to financial benchmarks. Furthermore, the banks on the CDOR panel should, fairly soon, release a submitters’ code of conduct that they have developed in consultation with IIROC and the Bank of Canada. In addition to providing a formal definition of CDOR and requirements for being a submitter, the code will specify minimum standards for submission methodology, internal oversight and records retention. Work continues to strengthen other aspects of the governance of CDOR to meet the principles established by IOSCO. For instance, we have discussed with industry the need for it to establish more formal administrative arrangements for CDOR, and the industry has begun work to take this forward. Other Canadian benchmarks While CDOR is probably the most important financial market benchmark in Canada, it will also be important to ensure that other significant benchmarks are well designed and have appropriate governance, in line with IOSCO standards. One obvious example here is the Canadian Overnight Repo Rate Average (CORRA). Although less widely used than CDOR, CORRA is important for the Canadian financial system, since it is the reference rate for overnight index swaps, which is a sizable derivatives market. CORRA is calculated based on actual transactions in the overnight market.3 Although not owned by the Bank of Canada, we calculate and publish the rate on the basis of data submitted by the brokers. Work has begun to look at what changes may be needed to CORRA given the new IOSCO standards. I expect that, as it progresses, that work will need involvement from a range of stakeholders. Turning to foreign exchange rates, while the Bank of Canada posts indicative exchange rates based on market transactions and market quotes, it does so for information purposes, not as a benchmark. Nevertheless, these rates seem to be used as benchmarks for some financial transactions. While there is no evidence of market manipulation affecting the Bank of Canada’s rates, we are reviewing these rates and considering any changes that may be appropriate. We will examine how these posted rates are currently used by market participants to see how any possible changes could affect market functioning. Conclusion We’ve covered some technical ground, but the basic thrust is simple. We need good governance to maintain trust in the myriad financial contracts on which our economy is built.                                                 2  See Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions, “Oversight of CDOR Benchmark-Setting Submissions,” 13 January 2014. 3  Specifically, it is a weighted average of general collateral repo trades that take place daily through three interdealer-brokers. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  I’ve talked about how some key financial benchmarks in other jurisdictions have fallen short of these requirements and what is being done to rebuild trust, internationally and in Canada. The introduction and implementation of the IOSCO benchmark principles will help ensure greater integrity and governance for financial benchmarks. Here at home, better articulated governance arrangements for CDOR and other important financial benchmarks will contribute to greater financial stability. In that context, robust financial benchmarks are akin to reliable units of weights and measures. Whether it is a litre of wine, a pound of butter or an interest rate benchmark, there should be no question that measurements for commercial and financial transactions are accurate and fair. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  K C Chakrabarty: Transforming credit information into action – issues and challenges Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Sixth Annual Credit Information Conference, organized by CIBIL – Credit Information Bureau (India) Ltd –, Mumbai, 20 March 2014. *      *      * Assistance provided by Shri Rajesh Jai Kanth and Ms. Jayanthi N. in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 1. Shri M.V.Nair, Chairman, CIBIL; Shri R.V.Verma, CMD, National Housing Bank; Shri M.V.Tanksale, Chief Executive, Indian Banks’ Association; Shri Rajiv Sabharwal, Executive Director, ICICI Bank; Shri Arun Thukral, Managing Director, CIBIL; Shri Satish Pillai, Chief Operating Officer, CIBIL; delegates to the Conference; friends from the media fraternity; ladies and gentlemen! It is a pleasure for me to be present here this morning to deliver the keynote address at the Sixth Annual Credit Information Conference organized by CIBIL. It is heartening to note that CIBIL has completed 10 years of successful operations of its Consumer Bureau in India. While I congratulate the entire team of CIBIL on this occasion, I must also sound a word of caution amidst the euphoria that this occasion brings in. It is a time for CIBIL and indeed for all the credit information companies in the country to introspect and reflect on what the industry has achieved over the last decade and whither to from here? The spurt in the stressed assets in the banking system has put a spotlight on the effectiveness of the Credit Information Companies in the country. With huge increase in the data / information availability, could they have sounded a timely warning about the impending deterioration in the quality of assets in the banking system? 2. As the pioneer of the credit Information services in the country and as the most dominant player in the industry, CIBIL has a very critical role in how industry responds to the current challenges and adapts itself to remain relevant. In the financial services industry, the dominant player has to be much more resilient, much more responsive and much more restrained than others. These are the qualities you must develop. CIBIL has a tremendous responsibility, a responsibility to not only propagate the usage of credit information by the lenders but, at the same time, of ensuring that the consumers see merits in maintaining a clean credit history. I observe that the theme of the Conference “Transforming Credit Information into action: powering growth through data, analytics and decisioning” is very topical as it reflects a vision of taking the industry forward. In my address today, I would outline the essential pre-requisites of a good credit information system and how this information can be used for improving the efficiency of the credit delivery system in the country. I would also share my perspectives on some of the issues and challenges facing this sector and the regulatory / supervisory measures taken by RBI in this area. However, before I get into those issues, let me begin by giving a brief historical perspective of the functioning of Credit Information Companies in India. Historical perspective 3. With a view to facilitating the distribution of credit to all sectors of the economy, RBI observed a need for establishing a Credit Information Bureau for the collection of credit information relating to borrowers fromlending institutions and for the provision of such information to the financial system. Accordingly, a Working Group (Chairman: N.H. Siddiqui) was set up in 1999 to explore the possibilities of setting up a Credit Information Bureau in India. The Group, in its report of November 1999, affirmed the urgent need for establishment of a credit bureau and accordingly, Credit Information Bureau (India) Ltd. (CIBIL) was incorporated in August 2000. CIBIL launched its credit bureau operations in April 2004 and its commercial bureau operations in May 2006. Following enactment of the Credit Information 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Companies (Regulation) Act (CICRA) in 2005, three other Credit Information Companies (CICs) have also been set up. 4. At the level of a regulator, credit registries can play a pivotal role in providing insights that can drive effective policy changes. They can also provide important inputs for the banking supervisors in monitoring systemic risks. A further use at a regulatory level may be to analyze appropriate capital and provisioning strategies for banks and, in particular, to assess whether current capital and provisioning regulations match up to actual risks. For the CICs/credit registries to be effective, the integrity and completeness of data is one of the essential pre-requisites. However, as I alluded to a little bit earlier, even after more than 10 years of their existence, the credit information companies/bureaus have not been able to penetrate the market in a meaningful way. There are a whole host of issues which have impeded the growth and acceptance of the CICs in India with quality of data submitted by the lenders, multiplicity of CICs, use of alternate data and consumer protection being the major ones. With a view to overcome these issues and challenges, RBI had set up a Committee (Chairman: Shri Aditya Puri, MD, HDFC Bank Limited) to examine the above issues and to also recommend a data format for furnishing of credit information to CICs by Credit Institutions. The Committee was also mandated to suggest best practices for the guidance of Credit Institutions in respect of usage of credit information as a part of their credit appraisal process. The final report of the Committee is awaited. Information into action: the essential pre-requisites 5. Let me now turn to the theme of the Conference “Information into action.” What do you need for putting ‘information into action’? In the context of the Conference, this essentially means that available credit information has to be extensively used for drawing inferences for making lending decisions. Some of you might know that I have been a student of statistics; hence, I would use an analogy from that discipline to explain under what conditions can the information be used for decision making. In statistics, if any sample data is to be used to draw some inference about the population parameters, the estimates should satisfy four basic characteristics. These are “unbiasedness”, “consistency”, “efficiency” and “sufficiency”. Similarly, if the credit information has to be used for facilitating effective lending decisions, the information should also satisfy the above four important characteristics. Let me explain them one by one. (a) Unbiasedness: When I say that the information should be unbiased, it basically means that the information gathered should not be biased in favour or against a consumer, lender or a borrower. The CIC should not say that an inaccurate rating was arrived due to wrong data provided by a bank. The onus is on the CICs to ensure that the data that they gather is error-free and they are able to give unbiased information to their customers. (b) Consistency: The credit worthiness of a borrower should be consistent and accurate. If one CIC rates a borrower as good and the other one rates him bad, this means that the credit information system is not consistent. Likewise, the rating of a borrower should not vary from one loan product to the other. (c) Efficiency: An efficient information system should ensure that the CICs are able to provide reliable, accurate and unbiased information at the least possible cost. (d) Sufficiency: The credit information system can be considered sufficient if it contains all required credit and payment related information about the borrower and no other CIC can give any additional material information on the credit history of that particular borrower. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Completeness of information 6. While I agree that at this stage we may not be close to meeting the four essential constituents of a robust information system, I would like to emphasize that unless we strive to meet them, we would not be able to transform information into action. A very important consideration for meaningful transformation of credit information into action is the completeness of data. Around 90% of our population has never borrowed from the formal financial system and hence does not have any credit history. Under the circumstances, they are quite likely to be denied credit by the lending institutions. How the completeness of data can be achieved in such cases? I will return to this aspect in a little while. Quality of data 7. A central strand of completeness of information is the quality of data. The efficiency and effectiveness of a credit bureau is largely dependent on the quality of data collected in its database. RBI has issued guidelines for submission of timely, accurate and error free data to the bureau. However, our observation is that the data furnished by banks to CICs in many instances continue to be incomplete / inaccurate. As we all know, the quality of the product can only be as good or as bad as the inputs. The data containing junk values, incorrect information and incomplete identifier fields fed by the lenders to the CICs would only lead to half-baked outputs and eventually contribute to creating information asymmetries between borrowers and lenders. While, I understand that the quality of data held by microfinance institutions about their borrowers is comparatively better, the quality and consistency of data of the banking system is not very reliable and hence, poses significant challenges to the effectiveness of credit information system. The CICs in India are trying to address the issue by taking recourse to proven best practices and supporting technology to ensure that the credit information rendered by them are accurate, complete and updated. They have also started undertaking quality checks while receiving and uploading of members’ data while returning the records rejected during the validation process back to the members along with reasons thereof, for correction and re-submission. 8. It is heartening to note that the results of efforts taken by CICs to clean the data have been positive as reflected in the improving ‘hit rate’ of the CICs. I understand that even in developed economies like the US, where credit bureaus have been in existence for over a century and where there are well evolved identification and verification systems, the bureau hit rate has been around 85%. So, while the hit rate of around 75% in the case of Indian CICs in the face of significant roadblocks like lack of unique identifiers and geographic and cultural diversities can be considered good, there definitely is scope for further improvement. Alternate data sources 9. Let me now come to another strand of completeness. As I mentioned a little while back, a sizeable number of individuals/small business owners may not have a prior credit history. So, how the completeness of data can be ensured in such cases? Certain World Bank studies have indicated that inclusion of reporting of non-financial payment data (alternative data) proves extremely beneficial for making lending decisions, specifically for the segment not having access to credit. The financially excluded consumers who have a positive payment record in non-financial obligations, can have access to affordable credit. CICs have requested RBI to permit them to collaborate with sectors like Telecom, Utility and Trade credit for inclusion of their data in the credit bureau database. They have stated that inclusion of these data sources in the bureaus database will not only benefit financial sector but also be useful for the Telecom, Utility and Trade credit sector. The Committee on Comprehensive Financial Services for Small Business and Low Income Households (Dr. Nachiket Mor, Chairman, December 2013) has suggested inter alia, the need to develop a robust legal and regulatory framework around customer data generated in various transactions (credit and payments, digital and off-line), with the objective of customer ownership of their own 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  transactions data and its use, among others, for signaling credit-worthiness. In this regard, the Committee has recommended that RBI should constitute a Working Group comprising of TRAI, CERC, and Credit Information Companies to develop a framework for sharing of data between telecom companies, electrical utilities, and credit bureaus. The suggestions/recommendations of the Committee are being presently examined by RBI. Single v/s multiple CICs 10. There is a view that the existence of multiple credit bureaus in an economy ensures competition and creates a cost advantage for the users. However, where consumers as well as financial institutions do not have complete understanding of the benefits of bureaus, this could lead to disaster. Due to the functioning of multiple bureaus, only a fragmented view of the borrower can be obtained and a holistic financial picture may be hard to achieve. It has been suggested in several quarters that in an environment where such infrastructure does not exist at all, the initial impetus may have to come from the Government/regulator. In such a model, initially there could be a single CIC; and later on, a model with multiple players could evolve to avoid a monopolistic environment. In addition, besides setting up the bureaus, the government/regulator may also need to work towards education and awareness of both, the financial institutions as also the consumers. 11. In India, while setting up of CIBIL heralded the beginning of the credit information system about a decade ago, the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 (CICRA) provided for an increase in the total number of CICs which may be granted the certificate of registration for carrying on such business. Thus, with the realisation that competition will bring better technology and efficiency in the system, three other companies were issued ‘in-principle’ approval to set up CICs in April 2009. 12. With at least 3 years of multi-CIC environment behind us, the problems of data fragmentation are coming to the fore. CICs collect credit information from banks and financial institutions, Non Banking Financial Companies, Housing Finance Companies, Micro Finance Institutions, credit card companies, etc. today. In terms of Section 15 of CICRA, every credit institution has to become a member of at least one CIC. Since four CICs are functional, there is the consequent issue of data existing in silos. As of now, when enquiry is made with one CIC about a certain borrower or prospective borrower, only the information that has been provided to the CIC by its own members would be available at that CIC. The information from the credit institutions from whom the borrower may have availed a credit facility but who are not members of that particular CIC, may not be included in the credit information report provided by it. This is another challenge with regard to the completeness of data. Data on commercial accounts 13. The database in the CICs has been primarily used in the retail segment, especially while approving credit cards, personal loans, home loans and auto loans. Anectodotal evidence shows that a major chunk of this has been accounted for by the private banks and foreign banks with the public sector banks only recently starting to use them in a significant way. In the commercial segment, the use of the bureaus has not been to the same extent. SMEs are a big growth driver of any economy, accounting for a majority of jobs and exports. Inadequate credit flow has been one of the factors constraining the growth of the SME sector. One of the reasons for banks’ reluctance to lend to this group is the unavailability of reliable information for banks to assess the creditworthiness of SME units. There is a significant role for the CICs in building an information base on SMEs and assisting banks in their credit decision making. This will facilitate the free flow of credit to SMEs and would provide an impetus to overall economic growth. The CICs would progressively need to enlarge their information database by bringing more sectors under their fold. 14. As I mentioned earlier, the Committee headed by Shri Aditya Puri is also looking into the issue of low usage of credit information by member institutions. We understand that some of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  the banks have complained about the high cost of obtaining a report as one of the considerations for low usage of credit information. On the contrary, the CICs are of the view that prices would come down with increased usage. In this context, the Committee has felt that workshops for creating awareness about Credit Information Reports (CIRs) and their use in credit appraisal by lenders would be more meaningful and these could be held regularly, in association with industry-level bodies like IBA or MFIN. Unique identifiers 15. A study in August 2005 on “The Evolution of Credit bureaus in Asia-Pacific” had recognised that there are challenges relating to data quality and consumer identification issues that CICs in India (at that point only CIBIL was in existence) will need to overcome. Sadly, these challenges continue to plague the system. As banks in India have inadequate electronic data capture systems and inadequate networking facilities, problems encountered in data-collection may be magnified multi-fold. Notwithstanding the massive numbers of unique identities generated by the UIDAI, the country as a whole does not have a single official national identification registry for uniquely identifying an individual. On our part as banking supervisors, despite our continuous persuasion, the Indian banks have not been able to assign a unique identification number of their customers. CICs have tried to work around this problem by sometimes using the Ration Card number, Voters Id, PAN and Aadhaar Number or a combination of these. However, the results have much scope for improvement since mix-up of credit information results in customer grievance. Customer grievance redressal mechanism 16. The Credit Reporting Knowledge guide recognises that “a challenge to data accuracy and validation is the lack of uniform identification schemes. Issuing national unique identity numbers is usually within the prerogative of the government. Adopting an identification system at the initial phases of establishing a credit reporting system would be ideal, but is not always realistic.” In such a scenario, both Credit Institutions and CICs must have customer friendly policies in place. Credit institutions should ensure that the records submitted to CICs are updated regularly. Customer grievance redressal should be given top priority especially in respect of complaints relating to updation/alteration of credit information. CICs, at their end, should have a structured and systemic process for redressing grievances. They should abide by the period stipulated under the CICRA in respect of updation, alteration of credit information, resolution of disputes etc. Summing up 17. I quite agree that there are significant hurdles to achieving completeness of information in terms of meeting the four fundamental criteria of unbiasedness, consistency, efficiency and sufficiency that I mentioned in the beginning. Some of the deficiencies of completeness of data/information can be overcome through use of better analytical tools by the CICs. In this regard, CIBIL could leverage upon its association with global leaders like TransUnion for providing much better solutions to their member institutions. A robust customer redressal system would also go a long way in improving the quality of information, by making the lenders aware about the importance of providing accurate data. The CICs need to be sensitive to the grievances of the customers and provide redressal in a timely manner. This would not only improve the quality of data but also lend credence to the utility of the credit information system in the country. 18. Notwithstanding the data quality and completeness issues, the lending institution should start using these information into their decision making process as unless the institutions use the data/information from the CICs in their decision making process and for pricing of their loan products, the completeness of information cannot be expected to improve. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Sharing of information and the individual’s privacy rights / sharing of personal information 19. Having dwelt upon the essential pre-requisites for transformation of information into action let me highlight the issues of protecting the individuals’ privacy rights insofar as CICs business is concerned. As per FSLRC report, personal information means any information that relates to a person or permits the inference of a person’s identity. This includes demographic information such as the person’s name and contact information; biometric information; and transactional information about holdings and dealings in financial products and services. The draft Code provides for the following protections for personal information: • A prohibition on collection of personal information beyond what is required for providing the relevant financial service. • A requirement to maintain confidentiality of personal information, unless the consumer has consented to the disclosure or it is otherwise permitted by law. • An obligation to maintain accurate, up-to-date and complete personal information, and to allow consumers reasonable access to their personal information. • Powers given to the regulator to specify additional requirements, exempt some financial service providers from application of this protection and establish mechanisms to ensure that consumers can access their personal information 20. The activities of credit bureaus are regulated almost everywhere so as to prevent violation of privacy and civil liberties. Privacy laws effect a wide range of issues that affect the individual, viz., limits on access to credit information by specified users (i.e. credit institutions and other entities allowed to use such information), setting time limits for how long such information can be maintained at the CICs, and the right to access, check and correct one’s own credit information. 21. In India, the various provisions of CICRA cover the regulation of credit information business and also include responsibilities of the bureaus, rights and obligations of the credit institutions and safeguarding privacy rights of the individual. We can understand credit information about an individual at the CICs as a reflection of how he or she behaves with relation to his lender/s. If he/she is a good borrower, there is a record of such repayments; else a record of defaults is built up. This is akin to reputational collateral which is used by CICs to provide a picture of the individual to a prospective lender. In some cases, existing lenders themselves may like to review their portfolio to evaluate the functioning of such individual borrowers post disbursal of credits and also determine if the payment-performances have taken a turn for the worse. It may be emphasised here that the credit information report which is built up from such stored credit information does not by itself say whether the borrower or the prospective borrower is a good credit risk or bad credit risk. It only provides lenders with the data which allows them to take the decision themselves, depending on their risk-reward trade-off and their internal policies. This gives them the comfort of taking an informed decision based on the credit information available within the system. 22. It is not uncommon for questions such as “Why should my information be passed around in the system?” to be raised, even today in our context. The provisions of CICRA seek to strike a balance between the dual objective of putting in place an efficient system of sharing of credit information in the larger interest of financial system on one hand, and maintaining the privacy of such information, on the other. As part of their customer education and awareness efforts, the CICs should be able to effectively communicate the benefits of lower interest rates that the consumers may derive if they are perceived as ‘good borrowers’. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  Recent regulatory / supervisory measures Let me now turn my attention to few of the recent regulatory/supervisory measures we have initiated in this area. (i)  Central Repository of Information on Large Credits(CRILC) 23. As you all know, Dr. Raghuram Rajan on assuming charge as Governor, RBI announced that RBI proposed to collect credit data and examine large common exposures across banks which will enable the creation of a central repository on large credits, which may be shared with the banks. This is expected to enable banks themselves to be aware of building leverage and common exposures. The CRILC is expected to act as a repository of large credits containing system-wide exposure of individuals and entities having exposure (both fund and non-fund based) of more than Rs. 50 million. Thus, the basic purpose of CRILC is to collect, store and disseminate large credit data to banks. The underlying objective of the creation of the CRILC is to tackle the menace of rising NPAs in the Indian banking system. I would like to urge the banks and the CICs to also put in place a system to collect credit data of exposures which are even below Rs.50 million, so that they could have reliable information about all the borrowers in the financial system. (ii)  Investment in credit information companies 24. RBI has issued a revised directive on November 29, 2013, allowing higher FDI limits to entities which have an established track record of running a Credit Information Bureau in a well regulated environment. This regulatory measure is aimed not only at bringing in the much needed foreign equity support but also to keep intact competition in this sector. As a result of this measure, the foreign partners of the CICs are taking steps to increase their equity stakes in the CICs and thereby continue to bring in foreign technology support to this long gestation capital intensive industry. Conclusion 25. Before I conclude, let me revisit the reasons for why the credit information bureaus including CIBIL, have not received the level of success they would have expected, even after a decade of their existence. In essence, the two users of the credit information, the lending institutions as well the consumers are still wary of the outputs generated by the CICs. While on the one hand, the lenders do not see compelling reasons to subscribe to the CIC reports for want of appropriate information or analytics, the consumers on the other hand are still sceptical about the authenticity of the CIRs. There have been numerous complaints about the CICs handing out incorrect reports to the consumers who have to then run from pillar to post to get these corrected. The grievance redressal system in this area, in fact, needs a thorough overhaul. Thus, going forward, the challenge for the CICs and indeed, for CIBIL, which has a virtual monopoly over this business is to address the twin concerns that I have mentioned. The purpose of having CICs in the system would be best served when the credit needs of deserving people are met in a timely manner and at a reasonable cost. 26. I am sure that the Conference would throw up some ‘actionable’ ideas which would go a long way in not only spreading awareness about the credit information system in the country but also improving it. I once again congratulate CIBIL for reaching a significant milestone in their journey and thank them for inviting me to be a part of this Conference. I wish you all a very fruitful deliberation ahead. Thank you! References: The Evolution of Credit Bureaus in Asia-Pacific- Dr. Rita Chakravarti and Beng-Hai Chea (August 2005) 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Role and Effects of Credit Information Sharing- – Tulli Jappelli and Marco Pagano (April 2005) Credit Reporting Knowledge Guide, International Finance Corporation (2012) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Takehiro Sato: Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing – importance of fiscal consolidation Speech by Mr Takehiro Sato, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at the Japan Society, New York, 19 March 2014. *      *      * Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. Introduction Thank you, Mr. Harris, for your kind introduction. Distinguished guests and members of Japan Society. It is my great honor and real pleasure to speak to you today. As a member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, I myself voted for quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) last April. It is my strong desire to ensure that it succeeds. At the same time, in the process of overcoming deflation, the Japanese government’s efforts for fiscal consolidation play a vital role. It is for that reason that I will talk about fiscal consolidation today. Today, I will first explain the current developments in Japan’s economy. I will focus on the meaning of the price stability target and stress the importance of flexibility in monetary policy. I will also talk about the effects of the price stability target on financial markets. Next, I will explain the importance of fiscal consolidation from a range of perspectives, including potential changes in the balance of payments and a saving and investment balance in Japan. In my speech, I will often refer to an optimistic scenario and a pessimistic scenario. The latter is intended to highlight the importance of the government’s efforts to ensure fiscal discipline. It is by no means intended to get bogged down in pessimism. I will then close my speech with some notes about the QQE and fiscal consolidation. I. Developments in Japan’s economy It has been almost a year since the Bank introduced the QQE last April (Chart 1). Economic activity and prices have been broadly in line with the baseline scenario presented in the Outlook Reports and interim assessments (Chart 2). In short, Japan’s economy is steadily pursuing its path to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. Looking ahead, the effects of the consumption tax hike from 5 to 8 percent in April will be closely monitored. In my judgment, Japan’s economy is entirely different from that in 1997, when the consumption tax was lifted from 3 to 5 percent. Japan’s economy has become much more resilient against tax hikes. On the price front, the Bank’s policy board has made the following judgment. Excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, the year-on-year rate of increase in the core CPI, which excludes volatile food, is likely to be around 1¼ percent for some time. Thereafter, it is expected to reach the price stability target of 2 percent from the latter half of fiscal 2014 to fiscal 2015, as the economy continues to grow at a pace above its potential growth rate. Based on such an outlook, the policy board has judged it appropriate to steadily pursue the QQE under its current guidelines of asset purchases. II. Price stability target and QQE A. Price stability target as a flexible framework Next, I will explain what we mean by the price stability target, introduced in January 2013 (Chart 3). 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Under the QQE, the Bank aims to achieve this target at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. The policy framework of the price stability target is flexible, just like that adopted by major central banks overseas. Specifically, monetary policy requires long and variable time lags before its effects permeate the economy, and thereafter prices. To achieve a sustainable growth path in the context of price stability, monetary policy needs to be flexible. In other words, we examine the current conditions and the outlook for economic activity and prices. We also analyze various risk factors including the accumulation of financial imbalances. We take account of all these developments when we decide on monetary policy. That is what I mean by being flexible. Flexibility in monetary policy has been widely shared with other countries. Particularly in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, major overseas economies have become increasingly attentive to the flexibility of monetary policymaking. From that viewpoint, the price stability target is by no means a rigid and superficial framework which calls for the inflation rate to reach 2 percent with surgical precision. It is a flexible and practical framework that accommodates the needs arising from economic developments. Put differently, what the price stability target aims to achieve is not a situation in which only prices will rise. Rather, it aims to achieve an environment in which the improvement of the overall economy results in higher wages and then higher prices. In my view, in such an environment, some degree of latitude to the price stability target – both on the upside and downside – is naturally required. Furthermore, it is necessary to make an analysis from broader perspectives when assessing the extent to which the Bank has come close to achieving the target. That includes examining the recent developments in wages as well as the core CPI, an indicator that the policy board presents in its assessments. B. QQE and long-term interest rate I will now talk about the effects of the price stability target on financial markets. Under the QQE, the Bank puts strong downward pressure on nominal long-term interest rates through the massive purchases of JGBs. It also tries to raise people’s inflation expectations via the accumulation of the monetary base. The combination of the two will lower real long-term interest rates. That is an unprecedented challenge. There are different views on the extent to which the massive supply of the monetary base can have a real impact on people’s inflation expectations. Nevertheless, lifting inflation expectations is one of just a few remaining policy options under these circumstances. After nearly 15 years of deflation, the medium- to long-term inflation expectations have been around 1 percent and stayed low, compared to those in other advanced economies. Moreover, Japan has been faced with a zero boundary of nominal interest rates. Here, let me recap on how the QQE will work on nominal long-term interest rates through its transmission mechanism. Nominal long-term interest rates combine two elements: one is the average of future short-term rates; the other is premiums (Chart 4). Based on that understanding, the Bank has specified its forward guidance in order to produce these effects. First it will continue with the QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. That in effect will exert downward pressure on the average of future short-term rates. In addition, premiums will be prevented from widening through the massive purchases of JGBs with relatively longer maturities. The QQE thus relies on the mechanism in which the combination of the forward guidance and asset purchases will maintain nominal long-term interest rates at low levels. That is not different from what happens at other central banks, such as the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England, which also depend on similar unconventional monetary policy. Under such unconventional policy, nominal interest rates are likely to rise as the effects of the policy start to occur, preceding the improvement in the economy and prices. Referring to the elements that I have just explained, future short-term rates are likely to rise if the market judges that an exit from current easing policy is at hand. Admittedly, we need to follow a narrow path to achieve the objective under the QQE, but it is a challenge that we must meet. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  As I will explain shortly, there is a limit to the extent to which a central bank can control the nominal long-term interest rates. Therefore, the government’s efforts for fiscal consolidation are vital. They will become even more vital when deflation comes to an end and an eventual exit from deflation occurs. III. Importance of fiscal consolidation A. Overcoming deflation and change in environment surrounding fiscal policy Let me now explain why fiscal consolidation is important in order to overcome deflation. From an optimistic viewpoint, if the medium- to long-term growth expectations rise as a result of overcoming deflation, the fiscal structure remains solid despite a pick-up in nominal long-term rates. That is because tax revenue will increase as the nominal growth rate rises. The elasticity of tax revenue is generally high at the initial phase of economic expansion, and corporate tax is likely to contribute to a higher revenue. On the expenditure side, the pace of increase in the government’s interest payment costs will remain subdued for some time. That is due to the government’s debt management policy in which the average maturity has been extended, and the government has taken advantage of current easy monetary conditions. For reference, the average maturity of JGBs issued in fiscal 2014 will be eight years and five months. In light of weak credit demand under deflation, the government is now building a fiscal structure which is resilient against possible rate rises. Coupled with the effects of the QQE, the government’s borrowing costs have stayed stably at around 1 percent. By extending the maturity of JGBs, the government in effect has been able to buy time on the liability side (Chart 5). Such an optimistic view may entail a risk. The aging population will continue to put pressure on additional fiscal expenditure, such as increasing social security benefits. The aging will constrain the labor supply on the supply side, and change the demand structure of the economy as a whole. Unless the economy responds to a change in the demand structure, it will reduce the potential to grow. If growth expectations do not rise materially due to the aging, the fiscal structure will remain vulnerable. Taking account of such demographic changes, it is better to be conservative. In my judgment, the fiscal issue will remain even after we manage to overcome deflation. B. Recent developments in balance of payments Now, I will talk about Japan’s balance of payments. The current account surplus registered 3.3 trillion yen last year. In the years for which a comparison can be made, it was the lowest figure recorded after 1985 (Chart 6). Behind that, the trade surplus in electronic appliances almost disappeared and fuel imports increased materially after the suspension of nuclear power plants. On a quarterly basis, the current account balance registered a deficit for the first time in the October–December quarter last year, and is expected to remain in deficit in the January–March quarter. Having said all that, the deficit in the quarterly current account balances fundamentally reflects solid imports thanks to resilient domestic demand due to the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike this April. Therefore, I do not expect the current account deficit to persist after the consumption tax hike. The deficit we see most recently is taking place under those somewhat unique circumstances. By contrast, according to the “balance of payments development stage theory”,1 the current account balance changes from a surplus to a deficit in the long run as a result of the demographic change. It looks as though the recent increase in fuel imports is accelerating                                                 1 Crowther’s “balance of payments development stage theory” explains long-term patterns of change in a country’s balance of payment structure as the economy advances from a debtor to a creditor country, and eventually to the one that liquidates its overseas assets. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  the change in the current account balance. The state of the economy – be it a trade surplus or deficit, or a current account surplus or deficit – is ultimately the result of people’s rational decision-making. It is irrelevant from the social welfare perspective. That leads me to conclude that it is not appropriate to say that a surplus is a good thing while a deficit is bad. Nonetheless, if the current account deficit continues, meaning that a domestic saving and investment balance will shift from a surplus to a deficit, there is a possibility that the advantage Japan has achieved by financing its deficits through ample domestic savings might change in the long run. C. Overcoming deflation, and saving and investment balance Let me now elaborate on the nexus between the saving and investment balance and the overcoming of deflation. I will start with the saving and investment balance under deflation. In Japan, excess savings have been decreasing in the household sector, whereas they have been increasing in the corporate sector (Chart 7). Putting those trends together, excess savings in the private sector as a whole have remained intact. Behind that, companies have made it a priority to downsize their balance sheets by repaying debts in light of harmful deflationary expectations. Put differently, deflation has led to excess savings in the private sector, and that has enabled the government to finance its debts with subdued borrowing costs. Thus, “deflationary equilibrium” has prevailed. The equilibrium is subject to change once the QQE succeeds and Japan’s economy overcomes deflation. Admittedly, it is not easy to predict what the saving and investment balance in the private sector will look like before and after deflation. In general, however, the propensity to import will rise by stimulating investment and spending. That will lead to an outflow of income overseas. Under such circumstances, domestic excess savings in the private sector are likely to shrink, if not a reversal from excess savings to excess investment. Looking at the corporate and household sectors separately, excess savings in the corporate sector will likely show a clear decline. That is because, after overcoming deflation, it will become rational for companies to change their strategies and increase their external debts to finance their investment. As for the household sector, economic theory says that the household savings rate will go down in an aging population. I note that it may not be the case if we take account of transfers from the government and the corporate sector (Chart 8). In my view, we should be mindful of a possible decline in domestic excess savings when the QQE succeeds and Japan moves out of the deflationary equilibrium. In light of the decline in excess savings, if the fiscal deficit does not change, the current account balance will register a deficit. We might no longer be able to finance all government debts with domestic savings. Then, overseas investors will ask for a higher premium, possibly driving the government’s borrowing costs even higher. To avoid being trapped in such a situation, or to mitigate the shock associated with that situation, it is vital that the government will continue with its sound fiscal management. That is important in terms of preventing the problem associated with shrinking excess savings from surfacing. Put differently, the government needs to show its firm commitment to fiscal consolidation. Moreover, the government needs to implement its path toward such consolidation in order to avoid leaving an impression with the market that it is not serious about the issue. The scenario that I have laid out contains a number of assumptions. In practice, the end of deflation will generate higher tax revenue as the nominal growth rate rises. That is obviously good for fiscal consolidation. Thus, I repeat that it is best to avoid getting trapped by pessimism. D. Domar’s theorem Fiscal sustainability generally means that the future outstanding amount of the government’s debts relative to GDP will not reach an unmanageable level. In theory, it can be summarized 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  as the current outstanding amount of the government’s debts relative to GDP being equivalent to the discounted value of the current and future primary balances. However, we cannot derive a threshold value of the outstanding amount of the government’s debts relative to GDP and say that the fiscal situation is no longer sustainable beyond that value. After all, whether or not the fiscal situation is sustainable depends much on what the future primary balance looks like and how a wide range of economic entities expect such balance to change. Here, let me come back to the equation for determining fiscal sustainability. If an economy grows at rates above the interest rates, the government will be able to issue bonds forever despite the conditions specified in the equation. That is called Domar’s theorem. This theorem is often referred to when doing a back-of-the-envelope calculation to assess fiscal sustainability. In practice, the interest rates are likely to stay above the growth rates, and it has become common today to assess fiscal sustainability on the condition that Domar’s theorem does not hold. In my view, when assessing fiscal sustainability, the interest rates that should be compared with the growth rates are not in terms of long-term bond yields but rather the average cost of the government’s borrowing. The cost could be higher or lower than the growth rates of the economy. Indeed, the government’s borrowing costs have consistently been declining since the beginning of the 1990s, when long-term bond yields began trending downward. Most recently, those costs are around 1 percent, well below the nominal growth rates (Chart 1). Under such circumstances, the government has benefitted from an “interest rate bonus”. Looking at those situations from a pessimistic viewpoint, we may face “an interest rate onus”, where the government’s borrowing costs remain higher than the nominal growth rates. The Japanese government has already started taking measures to extend the average maturity of its debts. We will still have some time before the interest rate onus takes place, and in the meantime the government can make its efforts for fiscal consolidation. E. Overcoming deflation and the bank’s response The next topic concerns what policy response the Bank might take when we see the overcoming of deflation start to have an effect on long-term interest rates. After the success of the QQE, people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations will be anchored at around 2 percent, and the Bank might possibly start moving toward an exit. Market participants will notice signs of change in economic activity and monetary policy. Under those circumstances, nominal long-term rates might start to adjust, well before the actual changes in policy. From a purely macroeconomic perspective, a change in nominal rates can be considered as the result of a change in people’s inflation expectations. Such a change may not be detrimental as long as real rates remain more or less the same. More optimistically, a higher tax revenue after the overcoming of deflation can be expected, and that will improve the fiscal situation. From a pessimistic viewpoint, an abrupt change in nominal rates might make the fiscal situation severer and possibly have an effect on the financial system. Somewhat ironically, the success in overcoming deflation might produce unfavorable spillover effects, given the significant size of the government’s debts. In an extreme case where there is a grave negative impact on financial stability, a central bank might have to choose either financial stability or price stability, no matter how strongly it is committed to price stability. Once a central bank can no longer pursue price stability in fear of fiscal sustainability, it might fall into a situation, known as “unpleasant monetarist arithmetic”.2                                                 2 See Sargent and Wallace (1981) for details regarding “unpleasant monetarist arithmetic”. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  In my view, we must avoid such a pessimistic scenario from unfolding. To that end, the Bank has been stress-testing the robustness of Japan’s financial system, taking into account possible changes in the interest rate environment. Furthermore, it has urged financial institutions to reinforce their risk management and take measures to enhance profitability. In terms of its relationship with the government, the Bank pursues monetary policy to achieve the 2 percent price stability target. That includes the process through which it will eventually exit from the current easing policy. We simply cannot accept a situation in which a monetary policy decision is affected by the consideration of fiscal policy. There is no question about it. Once the financial environment changes, it is possible that people will pay attention to the relationship between the government and the central bank. Expectations for the central bank’s operation to support bond prices might rise. However, under free capital mobility, the central bank’s involvement will not solve the problem. To be concrete, even though the central bank increases its operation in the government bond market in order to suppress the government’s borrowing costs, the premiums might possibly rise according to the mechanism that I laid out today, when it is judged by market participants that the central bank’s operation will weaken fiscal discipline. Furthermore, if the market thinks that the rapid increase in the central bank’s balance sheet might cause inflation beyond the level judged appropriate, then the anticipated future short-term interest rates might rise. In short, it is the market judgment that matters rather than the central bank’s intention. Down the road, social security spending is expected to rise due to the aging. That spending in Japan is not significantly high relative to that in other economies at this moment. However, it is vital that the government makes seamless and tireless efforts to make sure that fiscal discipline remains firmly intact and there is no doubt in the market concerning the government’s intention toward fiscal discipline (Chart 9). F. Plausibility of financial repression Despite the government’s determination to achieve fiscal consolidation, it appears that there is still a view stating that the central bank should conduct monetary policy in consideration of the fiscal situation. Those who are obsessed with such a view claim that the central bank should continue its massive bond purchase operations in order to avoid the problem of fiscal concern. They insist that the central bank should be involved in such operations when long-term rates start to pick up around the time of an exit. Often referred to as “financial repression”, the intention here is to contain a possible pick-up in nominal rates through the central bank’s massive bond purchases in order to maintain fiscal sustainability. That reminds me of the “fiscal theory of price level (FTPL)”.3 The FTPL states that a fiscal stimulus is effective for price stability. However, it is implicitly based on the assumption that a central bank does financial repression. In other words, it supposes that the bond prices will be maintained despite an increase in government debts as a result of fiscal expansion. Otherwise, the private sector, which holds government bonds, will reduce its spending due to the adverse wealth effect and hence offset an increase in demand stemming from additional fiscal measures. Under such circumstances, the output gap will not improve and prices will not rise. That said, whether or not a central bank can control bond prices depends not on its intention but on market judgment. It is for that reason too that I emphasize the importance of fiscal consolidation.                                                 3 See Sims (1999), Christiano and Fitzgerald (2000a, b), Leeper (1991), Cochrane (2000), and Woodford (1996, 2001) for details regarding the fiscal theory of price level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  Concluding remarks A. Government’s commitment for fiscal consolidation Now, let me sum up. In my speech today, I have repeatedly emphasized the importance of fiscal consolidation. Indeed, the Japanese government has already said that it will halve the deficit in the primary balance relative to GDP by fiscal 2015 from the level registered in fiscal 2010. Furthermore, it is committed to turning the primary balance from a deficit to a surplus by fiscal 2020. Those moves constitute an important part of the government’s commitment to fiscal consolidation and are now widely accepted by the international community. Accordingly, the government decided to raise the consumption tax from 5 to 8 percent in April; moreover, the tax rate is scheduled to be raised to 10 percent in October 2015. Down the road, we may hear more discussion concerning whether the consumption tax of 10 percent is enough to make the fiscal structure sustainable. Whatever the discussion might be, it is important to acknowledge that the government will take a crucial first step toward fiscal consolidation, given mounting social security spending. There is no question about that, and financial markets understand the government’s intention on that. B. QQE based on fiscal consolidation Recent long-term rates have been stable in light of signs of overcoming deflation. That is not just due to the effects of the Bank’s JGB purchases. It also hinges on the fact that market participants and businesspeople have full confidence in the government’s strong commitment to fiscal consolidation. That enables the Bank to conduct massive JGB purchases without being trapped in fiscal dominance. The Bank offers full support to the government’s commitment. The commitment for fiscal consolidation by the government is imperative so that the QQE – which is designed to overcome deflation – should not be perceived as the means for “financial repression”. At the same time, a problem will arise if the government creates a fiscal cliff, as epitomized by the enforcement of the Fiscal Structure Reform Act in the mid-1990s. In practice, a balanced approach may be required between a medium- to long-term commitment for fiscal consolidation and the short-term flexibility in policy. Even so, the government should ensure that it will not lose sight of the importance of fiscal consolidation and that it will reinforce its medium- to long-term commitment on that front. Thank you.   
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11  
12 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
BIS central bankers’ speeches 13  References Christiano, Lawrence J. and Terry J. Fitzgerald, “Price Stability: Is a Tough Central Bank Enough?”, Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, 2000a. Christiano, Lawrence J. and Terry J. Fitzgerald, “Understanding the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level”, Economic Review, 36 (2), Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, 2000b. Cochrane, John H., “Money as Stock: Price Level Determination with No Money Demand”, NBER Working Paper, No. 7498, 2000. Leeper, Eric M., “Equilibria under Active and Passive Monetary and Fiscal Policies”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 27, 1991. Sims, Christopher A., “The Precarious Fiscal Foundations of EMU”, De Economist, 147 (4), 1999. Sargent, Thomas J. and Neil Wallace, “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic”, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5 (3), 1981. Woodford, Michael, “Control of the Public Debt: A Requirement for Price Stability?”, NBER Working Paper, No. 5684, 1996. Woodford, Michael, “Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 33, 2001.   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The strength of retail – in a wider ASEAN economy Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central bank of the Philippines), at the Chamber of Thrift Banks (CTB) Annual Convention, Makati City, 19 March 2014. *      *      * Every year, your industry comes together to exchange views on the prospects for the year ahead. With your theme this year “Thrift Banks: Preparing for 2015 ASEAN Integration”, the thrift banking industry is recognizing a development that has quietly evolved through the years and will soon crystalize. ASEAN integration – broadly through the ASEAN Financial Integration Framework or AFIF and more specifically through the ASEAN Banking Integration Framework or ABIF – will come to fruition in line with the ASEAN 2020 vision that was enunciated way back in 2007. It is, in this sense, imminent and the Chamber is being responsive by preparing for this eventuality. In fact, for this Convention, the organizers have lined up experts to tackle different facets of integration. My role this morning is to describe the broad economic landscape, including the challenges and opportunities, that the thrift banking industry currently faces against the backdrop of ASEAN integration. The Chamber is being strategic in this way, for clearly, understanding one’s starting point and initial conditions is just as important as defining one’s final destination. The economy at large Let me begin therefore with the economy at large. It is tempting to simply cite the array of indicators that show that the macro-economy is strong. In 2013, we again saw the convergence of high growth and stable prices as the country posted a real gross domestic product growth rate of 7.2 percent amid an inflation of three percent. This is on top of the real GDP growth of 6.8 percent and a 3.2 percent inflation rate in 2012. We need to appreciate these numbers not just because they are better than the performance numbers that came out of 2011 (which were 3.6% real GDP growth and 4.6% inflation rate). Instead, these are excellent numbers because of the calamities that befell us during the period.1 On the external front, the balance of payments position was at USD5.1 billion for 2013. And the Gross International Reserves at almost 12 months’ worth of imports of goods and payments of services continues to provide ample cushion against external vulnerabilities. We should certainly point out that the growth of the real economy is supported by and feeds into a banking industry whose strength is well documented. Standard & Poor’s latest banking outlook (February 2014) notes that “Philippine banks will likely continue to benefit from the country’s buoyant economic prospects in 2014”. And in Moody’s own banking report (2014 Outlook dated December 2013), the Philippines is the only jurisdiction whose banking system they rate to have a positive outlook. Thrift banks as an industry may be small when compared to its universal and commercial bank peers. But it is by no means left behind. Peso deposits mobilized grew by 22 percent in                                                 1  Typhoon Pablo is the strongest tropical cyclone to ever hit Mindanao. The Zamboanga crisis was a 30-day stand-off. The earthquake in Bohol was the deadliest earthquake the Philippines has experienced in 23 years while Typhoon Yolanda is the most devastating typhoon on record. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  2013, loans expanded by 13 percent, total resources rose by 16 percent, while profitability increased by 18 percent. The challenges that lie ahead All these should be more than enough reason to be optimistic about the future of the banking industry. But financial markets can swiftly change course… Everyone here is more than aware that the saving that takes a long time to put together could be the investment that loses value in a “mark-to-market” second. And when financial markets get shocked, the impact leaves a mark in both depth and breadth. As an industry then, your stereotypical challenge is to maximize your strengths while addressing your weaknesses… This brings us to the question of what a thrift bank represents… This is a question of “character” which would define the path that you will take as well as those side roads that you ought to avoid. As I look at your Asset-Liability structure, I note that 86 percent of your liabilities are peso deposits and 66 percent of assets are in loans. Although your universal and commercial bank peers have peso deposits at roughly the same magnitude (72 percent), U/KBs only have 47 percent of their assets in loans. This fact is material. Without another avenue for generating revenues, the viability of the thrift bank model must rest in the balance between sourcing retail saving and deploying the same as loans. And as you dig deeper into the loan portfolio, it becomes readily evident that the bulk of the credits lie in consumer finance. From this perspective, consumer finance is therefore at the very crux of what defines thrift banks. The promise of the Filipino consumer The good news is that several indicators suggest that the prospects of our consumer finance market remains promising. Like all other jurisdictions in ASEAN, our population growth has actually slowed substantially from 3.35 percent per annum in 1960 to 1.72 percent in 2012.2 Despite this, some 35 percent of Filipinos are younger than 15 years old as of end-2012. This percentage is much higher than the rest of ASEAN which averages at only 25.8 percent. It is also much higher than those of China, Japan and South Korea which average 17.7 percent, that of North America at 19.3 percent and the euro area at 15.3 percent. What these numbers mean is that the Philippines will see a greater proportion of its population becoming consumers in the next few decades. This leaves the future market for consumer needs very potent. This is not to say that the current consumer market is not already attractive. World Bank data show, for example, that cellular subscriptions per 100 individuals is already at nearly 107 in the Philippines, higher than the 94 subscriptions average for the BCLMV countries (Brunei, Cambodia, Lao, Myanmar and Vietnam), and the 66 subscriptions for China, Japan and Korea. Our internet penetration rate is not that far off, where we have about 36 internet users per 100 individuals versus the 40 on average in China, Japan and Korea and the 45 users for Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia collectively. But as we develop our young population to be more tech-savvy, one surely expects our numbers to keep on rising. I really do not have to mention the bigger ticket items since this is your area of focus. But to put it on record, we have seen outstanding auto loans, credit card receivables and residential                                                 2  All the data in this section are taken from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators 2013 edition. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  real estate loans booked by thrift banks increase by Php 33 billion, Php 253 million and Php 29 billion respectively over the past three years alone. This translates to annualized growth rates of 15 percent, 14 percent and nine percent respectively. ASEAN integration and the consumer market Ladies and gentlemen, clearly, demographics favor you. Furthermore, ASEAN integration opens up a bigger regional market. After all, the economic prospects of ASEAN as a whole have always been premised on its retail market. ASEAN has a base of over 600 million individuals in 10 jurisdictions whose collective GDP in 2012 amounted to USD2.27 trillion. While this amount only represents 3.13 percent of the world’s nominal GDP, ASEAN as a collective aggrupation would be the world’s 8th largest economy, only following the US, China, Japan, Germany, France, UK and Brazil.3 Prospects for Philippine thrift banks On the whole then, an integrated ASEAN is a natural treasure trove for the consumer finance market. With ASEAN gross saving as a percentage to GDP just above 30 percent while the world is at under 22 percent, the potential for ASEAN is not just its size but also its saving.4 As an industry structured to mobilize retail saving and generate credit exposures to the consumer finance market, the prospects seem tailor-fit for you. In fact, within that framework, the Philippines does stand out even further because of the specific demographic profile that I described earlier. Does this mean then that your corporate future is secured? Unfortunately, the potential that is ASEAN and our own demographic advantages do not, on their own, create balance sheets. There are still strategic decisions to be made and tactical plans to be executed for these identified positives to be reflected as reality on your balance sheets. What is clear at this juncture is that market competition is changing the traditional niches. Internally, the larger banks are extending their network into areas where smaller banks traditionally operate while banks have increasingly tapped into the consumer finance space. Externally, ASEAN is poised to further integrate under the mantra of an ASEAN that is for ASEAN. Just as we will be exposed to the opportunities of a bigger regional market, our economic prospects will also be targeted by interested regional entities. In both cases, they create competitive pressure for TBs and this, in our view, presents the main strategic issue for thrift banks. Despite all the gains achieved in recent years, you and I will agree that status quo cannot be an option. The ideal solution is to “right size”, getting bigger so that you are better equipped to handle competitive risks while getting smaller in risk exposures where the bank cannot develop a competitive advantage within a reasonable period. This is all about managing risks, a familiar point that the BSP has raised at every opportunity. The difference between today and last year’s convention, however, is that the financial market has re-calibrated towards higher interest rate levels… the much awaited Fed taper has begun and the normalization in easy money conditions has commenced… Furthermore, the ASEAN’s collective resolve to transform into an economic community is upon us.                                                 3  Based on nominal 2012 GDP denominated in USD. The ranking is consistent across tables provided separately by the United Nations, the IMF and the World Bank. 4  Raw data from the World Development Indicators. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Ladies and gentlemen, the prospects for thrift banks in the Philippines indeed appear to be very strong. But the attractiveness of those prospects is also catching the attention of other banks in the Philippines and most likely, also of banks in the region. You simply have to get stronger to compete in this evolving market. How you become stronger and in what form remains the critical issue before you. I would like to believe that a thriving domestic economy, supportive demographics and your traditional strength in consumer finance should give you a healthy level of confidence as you find your place under the ASEAN sun. These, along with the innate Filipino ingenuity and talent in thriving amid challenges, should serve you well in this journey. I am sure that your resource speakers today will provide various insights and direction during their respective presentations. I then wish you a very productive convention and I thank you for your attention. Maraming salamat po sa inyong lahat. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Inia Naiyaga: Growing the private sector – the micro, small to medium businesses Address by Mr Inia Naiyaga, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the Fiji Indigenous Business Council 2014 Symposium “Indigenous businesses – creating our future”, Suva, 20 March 2014. *      *      * The President, Mr Ulai Taoi and office bearers of the Fiji Indigenous Business Council, Members of the Council, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen Ni sa bula vinaka and a Very Good Morning to you all. It is indeed a great pleasure for me to participate in today’s forum with the appropriate and topical theme “Indigenous businesses – Creating our future”. At the outset, let me commend the Fiji Indigenous Business Council for holding such an important forum and for looking at such a critical issue as a strategy for encouraging employment and commercial opportunities for our I’taukei. I was asked to speak on the subject “Growing the private sector: the small to medium business”. I have taken the liberty to add Micro businesses as well in my speech today as this is not just a buzz word but a reality, as most, if not all, businesses start as a micro enterprise with Fiji’s well known large businesses being no exception. My presentation today is divided into four parts. • Firstly, I have taken this opportunity to provide an update on the current state of the Fiji economy; • Secondly, I will highlight the importance of the Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises, or MSMEs to the economy; • Thirdly, I wish to highlight some recent initiatives and incentives by Government and the RBF to the MSME sector; and • Finally, share my thoughts on how the indigenous or we, the I’taukeis can increase our participation in business. 1. The current state of the Fiji economy Ladies and gentleman, the recovery in the Fijian economy which started in 2010 has now gained a much firmer footing, despite the continued sluggishness in key trading partner economies during the same period. The Fijian economy is estimated to have expanded by 3.6 percent last year following a 2.7 percent and 1.7 percent expansion in 2011 and 2012, respectively. We now have four years of consecutive growth not normally seen in our history. Last year, all sectors of the economy, with the exception of the mining and fishing sectors, contributed positively towards this growth.  This improved confidence can be attributed to a number of factors such as increased spending by Government in infrastructure development and social welfare and accommodative monetary policy by the Reserve Bank and the consequent easier access to credit and historical low interest rates. Furthermore, the concerted effort by Government towards an inclusive parliamentary democracy in 2014 has also been a major contributor to regained confidence amongst investors and consumers alike. The improved confidence is well reflected in our major macroeconomic indicators. Consumer spending has been buoyant throughout 2013 underpinned by better labour market 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  conditions, increases in the income tax threshold and wages for Government workers, higher inward remittances and increased lending by financial institutions. Partial indicators such as Value Added Tax (VAT) collections, new consumption lending, new vehicle sales and imports of consumption goods have all noted annual increases in 2013. Additionally, investment indicators showed continued resilience and growth last year as well. Total investment is estimated to have been around 28 percent of GDP last year as all partial indicators such as imports of investment goods, lending for investment, domestic cement sales and value of work-put-in-place registered annual increases. The improved investment climate and confidence has translated well into the demand for labour. The Reserve Bank survey based recruitment measure showed that the number of job advertisements rose by 9.3 percent in 2013, driven by improved recruitment intentions in the community, social & personal services followed by the wholesale, retail trade, restaurants & hotels, construction and the manufacturing sectors. The improved economic prospects are also a result of Government’s expansionary fiscal policy stance in 2013. In an effort to stimulate economic growth and investment, a substantial amount was spent on capital works, particularly infrastructure development. Inflationary pressures remained generally soft in 2013, mainly on account of stable food and oil prices. The year-end inflation rate stood at 3.4 percent compared to 2.5 percent at the end of 2012. However, our external sector continued to face some challenges. Export performance has been unsatisfactory and data up to November 2013 reveal that total domestic exports declined by 2.7 percent. As alluded to earlier, imports continued to surge due to the pick-up in demand across the economy. As a result the trade deficit widened further last year, though this was supported to some extent by favourable inflows of tourism and remittances. Remittances performed exceptionally well last year and reached a new record of $339 million. Nonetheless, our overall external position remained stable and foreign reserves was recorded at $1.8 billion at the end of last year, sufficient to cover 4.9 months of retained imports of goods and non-factor services. Ladies and gentleman, what is in store for us in 2014? Pre-2014 National Budget forecast for growth in 2014 was 3.0 percent. However, given the significant increase in Government expenditure on infrastructure, wages and salaries and social benefits such as free education as announced in the 2014 National Budget, growth is now forecast to surpass the projection and is currently being reviewed. Additionally, the surge in consumption and investment spending is expected to continue and can even be further boosted by the increased disposable income. Confidence in the economy is expected to remain strong and is supported by sentiments expressed by retailers and businesses in RBF’s business expectations and retail sales surveys which suggests a positive outlook for consumption and investment activity in 2014. Macroeconomic fundamentals are poised to remain strong and conducive to growth in business in 2014. A growing economy should therefore augur well for the Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises. 2. Importance of the Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) to the Economy We all recognise that micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) play a vital role in economic development. They are an important engine of economic growth not only for less developed economies but also the advanced nations. I am sure you all know why MSMEs are important. I will therefore re-iterate these factors briefly: • It Raises Economic Growth: In developing countries in Asia, SMEs make up the bulk of their economies, some as high as 60 percent of GDP. In Fiji, there are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  approximately 4,200 registered MSMEs, mainly in the agriculture, fishing, manufacturing and retailing and tourism sectors. It is estimated that the MSMEs sector accounted for almost 12 percent of our GDP in 2013 valued at around $800 million. However, total outstanding borrowing by this sector from the commercial banks was $316 million as at the end of 2013 or just above 8 percent of the total loans portfolio. This shows that this sector is still largely untapped and there is a lot of potential to develop a strong MSME sector as this leads to job creation, empowering individuals, increase exports and investments and in turn economic activity. • It Raises Exports/Investment: Small businesses do not always stay small; they grow. Many of our now large companies like Tappoos, Motibhais, Hotbread Kitchen and many others were once MSMEs. I am confident that as our small businesses grow they can help raise exports and investment in Fiji. They can also help in import-substitution thereby reducing our imports bill and narrowing the trade deficit. • It Creates Employment: Small businesses are the answer to our unemployment problem. Our formal sector cannot absorb all our school leavers – this is the same in all developing countries. The employment growth required for our future can come from the small business sector. Rough estimates suggest that close to 60 percent of Fiji’s labour force is involved in various forms of businesses that fall under the heading of MSMEs. • It Combats Poverty: MSMEs are also a way to combat poverty and can help us achieve our Millennium Development Goals. MSMEs allow people to help themselves rise above poverty, by supplying the means to provide for basic needs such as education, food, shelter and clothing. SMEs give people the dignity of working for a living. 3. Let me now move on to recent government and RBF policy initiatives to support the MSMEs Over the years, the Government and the RBF has put in place various incentives and supportive policies to create a conducive environment for MSME activity. As a way to increase the involvement of the financial sector and to enable greater access to finance by micro-entrepreneurs around the country, the RBF in 2010 required all commercial banks to set-up microfinance units at their branches. Commercial banks also established agents in rural areas using merchants and post office agents to facilitate finance activity. At the end of 2013, 81 agents were in operation providing basic banking services such as cash withdrawals, deposits and payments. In addition, since 2010, a total of 17 Microfinance expos have been held. These expos bring together financial stakeholders that provide financial services, financial literacy training and create more awareness on microfinance activity to those in the surrounding vicinity of the expo. The RBF’s Import Substitution and Export Finance Facility (ISEFF) were set up to improve Fiji’s BOP position by assisting exporters, renewable energy and import substitution businesses to obtain credit at concessional interest rates. Currently, the maximum interest rate charged on the facility is 5% p.a. The Bank, from July 2010 to 31 January 2014 approved around $54 million under the Facility. Of this amount, $44.7 million was approved for export finance, around $5.7 million for import substitution businesses, $4.0 million for energy projects. Of the total $80 million allocated by the RBF for the Facility, approximately $25.6 million still remains unutilised. The Government also continues to support MSME development with various funding allocations and policies in its National Budgets. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  To better monitor the development of the MSME sector, the RBF and Solicitor General’s office will work together to put in place a legal framework for the governance of MFIs. In 2012, the Government announced the SME Credit Guarantee Scheme. Under the scheme, the Government guarantees to pay 50 percent of the principal outstanding amount on defaulted SME loans, up to a limit of $50,000 per business. Today, the total allocation for this scheme has increased to $4 million with a total of 483 loans covered under the scheme at a value of $28.6 million, to date. Moreover, to support and facilitate economic activity, the Government has in recent years focused its funding on the development of infrastructure – particularly on roads and bridges and utilities – which will improve access and encourage MSME activity. In 2013, the Reserve Bank introduced the first ever National Microfinance Awards with three categories the Best Microfinance Entrepreneur – Individual, the Best Microfinance Entrepreneur – Partnership and the Best Microfinance Service Provider to recognise the contribution of MSME’s and micro-entrepreneurs in Fiji.  4. I now move on to some personal observations for us, the I’taukeis to succeed in business • When I was invited by Mr Joe Taoi to deliver this presentation, my initial reaction was that I am not an authority on the subject matter as I do not have the experience of being in a private business. However, my background as an Accountant and my almost four decade experience as a central banker has taught me some lessons that I feel are important to share with you at this forum. My first advice to aspiring I’taukei businessmen and women is that revenue is NOT EQUAL to profit. A lot of businesses, including our I’taukei businesses fail because of this simple misconception. • Secondly, to invest in a business, we first must learn to save. As I’taukeis our savings rate is much lower compared with others. If we do not save, we will not be able to start a business or use our saving as equity to borrow from the banks. Building up Savings and prudent management of our finances are very critical for us to succeed in businesses. • One of the most challenging aspects of Financial and Business Management I have noticed with most I’taukei businesses is the lack of budgeting and lack of financial discipline. Financial and Business literacy is, in my review, the key to our success. • One of the reasons many small businesses fail is because we sell goods on credit. Selling goods on credit means that your cash flow as a small business is affected resulting in the inability to restock or repay your loans. In most cases, such credit become bad debt and as a small business operating with narrow margins and low volumes, this can be disastrous. When you walk into a store owned by a non-I’taukei, you will see a notice prominently displayed which says “No Credit”. We therefore must follow this same rule of “no kerekere” if we are to succeed in business. • I often hear our own people saying that we the I’taukeis do not have it in us to succeed in business. I totally disagree as there are some of you here are a living testimony of businesses that have been successful. It is therefore important that we tell ourselves that We CAN succeed in business otherwise the battle will be lost before the contest begins. • As I had highlighted earlier, the Government introduced a SME credit guarantee Scheme. In my view, this facility is well suited for the I’taukei to take advantage of as the interest rate on such loans does not exceed 10% p.a. and the Government guarantees to pay 50 percent or whichever is less, of the SME loans that go bad. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Our assessment is that very few I’taukei business people have accessed this Facility out of the 483 loans advanced to date. It is, therefore, important for us to take advantage of this Facility as well as the ISEFF which attracts a maximum interest rate of 5% p.a. • While I am of the view that I’taukei businesses must be assisted, we must also be careful not to give too much handouts as it has the potential to create this “handout mentality with no responsibility and accountability as it is given free”. We must change this hand-out mentality. • Talking of changing behaviours is easy but most importantly, how do we go about changing them? We all cannot be business people. However, we can create the right environment for our children and future generations to be successful in business. You may be aware that Financial Literacy is now being integrated into the school curriculum and taught in all primary and secondary schools in Fiji since 2013. A pilot program with 28 schools commenced in 2012. Starting early at primary school level will ensure that our citizens of tomorrow will not only be financially literate but more important we are instilling in our children some form of responsibility and financial discipline at an early age. • Finally, Ladies and Gentlemen, we have some successful business people in this Council and in this room. You are important role models and mentors for upcoming I’taukei business entrepreneurs. If we look at the non I’taukeis we will note that the tricks of the trade are passed down from one generation to another. I therefore urge you as I’taukei business leaders to please continue to mentor our people who are thinking of starting a business or have just started one. There are no better role models than you to help them succeed. I wish you every success. May your business ventures continue to be a blessing to you, your families and our beloved Country, Fiji. Vinaka vakalevu. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Haruhiko Kuroda: How to overcome deflation Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a conference, held by the London School of Economics and Political Science, London, 21 March 2014. *      *      * Introduction It is indeed my honor to be given an opportunity today to speak at this conference hosted by the London School of Economics and Political Science. Just one year has passed since I became Governor of the Bank of Japan on March 20, 2013. In short, this past one year was one marked by the challenge of overcoming deflation. The word deflation might remind you of the price decline associated with rapid contraction of the economy during the Great Depression of the 1930s. Some might even look back to the much earlier episode of the downtrend in prices for more than 20 years that the United Kingdom experienced in the second half of the 19th century. What is deflation actually like? Why is deflation a problem? As I would expect that nobody here has actually experienced those past deflations, you might be able to conceive of answers to these questions, but it could be difficult to have a true sense of the reality of those situations. Therefore, in my speech today, I will talk about Japan’s experience of 15 years of deflation and how we are trying to overcome that. Let me first ask you a question. What is the average annual rate of decline in consumer prices in Japan in the past 15 years? The answer is minus 0.3 percent. Unlike the rapid and substantial price decline during the Great Depression in the 1930s, a feature of Japan’s deflation is that an extremely moderate price decline has continued for a long period. The unemployment rate was 5.5 percent at its worst and there has been no such scene as jobless people predominating in a town, as was the case in the Great Depression. This is not to say that there weren’t any problems simply because the decline in prices was moderate. If we were to regard the price decline during the Great Depression as a fierce and acute symptom, Japan’s deflation has come to show a symptom akin to a chronic lifestyle disease. Once an expectation that prices will fall becomes built-in among the public, real interest rates, which are obtained by subtracting expected rates of inflation from nominal interest rates, will increase. Of course, a central bank can cope with such a situation if it can lower nominal interest rates, but in Japan the policy rate had already been lowered to 0.5 percent in 1995 and there was little room to further reduce nominal interest rates. An increase in real interest rates restrains business fixed investment and household spending, and thus economic activity in Japan remained stagnant. In addition, under deflation, holding cash and deposits becomes a better choice than making investment, and incentives to launch new businesses by taking risks become weakened. In this situation, Japan’s economy lost vitality and the growth rate declined. It can be said that a moderate price decline has gradually undermined Japan’s economy. Therefore, what we should do to restore the vitality of Japan’s economy and let the economy grow in a sustainable manner is to achieve the 2 percent price stability target and overcome protracted deflation. As I will describe later, to overcome deflation, the Bank of Japan introduced last April quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, dubbed QQE – an unprecedented bold monetary easing – and has been pursuing this policy. Today, so as to enhance your understanding of the Bank’s initiatives to overcome deflation, I will address three questions. First, why has Japan’s economy been unable to overcome deflation? Second, how are we trying to get out of deflation? And lastly, how far have we come in the process of overcoming deflation? 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  I. Why has Japan’s economy been unable to overcome deflation? As I mentioned earlier, deflation has been continuing in Japan since the late 1990s, but the economy has not been in recession during the whole period. Instead, a recovery phase of more than six years, from the beginning of 2002 to early 2008, marked the longest post-war economic recovery. Since 1999, to overcome deflation, the Bank adopted ahead of other central banks various unconventional policy measures, such as the zero interest rate policy, quantitative easing policy, a commitment to the duration of these policies, and purchases of risk assets. If we had named the commitment to the duration of the zero interest rate policy introduced in 1999 an eye-catching “forward guidance”, the Bank might have received an honor as the inventor of this policy tool. However, despite the tailwind in the real economy and considerable efforts by the Bank, Japan’s economy could not overcome deflation. What was lacking? To state the answer first, what lacked was the central bank’s strong and clear commitment to achieve its price stability target and its actions to work on inflation expectations through that commitment. To begin with, if we look into the causes of Japan’s price declines, various factors have had an effect at each point in time. To name several, these were an adjustment of excess capacity and employment after the bubble period, low-priced imports from emerging economies and firms’ low-price strategies, financial institutions’ nonperforming loan problems and financial system uneasiness, and an excessive appreciation of the yen. As actual prices declined due to those factors, deflationary expectations that prices will not rise but instead decline were generated among people. Subsequently, even if those factors that induced price declines diminished, once deflationary expectations became entrenched, people would make decisions and take actions on the assumption that prices would not rise. Through this process, deflationary expectations themselves created in a self-fulfilling manner an economy in which prices did not easily rise. Explained by using the jargon of economics, Japan’s economy is in a situation in which the Phillips curve, which expresses a negative relationship between inflation and unemployment, has shifted downward due to a decline in people’s inflation expectations. Even when the economy is trapped in such a situation, we can raise prices temporarily by rejuvenating economic activity through stimulative policies. However, if the Phillips curve remains shifted downward, the economy will eventually return to a deflationary state once economic activity declines over the business cycle. This is why Japan’s economy could not overcome deflation after all, despite experiencing an economic expansion several times while deflation was continuing. Having analyzed why protracted deflation occurs, let’s turn to the second question: what is required to get out of protracted deflation and achieve the 2 percent price stability target in a sustainable manner? As the problem lies in the fact that people have a deflationary sentiment that prices will fall, we have to dispel such sentiment. We have to convince people that a situation in which prices will increase by around 2 percent every year is nothing special, and change the economy to one in which people make decisions and behave based on that assumption. In other words, it is necessary to raise people’s expected rates of inflation to 2 percent and re-anchor them at that level. The Bank had repeatedly implemented various leading-edge policies. While a series of such policies stimulated economic activity, they fell short of showing a strong and clear commitment to achieve the price stability target by any means. As a result, these were insufficient to work on inflation expectations and failed to raise them. Therefore, even in the face of a temporary rise in prices, the rise was not sustained and the economy could not get out of deflation for a long period. II. How to overcome deflation Let me next talk about how the Bank is now trying to raise people’s inflation expectations and overcome deflation. It is clear from the results of past policies that deflationary sentiment that has been embedded under protracted deflation cannot be easily dispelled. There have been only a few examples. Looking back, one can immediately think of the U.S. New Deal Policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  of the 1930s as an episode in which people’s inflation expectations substantially rose in a short period of time through policy measures. At the same period in Japan, a similar series of macroeconomic policy measures called the “Takahashi Economic Policy”, named after the finance minister who took the initiative, were implemented. In these policies, an exit from the gold standard enabled foreign exchange rates to adjust in line with actual economic conditions, and macroeconomic policies that combined aggressive fiscal and monetary policies were implemented. By contrast, the powerful monetary tightening by Chairman Volcker of the U.S. Federal Reserve (Fed) from the end of the 1970s to the beginning of the 1980s can be noted as an episode in which inflation expectations were substantially lowered. All these events are associated with the policy authorities’ strong will to drastically change the economic situation, and with a bold policy conversion that underpinned such will. Therefore, to convert people’s deflationary expectations and raise their expected rates of inflation, it is necessary to demonstrate the Bank’s strong resolution and commitment toward overcoming deflation and to implement decisive policy that is sufficient to achieve that goal. We also have to make the conversion of expectations happen under a zero lower bound for nominal interest rates. Taking these points into account, at the Monetary Policy Meeting on April 4 last year, the Bank introduced the unprecedented large-scale monetary easing policy of the QQE. It was a policy, upon strongly committing to achieve the 2 percent price stability target with a time horizon of about two years in mind, to increase the monetary base by an unprecedented amount of about 60–70 trillion yen to underpin the commitment. As a result, the monetary base will be doubled in two years. In addition, aiming to achieve the 2 percent price stability target, the Bank committed to continuing with the QQE as long as it is necessary for maintaining the target in a stable manner. The Bank clearly committed to achieving the 2 percent price stability target, with a time horizon of about two years in mind, and also to continue with the unprecedented large-scale monetary easing of the QQE as long as it is necessary for maintaining the target in a stable manner. We considered that such a combination would raise people’s inflation expectations in a forward-looking manner. We also assumed that, as a result, if actual prices start to increase, that would affect inflation expectations in a backward-looking manner as well. And with an increase in the number of people who believe in the Bank’s commitment, the forward-looking influence would also be strengthened. Let me be more specific about the transmission mechanism of the QQE. Three transmission channels are assumed: containing interest rates and risk premiums through massive asset purchases, portfolio rebalancing, and raising inflation expectations. What I would like to focus on in particular is the channel starting from a rise in inflation expectations. As a rise in inflation expectations shifts the Phillips curve upward, under the same level of economic activity, the actual inflation rate will be higher. In addition, a rise in expected rates of inflation, if nominal interest rates rise by less than that, will lower real interest rates and stimulate economic activity. That is, if the Bank can contain nominal interest rates through massive asset purchases while raising expected rates of inflation, it can lower real interest rates. In the case of central banks in the United States and Europe, as inflation expectations have already been anchored at the price stability target, they have no choice but to reduce nominal interest rates in order to lower real interest rates. However, in the case of Japan, as inflation expectations have been below the level of the price stability target, there is room for lowering real interest rates through raising inflation expectations. A decline in real interest rates will stimulate business fixed investment and consumption, and raise the actual inflation rate by narrowing the output gap. Once prices start to rise, this will further induce a rise in inflation expectations, which in turn work on real interest rates to decline again. In such a manner, a virtuous cycle starting from a rise in inflation expectations will take hold. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  III. How far have we come? So, how far have we come toward the goal of achieving the 2 percent price stability target and overcoming deflation? To state the conclusion first, Japan’s economy has been following a path toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target as expected, and we are halfway there. The transmission mechanism of the QQE has been functioning as initially intended. According to various surveys and market indicators, we judge that inflation expectations have generally been rising. Due to the Bank’s massive purchases of government bonds, long-term interest rates have been hovering in a stable manner at low levels. In fact, in the face of a rise in U.S. long-term interest rates from below 2 percent to about 3 percent in relation to speculation about the Fed’s tapering of its asset purchases, Japan’s long-term interest rates have been stable and recently at around 0.6 percent. As a result, real interest rates have been declining. There are also changes in bank behavior. The year-on-year rate of increase in bank lending has gradually accelerated and has been around 2.5 percent. Lending has increased not only to large firms but also to small firms, for which the year-on-year rate of change has turned positive, suggesting that lending has become widespread to a variety of businesses. Partly reflecting this development in bank lending, the year-on-year rate of increase in the money stock has gradually been accelerating, hovering around 4 percent in recent months. In relation to this, last month, the Bank expanded lending facilities to support financial institutions’ initiatives to increase lending that are similar to the Funding for Lending Scheme of the Bank of England. The Bank of Japan will provide funds to financial institutions up to double the amount of their net increase in lending and, like the Long-Term Refinancing Operations of the European Central Bank, provide long-term funds. It will provide funds with a four-year fixed rate of 0.1 percent. While the Bank’s main engine of its monetary policy is the QQE, these facilities are designed to reinforce a transmission mechanism of the policy. We have been taking a stance of doing whatever we can to achieve the 2 percent price stability target. Partly due to the effects of the QQE, Japan’s economy has been growing above its potential growth rate led by domestic demand, with real GDP growth increasing year-on-year by 1.5 percent on average in 2013, and by 2.5 percent measured from fourth quarter to fourth quarter. On the employment front, the unemployment rate has declined to 3.7 percent, which is close to the structural unemployment rate of around 3½ percent. As for the outlook, Japan’s economy is expected to continue on a moderate recovery with a virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending at work. On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) excluding fresh food was minus 0.5 percent as of March last year, turned positive in June, and has been accelerating to mark plus 1.3 percent this January. It is still lower than that in the United Kingdom, but almost the same level as that in Germany and higher than that in most of the continental European countries. The rate of increase is likely to be around 1¼ percent for some time, subsequently return to the uptrend, and is likely to reach around the price stability target of 2 percent from the end of fiscal 2014 through fiscal 2015. Achieving an inflation rate of more than 1 percent in less than a year since the introduction of the QQE was beyond many people’s expectations. In fact, according to the ESP Forecast Survey, which compiles economists’ forecasts, the projection of the year-on-year rate of growth in the CPI for this January–March quarter as of March last year was only plus 0.4 percent. While we introduced the QQE with confidence in its effects, for many people this development in the CPI seemed to have been a positive surprise. When something occurs that differs from expectations, people have a strong incentive to change their past views and behavior. Our work to change deflationary expectations that have been entrenched over time as well as people’s behavior under such expectations has been progressing as expected, with the strong reinforcement of an actual rise in the CPI. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  As the consumption tax will be raised to 8 percent from 5 percent this April, it is expected that there will be a decline in demand after the tax hike following the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the tax hike. Based on the experience of the economy going into recession when consumption tax was raised last time, in 1997, there are some concerns over the outlook for the economy this time as well. However, looking back at 1997, the economy at one point recovered from a plunge following the consumption tax hike, but Japan’s financial system instability and an outbreak of the Asian currency crisis substantially affected the subsequent economic deterioration. By contrast, at present, Japan’s financial system has been maintaining stability and emerging economies in Asia have become more resilient due partly to an accumulation of foreign reserves and an establishment of safety nets. In addition, Japan’s employment situation is far more favorable than that in 1997. Taking these points into account, the Bank believes that, while Japan’s economy will temporarily decline immediately after the consumption tax hike, it will continue to grow above its potential growth rate as a trend with a virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending being maintained. Concluding remarks As I have mentioned, so far, with the QQE steadily exerting its intended effects, Japan’s economy has been following a path toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target as expected. Of course, we are only halfway there and will steadily pursue the QQE. As the economy is associated with upside and downside risks, we will examine them and make adjustments as appropriate in order to achieve the 2 percent price stability target. By firmly continuing with such policy, I am convinced that we can achieve the 2 percent price stability target and overcome deflation. In the past 15 years, Japan was not sleeping because it wanted to. It was only that, even if one person or one firm wanted to take on new challenges, rewards meeting such challenges could not be expected under a macroeconomic environment of persistent deflation. With the QQE and the government’s various initiatives, we have unlocked this “fallacy of composition”. Therefore, Japanese firms that originally were equipped with excellent technologies and human capital have started to take on new initiatives again, and the economy and prices have changed dramatically. We should not let this trend be reversed. To this end, we are making efforts with strong resolution. The day that Japan’s economy can contribute more and more to the global economy is at hand.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Yoshihisa Morimoto: Economic activity and prices in Japan and monetary policy Speech by Mr Yoshihisa Morimoto, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Wakayama, 20 February 2014. *      *      * I. Recent economic and price developments A. Japan’s economy and prices 1. Current state of and outlook for Japan’s economy I will begin by explaining the current state of, and outlook for, Japan’s economy. Economic activity had stopped weakening after the turn of 2013. The economy then returned to a moderate recovery path around mid-year as domestic demand remained resilient, mainly due to the effects of monetary easing and various economic measures. Japan’s economy has since continued to recover moderately as domestic demand has remained firm, although exports have somewhat lacked momentum. Business sentiment has been improving in a wide range of industries, including those of small firms, and in regional terms economic recovery has been spreading on a national basis. Taking a closer look at developments in demand, exports showed relatively high growth in the first half of 2013 but have somewhat lacked momentum since the second half amid somewhat sluggish movements in some emerging and commodity-exporting economies. As for domestic demand, private consumption has remained resilient as a trend, with improvement in the employment and income situation, and a front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike has been observed mainly in durable consumer goods, as suggested particularly by the recent noticeable rise in new car sales. Housing investment has been increasing. Public investment has been trending upward, mainly reflecting the effects of various economic measures implemented thus far. Business fixed investment has been picking up, as the aggregate supply of capital goods – a coincident indicator of machinery investment – has recently shown relatively high growth with improvement in corporate profits, and as machinery orders – a leading indicator of machinery investment – have been improving as a trend even in the manufacturing sector, albeit with fluctuations. Taking these developments as a whole, the employment and income situation has been improving, supported by resilient domestic demand, indicating that a virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending is being maintained. As for the outlook, while Japan’s economy will be affected by the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the consumption tax hike, it is likely to continue growing at a pace above its potential, which is estimated to be around 0.5 percent, as a trend, as the virtuous cycle will continue to operate. Japan’s exports are expected to increase moderately as overseas economies – mainly advanced economies – recover moderately. Meanwhile, business fixed investment is likely to follow a moderate increasing trend, with improvement in corporate profits. Private consumption and housing investment, albeit with some fluctuations, are expected to remain resilient as a trend, as improvement in employee income is expected to gradually become evident. Public investment is expected to trend upward for the time being, supported partly by the effects of the implementation of the supplementary budget for fiscal 2013, and then remain at a high level. In the Bank of Japan’s January 2014 interim assessment of the October 2013 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report), the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for the economic growth rate was 2.7 percent for fiscal 2013, 1.4 percent for fiscal 2014, and 1.5 percent for fiscal 2015. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  2. Prices Next, I will talk about price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food turned positive in June 2013 and rose to 1.3 percent in December. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, excluding prices of food and energy-related goods such as petroleum products, was 0.7 percent in December, and improvement in prices is spreading across a wide range of items amid the improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance, with the number of items for which prices have risen exceeding that for which prices have declined. As for the outlook, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food), excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, is likely to be around 1–1/4 percent for some time as the effects of the upward pressure from prices of petroleum products subside. Thereafter, it is likely to rise, reflecting factors such as the improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance due to the recovery of Japan’s economy as well as the rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations in response to fundamental changes in the public’s expectations. The rate of increase in the CPI is likely to reach around 2 percent – the price stability target – toward the latter half of the projection period, through fiscal 2015. Specifically, in the Bank’s interim assessment in January of the October 2013 Outlook Report, the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food; for fiscal 2014 and fiscal 2015, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hikes) was 0.7 percent for fiscal 2013, 1.3 percent for fiscal 2014, and 1.9 percent for fiscal 2015. B. Major issues surrounding economic activity and prices I would now like to talk about the key issues concerning assumptions related to the outlook for Japan’s economic activity and prices. Japan’s economy is expected to achieve sustainable growth as the virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending – including wage increases and a recovery in business fixed investment – continues to operate. However, Japan’s working-age population has been on a downtrend due to the aging population and declining birth rate. For the economy to achieve a higher growth rate, it is important to step up efforts to secure a sufficient labor force and raise productivity, allowing firms and households to raise their optimism about future income and demand. Positive developments have recently been observed, such as progress in the labor force participation of women and the elderly, as well as firms’ efforts in growth sectors. In the future, if growth expectations gradually rise as active efforts by the government and firms to strengthen Japan’s growth potential bear fruit, this in turn will eventually lead to a rise in Japan’s potential growth rate. At this point, I will discuss recent developments in overseas economies and Japan’s exports, business fixed investment, the employment and income situation, and inflation expectations, all of which are likely to have a significant effect on the outlook for economic activity and prices. 1. Developments in overseas economies and Japan’s exports I will first examine current developments in overseas economies to assess those in Japan’s exports. Overseas economies – mainly advanced economies – are starting to recover, although the performance remains lackluster in some parts of emerging and commodity-exporting economies. As for the outlook, overseas economies – mainly advanced economies – are likely to continue recovering. In January 2014, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) revised upward its projections for global economic growth in its World Economic Outlook, forecasting that the global economy would moderately accelerate its pace of growth from 3.0 percent in 2013 to 3.7 percent in 2014 and 3.9 percent in 2015. Looking at respective regions, the recovery of the U.S. economy has gradually become widespread as the employment and income situation continues on an improving trend, with firmness in household spending spreading to the corporate sector and boosting production, although some effects of a winter snowstorm are still being observed. The benefits of the shale revolution are also being felt by the economy. Looking ahead, the U.S. economy is expected to gradually see an acceleration in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  its pace of recovery, led mainly by private demand, partly because the fiscal drag will gradually fade as uncertainties surrounding the economy abate somewhat, mainly due to progress in the fiscal debate. In the European economy, business and household sentiment has been on an improving trend as financial markets have regained stability. In such circumstances, private consumption has been picking up, albeit moderately, and production is starting to pick up. Further developments regarding the European debt problem, efforts to restore financial soundness, and the disinflationary trend warrant attention. Nevertheless, the economy is likely to continue picking up, as domestic demand is expected to do so as well and as exports are likely to recover moderately. The Chinese economy continues to see stable growth on the back of firm domestic demand including private consumption and fixed asset investment, although the pace of growth has decelerated somewhat. It is likely to maintain stable growth, as the government – while progressing with reforms to address structural problems – is expected to pursue policy measures that take due account of economic activity, although some uncertainties remain including the effects of excess production capacity and debt. Regarding some of the other emerging and commodity-exporting economies, in a situation where they are facing structural problems such as fiscal deficits and current account deficits, there have been outflows of funds against the background of the U.S. Federal Reserve’s reduction of the pace of its asset purchases. Thus, continued attention is warranted on developments in these economies, including the effects on economic activity. Emerging economies other than China and commodity-exporting economies as a whole will likely lack growth momentum for the time being, but from a longer-term perspective, positive effects of the recovery in advanced economies will spill over to them. Amid these developments in overseas economies, Japan’s exports have generally been picking up but continue to lack some momentum. This may be partly attributable to structural factors including the shift of Japanese firms’ production sites to overseas accompanying increased local procurement of parts by Japanese manufacturers. Fundamentally, however, the lack of momentum is considered to be largely due to the sluggishness in the emerging economies, particularly the ASEAN economies, which are closely linked to Japan’s economy. As for the outlook, exports as a whole – including indirect exports via Asian economies such as China and the NIEs – are likely to increase moderately, as the growth rates of advanced economies such as those of the United States and Europe increase. 2. Developments in business fixed investment Turning to the corporate sector, it is important that increases in corporate profits and demand lead to growth in business fixed investment. Corporate profits have been recovering on the back of firm domestic demand and developments in the foreign exchange market. Business fixed investment has been picking up on the whole, including the manufacturing sector, which had been lagging behind. Going forward, business fixed investment is likely to follow a moderate increasing trend against the backdrop of an improvement in corporate profits and the effects of monetary easing. In the context of investment profitability, profitability from business fixed investment is likely to improve and the extent of the monetary easing stimulus to encourage investment is likely to strengthen, owing to a rise in the rate of return on capital due to economic recovery combined with the decline in real interest rates mainly reflecting a rise in inflation expectations. As to the objects of investment, latent demand for the maintenance and replacement of equipment has built up, reflecting past restraints on firms’ investment, and has become more likely to materialize. Investment related to disaster prevention and energy is also expected to increase. Furthermore, firms’ medium- to long-term growth expectations are likely to rise moderately, due partly to the positive initiatives to strengthen the competitiveness and growth potential of Japan’s economy, such as the government’s regulatory and institutional reforms and various tax reduction measures, as well as firms’ restructuring efforts. In such an environment, if business fixed investment continues on an uptrend and firms’ efforts to accumulate capital in growth sectors and increase labor 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  productivity make headway, the potential economic growth rate – the real strength of the economy – should also rise moderately. 3. Employment and income situation I would now like to talk about the employment and income situation, which is one of the key factors in achieving a sustainable recovery in domestic demand. Private consumption has recently been resilient thanks to continued active spending by the elderly – the baby-boom generation in particular – and is underpinned by the wealth effects of the rise in stock prices. While active spending by the elderly is expected to continue as firms work to capture demand, the key to economic improvement in a well-balanced manner lies in improvement in income supporting private consumption. Looking at the current employment and income situation, supply and demand conditions in the labor market continue to improve steadily, with the active job openings-to-applicants ratio having risen to the level observed prior to the Lehman shock of just over 1.0 and with the unemployment rate similarly having fallen to the pre-Lehman shock level of 3.7 percent, mainly due to resilient domestic demand. Firms are increasingly experiencing a shortage of labor, as suggested by the fact that the employment conditions diffusion index (DI) (the proportion of firms responding that employment is “excessive” minus the proportion of those responding that it is “insufficient”) in the latest Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) is deeper in negative territory, particularly in the nonmanufacturing sector. Reflecting these supply and demand conditions in the labor market, a growing number of firms, especially among industries increasingly experiencing a shortage of labor, have eased or made more flexible their hiring criteria, or have adopted the “hire-and-nurture” recruiting method, which involves supporting their workers’ efforts to obtain the qualifications necessary for their jobs. At the same time, firms are making progress in terms of actively employing women, the elderly, and foreign nationals, and in increasing the diversity of their employment methods. This has resulted in more active job searches by women and those who had been out of the workforce, resulting in the recent growth of the labor force population. If these diverse employment styles gradually become established with a sustained economic recovery, this will help secure a sufficient labor force despite the declining trend of the working-age population, underpinning the medium- to long-term growth potential of Japan’s economy. The improvement in supply and demand conditions in the labor market is influencing nominal wages. Specifically, the year-on-year rate of change in nominal wages per full-time employee has become slightly positive, reflecting increases in overtime pay and winter bonuses. In addition, hourly nominal wages per part-time employee remain on a modest increasing trend year on year. Looking at workers as a whole, scheduled wages per employee have remained slightly negative year on year, due partly to the increase in the proportion of part-time workers, whose wage levels are relatively low. Still, the employment and income situation has been improving on the whole, with employee income – wages per employee multiplied by the number of employees – continuing to register year-on-year increases. Going forward, as the improvement in supply and demand conditions in the labor market continues, nominal wages are expected to be put under upward pressure gradually. Regarding the wage negotiations to be held this spring, labor unions are demanding wage hikes, including an increase in workers’ base wages. At the same time, a growing number of firms appear to be indicating their willingness to allow for a certain rise in wages in terms of total remuneration, including base wages. Amid increasing corporate profits, close attention will be paid to whether firms carry out wage hikes to some extent, including an increase in scheduled wages. 4. Developments in prices and inflation expectations I will now turn to price-related issues. Japan’s economy has been following the path toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target, as expected, and we can say that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) has been somewhat higher than 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  market expectations thus far. Inflation expectations of firms and households have also risen on the whole, and are likely to remain on an increasing trend under the Bank’s quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE), due in part to a rise in the actual inflation rate. However, since the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is expected to be around  1–1/4 percent for some time, close attention still needs to be paid to whether medium- to long-term inflation expectations will rise as expected. In addition, it is important that a virtuous cycle between price rises and wage increases operates effectively in order for prices to rise in a sustainable fashion. Discussions on efforts to raise productivity and on price developments in the upcoming wage negotiations will therefore be monitored closely. II. Conduct of monetary policy A. Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) 1. Framework of QQE Next, I would like to turn to the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. In order for Japan’s economy to overcome deflation as early as possible and achieve sustainable growth with price stability, the Bank introduced in January 2013 the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. Then, in April the Bank introduced QQE to achieve the price stability target at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. Specifically, the Bank decided upon the following. First, with a view to pursuing quantitative monetary easing, the Bank decided to increase the monetary base – which is the total amount of currency it directly supplies to the economy (the sum of banknotes in circulation, coins in circulation, and current account deposits held by financial institutions at the Bank) – at an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion yen, thus doubling it in two years. Second, to achieve this, the Bank has been purchasing Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that their amount outstanding increases at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen. In doing so, the Bank has aimed at working on interest rates across the yield curve – including longer-term ones – extending the average remaining maturity of its JGB purchases to about seven years. And third, the Bank has been purchasing exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding increase at an annual pace of about 1 trillion yen and about 30 billion yen, respectively. The Bank will continue with QQE – consisting of these measures – aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. In order to achieve the price stability target, it is important to create a virtuous cycle in which prices rise moderately along with a balanced and sustainable improvement in economic activity that is accompanied by increases in corporate profits, employment, and wages. 2. Effects of QQE Now I will talk about developments since the introduction of QQE. The monetary base has been increasing at an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion yen – in line with the Bank’s guideline for money market operations – owing to progress in the Bank’s large-scale JGB purchases, and reached its initial projection of 200 trillion yen at end-2013. The Bank intends to increase its monetary base to 270 trillion yen – corresponding to as much as approximately 60 percent of Japan’s nominal GDP – toward end-2014. Despite some instability observed in the JGB market soon after the introduction of QQE last April, the market gradually regained stability as the Bank implemented detailed money market operation measures while maintaining a close dialogue with market participants. QQE has thus been exerting its intended effects, with favorable developments spreading to economic activity and financial markets. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The Bank conducts QQE keeping in mind two key transmission channels, that is, routes by which the effects of QQE are expected to carry through the economy: (1) lowering real interest rates by exerting downward pressure on nominal long-term interest rates and raising inflation expectations; and (2) the portfolio rebalancing effect. In lowering real interest rates, the Bank first applies strong downward pressure on nominal long-term rates by tightening JGB market conditions through the massive purchases of JGBs. Then, through a clear explanation of its determination to achieve the price stability target at the earliest possible time and the continuation of massive purchases of assets underpinning this determination, it aims to raise inflation expectations by boosting people’s expectations that the economy will become revitalized. Consequently, real interest rates could be lowered if the extent of a pick-up in nominal rates is contained within the extent of a rise in inflation expectations. As the spending behavior of firms and households is influenced by real interest rates, a decline in such rates would help to increase firms’ and households’ investment and consumption. As for recent developments, in a situation where nominal long-term interest rates have been stable at low levels, real interest rates appear to be on a declining trend on the back of a rise in inflation expectations as a whole. Real interest rates are expected to continue on a declining trend given that the Bank’s large-scale JGB purchases will put strong downward pressure on nominal long-term rates and as inflation expectations rise in line with an increase in the actual inflation rate. Next, the portfolio rebalancing effect can be described as the effect produced by the Bank’s asset purchases, in which they encourage financial institutions and institutional investors to shift their asset portfolio toward lending and investment in risk assets such as stocks. The aggregate flow of investment – including by households – confirms that investments in stocks and investment trusts as well as in corporate bonds, in addition to lending, have been increasing, while the amount of JGB holdings has been decreasing. The increases are partly attributable to the rise in stock prices, and the increase in the amount of lending is still small compared with that of the monetary base. Nevertheless, portfolio rebalancing – mainly characterized by the shift in investment to risk assets – is likely to gradually gather momentum as firms’ demand for funds continues to strengthen and given that business fixed investment is expected to continue on a moderate increasing trend. With these channels acting together, it is likely that the aggregate supply and demand balance will improve and that the actual inflation rate will rise further. 3. Developments in financial markets Meanwhile, financial conditions remain accommodative. Firms’ funding costs have been hovering at low levels, with long-term average contract interest rates on new loans and discounts having declined to the 0.8–0.9 percent level, reaching a historical low. Firms see financial institutions’ lending attitudes as being on an improving trend. The DI of financial positions of small firms has been recovering, reaching the most recent peak level seen around 2006. In addition, the number of corporate bankruptcies has been at a low level, with figures for January 2014 at the lowest for a January since 1991. The amount outstanding of bank lending has been at around 2.5 percent, with lending to small firms extended to those across a wider range of industries and a climb observed in the year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of such lending. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds have continued to be favorable. In these circumstances, the year-on-year rate of growth in the money stock (M2) has been high at around 4.5 percent. Looking at financial markets, money market rates have been below the 0.1 percent level for all maturities. Long-term interest rates have been stable at a historically very low range of 0.6–0.8 percent, even at a time when overseas interest rates rose on the whole, with U.S. long-term interest rates reaching around 3.0 percent, mainly against the backdrop of an economic recovery. In addition, stock prices have risen substantially and a correction in the yen’s appreciation has been taking place in the foreign exchange market. Regarding economic activity, a front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the consumption tax hike are expected. In making future monetary policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  decisions, it is important to assess whether Japan’s economy is following the path toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target as expected, after smoothing out related fluctuations in demand. At present, the virtuous cycle continues to operate as the effects of QQE on economic activity are becoming pronounced. Nevertheless, it is important to continue to carefully examine economic developments and the effects of monetary policy. Furthermore, in order to fully ensure the effectiveness of monetary easing, it is essential for the government to ensure the market credibility of fiscal consolidation. Japan faces serious fiscal imbalances, even by international standards. If the credibility of its fiscal management were to decline, long-term interest rates would likely rise in a manner inconsistent with economic and price developments. The government has indicated that it aims to halve the primary deficit-to-GDP ratio by fiscal 2015 and achieve a surplus in the primary balance by fiscal 2020. Based on these targets, it is expected that the government will continue making efforts toward fiscal consolidation. B. Loan support program Next, I will discuss the Bank’s Loan Support Program. To support full use of the accommodative financial conditions by firms and households, the Bank – in addition to implementing aggressive monetary easing measures – has established the Loan Support Program. The program consists of two measures: the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank lending (hereafter the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility) and the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth (hereafter the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility). At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on February 17 and 18, 2014, the Policy Board decided to double the scale of the two facilities and to extend the application period for them, both of which were due to expire shortly, by one year. It also decided to extend the duration of loans, enabling financial institutions to borrow funds at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent per annum for four years instead of the current one to three years. Let me elaborate on the framework of and the recent enhancements made to these facilities. First, the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility aims to prompt financial institutions to take a more active lending stance and stimulate firms’ and households’ demand for credit. With this facility, the Bank provides long-term yen-denominated funds at a low interest rate to financial institutions, at their request, up to an amount equivalent to the net increase in their lending. There is no upper limit to the total amount of funds provided by the Bank under this facility. Under the enhanced framework, the Policy Board decided to double the maximum amount of its fund-provisioning to each financial institution – formerly set to the net increase in its lending – allowing it to borrow funds from the Bank up to an amount that was twice as much as the net increase in its lending. Moreover, the duration of loans was extended from the former period of one to three years with a fixed interest rate of 0.1 percent per annum to four years with a fixed rate of 0.1 percent per annum. The amount outstanding of fund-provisioning under the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility is about 5 trillion yen as of end-2013. Based on the assumption that the growth rate of bank lending and the utilization rate of the facility will remain more or less at current levels, the amount outstanding of fund-provisioning under the enhanced framework is estimated to be around 30 trillion yen. I will now move on to the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, which aims to support the flow of funds to growth sectors. With this facility, the Bank provides long-term funds – both yen-dominated and foreign currency-denominated – at a low interest rate to financial institutions for their lending and investment to areas that are expected to contribute to strengthening Japan’s growth potential, such as medical and nursing care; environment and energy; agriculture, forestry, and fisheries; and tourism. Before the enhancements, the Bank set the maximum amount of its fund-provisioning to financial institutions under the main rules and special rules as follows: 3.5 trillion yen under the main rules for financial institutions’ investments and loans amounting to 10 million yen or more; 500 billion yen under the special rules for financial institutions’ equity investments and asset-based lending (ABL) – the latter 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  of which uses assets such as accounts receivable and inventories as eligible collateral; 500 billion yen under the special rules for financial institutions’ small-lot investments and loans; and 12 billion U.S. dollars – equivalent to 1.2 trillion yen – under the special rules for a U.S. dollar lending arrangement using the U.S. dollar reserves already held by the Bank. In the recent enhancement of the facility, the Policy Board decided to double the maximum amount of the Bank’s fund-provisioning under the main rules, which had almost reached its limit, to 7 trillion yen, and increased the maximum amount of its fund-provisioning to each financial institution from 150 billion yen to 1 trillion yen. It was decided that the duration of all loans – excluding those made under the U.S. dollar lending arrangement – would be extended from the former period of one to two years with a fixed interest rate of 0.1 percent per annum to four years with a fixed rate of 0.1 percent per annum. In order to maintain the virtuous cycle, it is important that firms and households actually make use of the accommodative financial conditions for funding and increase investment and spending, which in turn will lead to an improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance and further to the strengthening of the economy’s growth potential. The recent enhancement of the two facilities, and the extension of their application period, will likely promote such movements. The corporate sector has accumulated 230 trillion yen worth of cash and deposits amid firms’ persistent tendency to invest only as much as their cash flow allows. Recently, however, firms have increasingly shown a willingness to take the opportunity to start new investment using external funds. Through the measures I have just explained, the Bank will continue to provide firm support enabling them to meet their challenges. I hope that these measures, together with steady progress in the implementation of the Japan Revitalization Strategy – aimed at strengthening the government’s competitiveness – will prompt financial institutions to take a more active lending stance and stimulate firms’ and households’ demand for credit, with a view to encouraging banks’ lending and strengthening the foundations for economic growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Haruhiko Kuroda: Aiming at 2 percent inflation. Why? Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Tokyo, 20 March 2014. *      *      * Introduction It is my honor to be given the opportunity to speak in front of you, who are successful at the forefront of Japan’s economic world. The Bank of Japan, aiming at overcoming deflation at the earliest possible time, introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) last April. Almost one year has passed since then, and the QQE has been steadily exerting its effects and Japan’s economy has been following a path toward achieving a price stability target of 2 percent as expected. Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately in association with a virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending. The real GDP growth rate has marked five consecutive quarters of positive growth, and domestic demand has been registering high growth at an annual rate of about 3 percent since last year (Chart 1). As for the outlook, while the economy will be affected by a swing of the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the consumption tax hike, it is expected to continue to recover moderately as a trend. As the economic recovery continues, prices have also been improving. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) excluding fresh food turned positive in June last year and accelerated since then, and was plus 1.3 percent for December last year and January this year. Not only have energy-related goods pushed up prices, but an improvement has also been seen in a wide range of items given that underlying upward pressure on prices has increased as the aggregate supply and demand balance has improved and inflation expectations have risen. Such spreading improvement is suggested by the fact that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding food and energy has increased to plus 0.7 percent (Chart 2). As for the outlook, the CPI inflation rate – on the basis of figures excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike – is likely to be around 1¼ percent until around this summer, as the underlying upward pressure on prices is likely to strengthen while the positive contribution stemming from the rise in energy prices will decline. Subsequently, against the background of further improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance and the rise in inflation expectations, the inflation rate is expected to gradually return to an increasing trend, and is likely to reach around the price stability target of 2 percent toward the end of fiscal 2014 through fiscal 2015. The Bank considers that 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is the price stability target the Bank should aim at. On this point, various concerns have been raised. Among these, two are that “daily life will become difficult if prices go up” and “only prices might increase without an increase in wages.” For firms, there might be a concern that they cannot mark up output prices to the extent input prices have risen. In particular, as the consumption tax will be raised from next month, many might be worried about an increase in general prices. Therefore, today, I would like to explain my views, focusing on why the Bank aims at 2 percent inflation. I. Problems of deflation Let me start with confirming why deflation is problematic, by looking back at the past 15 years. In Japan’s economy, deflation has continued for 15 years since the second half of the 1990s. Deflation was not only a result of economic stagnation but also a cause that protracted 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches economic stagnation. Amid 15 years of deflation, behavior based on the recognition that prices would not rise or prices would moderately decline has been embedded in the economy, and that led to protracted economic stagnation. Viewed from firms’ side, under deflation, as they cannot raise the prices of their products and services, their sales and profits will not increase. Therefore, firms will restrain labor costs and business fixed investment as much as possible. For households, as wages will not increase, consumption will be restrained. If households hold back consumption, firms will be forced to reduce the prices of their products and services in order to tap consumption. Deflation also affects the investment decisions of firms. For firms to decide on business fixed investment, what matters is developments not in nominal but in real interest rates. If deflationary expectations are embedded, real interest rates, which are obtained by subtracting expected rates of inflation from nominal interest rates, remain high. Namely, even with no change in nominal borrowing interest rates, expected profits will become less if a price decline is expected to continue, and the effective burden of repayment of borrowings will increase. In this situation, it is natural that firms’ incentives for business fixed investment will wane. Also, for households, if they expect that general prices will decline in the future, they will become more inclined to defer consumption as much as possible. They will be better off if they buy goods and services after those prices decline. Meanwhile, under deflation, holding cash and deposits will become a relatively better investment. Deflation will reduce the rate of return on investment in businesses and in risk assets such as stocks on the one hand, but on the other hand increase the real rate of return on cash and deposits, for which nominal values do not decrease. Therefore, for firms and households, it becomes a rational behavior to restrain business fixed investment and consumption and to hold surplus funds in the form of cash and deposits. Thus, under deflation, as firms and households turn away from risk-taking activities, a vicious cycle of a decline in prices, a fall in sales and profits, restraint in wages, stagnation in consumption, and further decline in prices has continued. Looking back at Japan’s economy for the past 15 years through macroeconomic indicators, GDP and employee income on nominal bases peaked in 1997 and have since been on a long-term downtrend (Chart 3). Amid deflation, Japan’s economic activity on a nominal basis has been consistently scaling down. Under deflation, Japan’s economy has been faced with the fallacy of composition that, despite each economic entity acting rationally, the economy as a whole has been contracting. As a result, it can be said that Japan’s economy has been trapped in deflationary equilibrium. Now, while deflation has been continuing in Japan’s economy, are you aware to what extent the CPI has declined? In the 15 years from fiscal 1998 to fiscal 2012, the annual decline in the CPI was actually only 0.3 percent on average (Chart 4). It may safely be said that the rate of change in the CPI during this period was negative, but almost 0 percent. This fact suggests that even an almost 0 percent rate of change in terms of the CPI is actually a state of deflation. In terms of what firms recognize, in the Tankan survey (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) for the past 15 years, the proportion of firms responding that output prices of their products and services declined has almost consistently exceeded that of firms responding that those prices increased (Chart 5). Taking account of these points, in order to overcome deflation, we have to aim at an inflation rate in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI that is higher than 0 percent. The question is, to what extent of a positive rate should we aim? The Bank considers this to be 2 percent. Let me explain the reasons for this in what follows. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 II. Aiming at 2 Percent Inflation. Why? A. Price stability As stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act, an aim of the monetary policy the Bank conducts is “achieving price stability, thereby contributing to the sound development of the national economy.” To achieve price stability is an aim of monetary policy as well as the Bank’s responsibility. After all, what the Bank aims at is price stability in this sense, and it has no intention to artificially create inflation. On that basis, the Bank considers that, if price stability is to be defined numerically in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, this is 2 percent. There are three reasons for this (Chart 6). First, there is a feature to note in the CPI. The CPI has an upward bias – namely, there is a tendency toward seeing higher figures in the growth rate of the CPI. Second, there is a view that it is necessary to have a so-called buffer. In order to maintain the ability of monetary policy to respond to a substantial deterioration in economic activity, it would be better to secure some degree of an inflation rate. Third, these views have been widely shared among major central banks, and many are conducting monetary policy that aims at achieving an inflation rate of 2 percent. In other words, 2 percent has become a global standard. Let me elaborate on these three reasons. B. Features of price indices: upward bias in the CPI The prices that monetary policy should target are not prices of individual goods and services, of course, but prices as a whole. That said, to measure the level of prices in general, it is necessary to weight prices of individual goods and services and compile them; according to compiling methods, various indexes are then created. In judging price conditions, these indexes need to be used by taking account of the features they entail. While I will not go into detail, as this becomes too technical, it is generally known that the CPI has a tendency toward its growth rate showing higher figures – that is, to exhibit an upward bias. As for the GDP deflator, which is a price index used to calculate real GDP, its growth rate has become somewhat low. This is mainly because the deflator includes capital goods, for which price declines have been substantial. It is also because a rise in import prices has not been completely passed on to output prices, and this has worked to lower the deflator. In fact, since fiscal 1998, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI has been about 1 percent higher on average than that in the GDP deflator (Chart 7). Many central banks, including the Bank of Japan, mainly use the CPI to judge price trends. This is because the CPI is an index in line with the public’s actual sentiment that covers goods and services that households consume, and is a quickly available statistic that is published monthly. Taking account of these points, the Bank’s price stability target is also defined as the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. However, as I have just mentioned, the CPI has an upward bias, and thus, when defining the price stability target in the form of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, it needs to be presented as a somewhat positive figure. C. Ensuring room to reduce interest rates: the so-called buffer Let me turn to the view that there is a need to secure room for an interest rate reduction by maintaining a positive inflation rate, thereby enhancing the ability of monetary policy to respond to economic deterioration; that is, that there is a need to have the so-called buffer. Put in extremely simple terms, an interest rate level that is neutral to economic activity is determined by the sum of the economy’s growth potential and an average inflation rate. For example, if the potential growth rate is 1 percent and the inflation rate is 2 percent, the interest rate neutral to economic activity will be 3 percent．In this case, against economic deterioration, there is room amounting to 3 percent for a central bank to stimulate the economy by reducing the interest rate. However, even if the potential growth rate is 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 percent, if the inflation rate is 0 percent, the room to reduce the interest rate amounts to only 1 percent as the level of the neutral interest rate is 1 percent. Therefore, when the level of the neutral interest rate is low, the interest rate will easily reach the 0 percent bound. A situation in which the interest rate reaches close to 0 percent and there is no room for further monetary easing through interest rate control is called the “zero interest rate lower bound.” Japan was the first among advanced economies to face the zero lower bound. Since the Bank reduced its official discount rate to 0.5 percent in September 1995, for almost 20 years now, Japan’s short-term interest rate has not exceeded 0.5 percent and has been hovering in the range of 0–0.5 percent (Chart 8). Of the two pillars of macroeconomic policy – fiscal policy and monetary policy – there has been a continuing situation whereby the effectiveness of monetary policy has been significantly impaired. In the meantime, the Bank took various initiatives ahead of other central banks in the world, including the adoption of various unconventional monetary policy measures ranging from the zero interest rate policy and quantitative easing to forward guidance in recent terminology. To be sure, even under the zero lower bound, there is still some room to pursue monetary easing through such unconventional monetary policy measures. However, it is also certain that, during this period, the most effective and traditional monetary policy channel of interest rate control has been lost. In my view, the Bank’s monetary policy has yielded results to some extent over the past 15 years in smoothing economic fluctuations. However, it was not sufficient to stave off a worsening of disinflation and preempt deflation from becoming entrenched. If the Bank had aimed at a price stability target of 2 percent at an earlier stage, it could have pursued more timely and bolder monetary easing in response to a decline in the inflation rate, thereby enabling the economy to overcome deflation at an early stage. With its protraction, deflation has become a problem that is increasingly stubborn and difficult to overcome. Based on the difficulties of the past 15 years, we need to let Japan’s economy overcome deflation at the earliest possible time and prevent, by any means, the economy from falling back into deflation again. To that end, it is critical to preempt deflation with a conduct of monetary policy that aims at a 2 percent price stability target. And, so as not to lose the effective measure of interest rate control, I believe that it is critical to secure room for an interest rate reduction through achieving around 2 percent inflation in a stable manner and allowing an economic activity-neutral interest rate to be formed at a somewhat high level. D. Global standard So far, I have explained the reasons to aim at 2 percent inflation from two viewpoints: due to a feature of the CPI, and to secure room for an interest rate reduction. These views are not special ones that only the Bank is adopting. Based on similar lines of thinking, many central banks overseas have already been implementing policies aiming at 2 percent inflation. For example, central banks in the United Kingdom, Canada, and New Zealand have set an inflation target of 2 percent, and in the United States, the Federal Reserve has set its longer-run goal for inflation at 2 percent. In the euro area, the European Central Bank (ECB) has presented a numerical definition of price stability, which is below, but close to, 2 percent (Chart 9). While there are various ways of expression, conducting monetary policy aiming at around 2 percent of inflation has become a global standard. If talking only about the buffer – namely, securing room for an interest rate reduction – the higher the inflation rate, the better. However, what monetary policy is aiming at is to achieve price stability. An issue will be the balance between the two. Based on past experience in a variety of economies, it has become a general view globally that around 2 percent would be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 desirable. In other words, the global standard of 2 percent inflation has become established through past experiences rather than based on theoretical analyses. Amid long-term stagnation since the Lehman crisis, the inflation rate has recently been declining globally, mainly in the euro area. As the International Monetary Fund Managing Director Christine Lagarde said in a speech, “with inflation running below many central banks’ targets, we see rising risks of deflation,” and thus a risk of deflation has become an important topic globally. The world thoroughly understands how Japan has been suffering long-term stagnation amid deflation, and there is a strong recognition of the need to avoid being like Japan in this particular regard. In fact, the CPIs in the United States, the euro area, and the United Kingdom have recently been on a downtrend (Chart 10). That said, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI even in the euro area, where a risk of deflation has been most discussed, is plus 0.7 percent. That is still at a sufficiently high level compared with Japan’s CPI inflation rate of the past ten years or so. Nevertheless, at the press conference following each meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB, President Mario Draghi has been repeatedly questioned of late about the risk of deflation. While noting that having low inflation for a protracted period of time is a risk in itself and that he would not ignore such a risk, he also emphasized that medium- to long-term inflation expectations are well-anchored at a level of “below, but close to, 2 percent,” a level that the ECB defines as price stability. Coupled with the prospects that economic activity in the euro area will continue to pick up moderately, it is unlikely that the euro area will fall into deflation. Nevertheless, these developments in the euro area indicate that the importance of aiming at 2 percent and, on the other side of the coin, the danger of falling into deflation, have been strongly recognized in the area. III. Wages and prices: prices viewed from the perspective of households As I have explained, aiming at a 2 percent price stability target in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is appropriate in terms of macroeconomic policy management, conceptually and as a global standard. Nevertheless, an opinion that there will be a negative impact if taken from the viewpoint of households is naturally heard. Therefore, let me next talk about prices viewed from the side of households, focusing on the relationship between wages and prices. From households’ perspective, it is quite natural to think that price increases are not desirable. According to the latest Opinion Survey on the General Public’s Views and Behavior the Bank conducts on households, about 80 percent of respondents who have felt that prices “have gone up” have described the price rise as “rather unfavorable.” This is not surprising. If asked only about prices, respondents will respond on the assumption that other conditions, including wages, are unchanged. If wages were not to change, price declines ought to be desirable. However, it does not normally happen that prices rise without being accompanied by wage increases. If corporate sales grow and corporate profits increase due to a rise in prices of goods and services, wages paid to employees tend to increase accordingly. As employees will demand that the portion of an increase in a firm’s profits to which they contributed be paid as wages, on a macro basis, the rate of increase in nominal wages will be the sum of the inflation rate and the rate of increase in labor productivity. Otherwise, the ratio of labor income to total income, which is the employees’ share, will continue to decline with a price rise. Such a thing might happen temporarily, but would not continue in a sustainable manner. In fact, this is underpinned by past data. Comparing developments in the rate of increase in wages per hour and that in the CPI in phases in which prices were rising, the rate of increase in wages has been exceeding that in the CPI on most occasions. There have been only two periods since 1971 when things did not go that way and the rate of increase in the CPI was higher than that of wages – the second oil shock in 1980 and a surge in international commodity prices during 2007 and 2008 (Chart 11). Both episodes occurred when the 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches inflation rate surged temporarily due to a supply shock; namely, to external factors other than domestic demand. Therefore, the real options we are faced with are whether to aim at a world in which both wages and prices rise moderately, or to aim at a world in which wages and prices decline, as has been the case over the past 15 years. The choice is obvious. In the situation the Bank aims at, in which a 2 percent inflation rate continues stably, wages and prices would rise moderately in the normal course of things. This is the kind of economy in which each economic entity acts on the assumption that prices will rise by about 2 percent annually, even when the economy is in a normal state. In such a society, a 2 percent price increase will be factored into wage setting. In this regard, in Japan, an increase in base pay – a scheme that was lost amid protracted deflation – has gradually been restored recently. This can be regarded as a step toward transferring to a new social economic system in which a 2 percent price increase is built in as a social norm, and this deserves focused attention. The extent to which nominal wages will increase in excess of inflation, or in other words, the extent to which real wages will increase, will hinge over time on the extent to which labor productivity – the amount of goods and services produced by an input of one unit of labor – will increase. An increase in real wages, which is a critical challenge, will ultimately be attained through an improvement in productivity. In this regard, in addition to efforts by individual firms, it is important to prepare an environment in which to improve productivity through various growth strategies and deregulation. The government has demonstrated that measures to raise the growth potential of the economy will be accelerated and reinforced through implementation of its Japan Revitalization Strategy. It is expected that further improvement in productivity will be achieved through such initiatives. For firms, especially small and medium-sized firms, there might be a concern that they cannot mark up output prices to the extent input prices have risen. In a situation in which prices rise upon escaping from deflation, as I’ve just explained, it will become easier for firms to pass an increase in input prices on to output prices. I said earlier that, under deflation, a vicious cycle of a decline in prices, a fall in sales and profits, restraint in wages, stagnation in consumption, and further decline in prices has continued. In such a situation, it was not easy to pass an increase in input prices on to output prices. In fact, according to the Tankan survey, over the past 15 years compared with previous years, the diffusion index for input prices – obtained by subtracting the proportion of firms responding that their input prices were falling from that of firms responding that input prices were rising – has been substantially exceeding the diffusion index for output prices (Chart 12). By contrast, in an economy and society in which 2 percent inflation continues stably, a cycle just the opposite of the vicious cycle under deflation will be achieved. Starting from a moderate increase in prices, a virtuous cycle of the economy of an increase in sales and profits, an increase in wages, rejuvenated consumption, and a moderate increase in prices will be achieved and become entrenched. In a situation in which an economic virtuous cycle continues and firm demand is maintained, it will become easier for firms to pass on an increase in input prices on to output prices. IV. Consumption tax hike and inflation Let me next talk about the consumption tax hike and its implications for inflation. From next month, the consumption tax rate will be raised to 8 percent from the current 5 percent. As items in the CPI include those that are tax-free or exempted from taxation, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI will be pushed upward by about 2 percent in association with the 3 percent consumption tax hike. In relation to this, let me point out two things. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 First, any increase in the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI by the consumption tax hike will be a temporary one. With the consumption tax hike next month, it is estimated that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding fresh food will be pushed upward on the surface by about 2 percent during fiscal 2014, but that this will disappear in fiscal 2015. As a specific example, let us look at developments that occurred in the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI when the consumption tax was raised in April 1997 to 5 percent from 3 percent. It was plus 0.5 percent in March 1997 prior to the tax hike, and after the hike went to around plus 2 percent for one year, from April 1997 to March 1998. The rate of increase was pushed up by about 1.4 percent. However, in April 1998, one year after the tax hike, the rate of increase dropped to plus 0.2 percent and the effect of the tax hike disappeared (Chart 13). Needless to say, the Bank aims at maintaining the 2 percent price stability target in a sustainable manner. Therefore, in assessing the price situation in pursuing monetary policy, we believe that it would be appropriate to make assessments by excluding the short-term variation factor on prices brought about by the consumption tax hike. The second thing is a negative impact on real income due to the consumption tax hike. Given that consumption tax is tax revenue for the government, it is unavoidable that the consumption tax hike will have such a negative effect. The increase in the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI does not represent a rise in the value of goods and services themselves, but rather is the result of adding a tax that would be paid at the time of consumption to the prices of goods and services. The impact of the consumption tax hike should be discussed in a context that includes taxation, public finance, and the social security system, and it is necessary to clearly distinguish this from ordinary discussions on inflation. In sum, we believe that an increase in the CPI due to a consumption tax hike needs to be considered separately from the price increase as a trend. The Bank aims at achieving the 2 percent price stability target on a trend basis that excludes the direct impact of the consumption tax hike. I should note that, for some fees for public services, the old tax rate of 5 percent will be applied as a transitional measure for a certain period after entering April. Such a measure will be reflected in compiling the CPI. Therefore, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding fresh food that will be pushed upward due to the consumption tax hike will remain at about 1.7 percent in April and will become about 2 percent from May onward. The Bank will also take this point into account in assessing the price situation from next month onward. V. Future monetary policy Let me conclude my speech by briefly mentioning monetary policy for the near future. As I have indicated today, we believe it is necessary to achieve the 2 percent price stability target as swiftly as possible in order to overcome 15 years of deflation and prevent a recurrence of deflation. As the state of deflation has continued for many years, in the process of transitioning to the 2 percent target, various changes might occur in the economic and social system. However, if comparing the economy in which good and expanding equilibrium has been achieved under the 2 percent price stability target with that of deflationary equilibrium during these 15 years, there will be no room for denying that the former is desirable. What is important is not to fear changes but to look for a style of business and living that suits the economy after overcoming deflation. The QQE has been steadily exerting its intended effects and Japan’s economy has been following a path toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target as expected. The Bank will continue with the QQE, aiming to achieve the 2 percent price stability target, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will thoroughly examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. If, in the future, the outlook will change due to the manifestation of some risk 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches factors and adjustments become necessary in order to achieve the 2 percent price stability target, the Bank will make them without hesitation. With such monetary policy, we look to overcome deflation at the earliest possible time. Thank you.     
BIS central bankers’ speeches 9    
10 BIS central bankers’ speeches      
BIS central bankers’ speeches 11    
12 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
BIS central bankers’ speeches 13    
14 BIS central bankers’ speeches  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Christopher Kent: Foreign investment in residential real estate Opening statement by Mr Christopher Kent, Assistant Governor (Economic) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, and Mr David Orsmond, Deputy Head of Economic Analysis of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics Inquiry into Foreign Investment in Residential Real Estate, Sydney, 27 June 2014. *      *      * Thank you, Chair, for the opportunity to discuss this topic with you today. As summarised in our Submission,1 foreign residential investment has been a feature of Australia’s housing sector for many decades. Foreign demand for housing has supported the local construction industry, while foreign-based developers provide access to alternative sources of financing and add a degree of competition to the sector. Some recent housing purchases have also been associated with the increase in the number of families, particularly from Asia, that want to educate their children in Australia. More broadly, foreign residential demand in Australia is linked to the rise in income and wealth globally, but particularly in Asia, which is adding to business opportunities as our economy becomes more integrated with others in the region. This is welcome and to be expected. An underlying theme in much of the commentary has been whether foreign residential investment has increased the demand for Australian housing by more than it has increased supply, and hence whether it has led to an increase in housing prices, especially for first home buyers. The data clearly show an increase in the level of approvals for foreign residential purchases over time, but it is difficult to know how much this has boosted net demand for Australian housing. While varying a bit from year to year, the data published by the Foreign Investment Review Board (FIRB) suggest that foreign purchase approvals have been fairly low as a share of national housing turnover. Specifically, the FIRB data suggest that the value of foreign residential approvals has generally been around 5–10 per cent of the value of national housing turnover. Using several assumptions, we estimate that the number of foreign approvals has been around half of that range. In its Submission to this Committee, FIRB included data covering the first three quarters of this financial year, which show a rise in approvals, especially for new dwellings. Nonetheless, it is important to remember that the share of actual residential purchases by foreign and temporary residents is likely to be much lower than the FIRB data suggest because not all approvals lead to a purchase. This point is outlined in our Submission and in a recent article published in the Bank’s Bulletin.2 It is worth emphasising that the purchase of a property by a foreign citizen or temporary resident may not contribute one for one to net housing demand in Australia. For instance, there would be little effect on net demand if the property purchased is used to house foreign students who would otherwise have needed to rent during their stay here. Similarly, net demand for housing would be little changed if an investment property is subsequently rented out. There is no comprehensive information on the magnitude of these types of transactions. So, while it seems likely that foreign residential purchases have added somewhat to net housing demand in Australia, there is no way of knowing the exact extent to which this has been the case. Whether an increase in net housing demand – be it from foreign or domestic sources – leads to higher housing prices depends on the responsiveness of supply. This subject has been                                                 1  See RBA (2014), “Submission to the Inquiry into Foreign Investment in Residential Real Estate”, 9 May. 2  See Gauder M, C Houssard and D Orsmond (2014), “Foreign Investment in Residential Real Estate”, RBA Bulletin, June, pp 11–18. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  especially topical of late, with housing prices nationally rising by close to 10 per cent over the past year. The rise in prices has primarily reflected increased housing demand from Australian residents and citizens, partly owing to low interest rates. The supply of housing is responsive to a rise in housing demand but, given the time needed to plan and build new housing, this typically occurs with some lag. However, several factors can accentuate this lag, including: • a shortage of well-located land and geographical constraints in our capital cities • the complexity of the planning and approval process, which adds to the time and costs of new housing developments • concerns of existing residents in regard to new development projects in their vicinity. These are not easy issues to address, although it is widely agreed that an appropriate balance needs to be struck if housing is to be provided at a reasonable cost. Through the Bank’s business liaison, we hear from housing market participants that impediments to increasing the supply of housing in some greenfield areas have eased in recent years. Also, there has been interest in converting some of the older office buildings in central business districts into residential use, which may ease the shortage of land in highly sought after areas. However, our contacts also report that more could be done to increase the responsiveness of housing supply to demand. Notwithstanding general concerns about the responsiveness of supply, the information available suggests that foreign residential purchases have probably not had a large direct effect on the price of housing that is typically purchased by first home buyers. While incomplete, the FIRB data and the information received through our liaison with developers suggest that most foreign residential purchases are for new, higher-density, inner-city properties as well as properties close to universities. Furthermore, the properties they purchase tend to be valued well above the average national sales price. In contrast, most purchases by first home buyers have been for established homes that are priced well below the national average. Moreover, when they do purchase new housing, first home buyers appear to generally purchase detached homes close to the fringe of the main cities rather than new apartments located close to the city centres. Of course, there are some foreign buyers that purchase cheaper homes outside the inner-city areas, just as there are some first home buyers that purchase inner-city properties priced above the national average. But in the main, foreign buyers appear to be purchasing properties that are typically quite different in their characteristics from those purchased by most first home buyers. Finally, I would like to comment on the issue of the availability of data. FIRB’s main role is to ensure foreign purchases are consistent with the rules, rather than to provide data on the actual level of foreign investment. Even so, a case could be made for more timely provision of the approvals data that are already collected by FIRB, perhaps publishing them on a quarterly rather than annual basis. Also, more granular data could be provided, such as the number of approvals within broad price brackets rather than just the total value and number of approvals. Beyond that, the benefits of any new reporting requirements in this area should be weighed carefully against the costs of its collection and administration. With those introductory comments, my colleague, Dr David Orsmond, and I are happy to take any questions you may have. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Daniel K Tarullo: Stress testing after five years Speech by Mr Daniel K Tarullo, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Federal Reserve Third Annual Stress Test Modeling Symposium, Boston, Massachusetts, 25 June 2014. *      *      * Born of necessity during the depths of the financial crisis as part of an effort to restore confidence in the U.S. financial system, supervisory stress testing has in the intervening five years become a cornerstone of a new approach to regulation and supervision of the nation’s largest financial institutions. First, of course, it is a means for assuring that large, complex financial institutions have sufficient capital to allow them to remain viable intermediaries even under highly stressful conditions. More broadly, supervisory stress testing and the associated review of capital planning processes have provided a platform for building out a regulatory framework that is more dynamic, more macroprudential, and more data-driven than pre-crisis practice. Each year we have refined elements of both the substance and process of the stress tests. These changes have been informed not only by our own experience, but also by critiques and suggestions offered by others. This annual symposium hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston has become an important channel for eliciting reactions and advice from outside experts and the banks subject to the annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR). Although the major elements of our approach have now been successfully established, I anticipate that we will continue to make enhancements. If supervisory stress testing is to give regulators, banks, and the public a dynamic view of the capital positions of large financial firms, it must itself respond to changes in the economy, the financial system, and risk-management capabilities. This morning I will give a retrospective on the first five years of supervisory stress testing, highlighting some of the accomplishments and identifying some areas in which we may consider changes in the future. Then I would like to turn to a topic that has gained increasing attention in the past couple of years – the qualitative assessment of firms’ capital planning processes that we conduct in parallel with our quantitative assessment of firms’ capital positions. From SCAP to CCAR The potential value of comprehensive stress testing had been much discussed among academics, analysts, and regulators in the years preceding the financial crisis, but only during the crisis was this supervisory tool first used at the same time across the largest firms. The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) demonstrated in practice, not just in theory, the value of simultaneous, forward-looking projections of potential losses and revenues based on each bank’s portfolio and circumstances. The forward-looking feature overcame the limitations of static capital ratios. The simultaneity, along with stress test features such as the use of common macroeconomic scenarios, introduced a critical macroprudential dimension that offered insights into the condition of the entire financial system, including whether banks were sufficiently resilient to continue to lend to households and businesses under such adverse conditions. The Federal Reserve’s basic approach to stress testing has not changed materially since the SCAP. We continue to take a multidisciplinary approach, drawing on a wide range of staff expertise. We create hypothetical macroeconomic scenarios that incorporate an assumed sharp deterioration in economic and financial conditions. Supervisors estimate each bank’s expected losses and revenues and use these estimates to project post-stress capital levels and ratios under the hypothetical scenarios. The estimated capital ratios are then compared with regulatory benchmarks. We use common scenarios for all firms; for the firms with the 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches largest trading activities, we add a market-shock scenario that incorporates market turbulence of severity similar to that of the latter half of 2008. While the basic approach has remained consistent, much else has changed. In the first place, of course, the requirement for stress testing has become statutory, as Congress drew on the lessons of SCAP in crafting prudential standards for large financial firms in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act).1 Second, the annual supervisory stress test has been incorporated into CCAR, a broader program that requires large banking organizations to submit a capital plan annually. The CCAR process gives supervisors an opportunity to evaluate plans for capital distributions against the backdrop of the firm’s overall capital position under both baseline and hypothesized stressed conditions. It also provides a regular, structured, and comparative way to assess the capacity of these firms to manage their capital positions and, by implication, more generally to manage their risks. I will return to this feature of CCAR a bit later. Third, there have been substantial enhancements to the supervisory stress test. Perhaps the most important change has been the development of independent supervisory models. Because the original SCAP was developed on the fly and under considerable time pressure, supervisors necessarily had to rely on firms’ own estimates of losses and revenues as a starting point for analysis, although they evaluated the firms’ estimates and made significant adjustments. In each stress test that has followed, and building upon the considerable progress in data collection, we have made completely independent estimates of a progressively greater proportion of potential net income or losses. These improvements in data and models have increased our ability to distinguish risks within portfolios. We have also refined the formulation of the hypothetical scenarios that form the basis of the stress tests. The severely adverse scenario is designed to reflect, at a minimum, the economic and financial conditions typical of a severe post-World War II U.S. recession.2 In devising recession scenarios, we draw on many of the same macroeconomic modeling tools used in making monetary policy. Because not all significant risks facing banks are tied to the business cycle, our scenarios now incorporate other adverse developments such as an exceptionally large decline in house prices, sharp drops in the value of stocks and other financial assets, or a worsening of global economic conditions more severe than might normally be expected to accompany a deep recession in the United States. We have implemented the Dodd-Frank requirement for an “adverse,” as well as a “severely adverse,” scenario not by simply hypothesizing a milder recession, but by testing for somewhat different risks. The past two years we have used the adverse scenario to test the impact of a sudden, significant increase in interest rates. More discrete changes of note include the assumption of default by each firm’s largest counterparty and the incorporation of salient risks beyond those in the overall scenarios.3 The former obviously serves a microprudential purpose, but it also could promote systemic stability objectives if it were to identify a single exceptionally large exposure for the entire financial system. The incorporation of salient risks helps to use stress tests to “lean against the wind,” not just build a buffer for future losses. For example, the 2011 and 2012 scenarios incorporated possible severe stress in Europe. Inclusion of this factor may have led to greater awareness and better risk management of U.S. firms’ European exposures.                                                  1  Dodd-Frank Act §165(i), 12 U.S.C. §5365(i). 2  See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), “Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing (PDF),” final rule (Docket No. OP–1452), Federal Register, vol. 78 (November 29), p. 71443. 3  See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2014 Summary Instructions and Guidance (Washington: Board of Governors, November 1) (PDF), p. 8. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Finally, I might mention a change made this year that actually reverted to a feature of the SCAP. We did not allow banks to assume their balance sheets would shrink in the stress scenarios as a way of meeting the minimum capital charge, something that many banks had done in the stress tests of the past few years.4 Foreclosing this assumption serves the macroprudential goal of helping to ensure that the major financial firms remain sufficiently capitalized to support lending in a severe downturn. As I have already suggested, we are likely to continue to hone the supervisory stress test. In particular, I expect that we will devote more attention to developing the macroprudential elements of the stress tests. For example, we might sharpen our focus on the risks to the financial system of significant common exposures among firms. We have already adjusted the market shock applied to the trading books of the six largest firms to ensure that firms are not incentivized to hold significant amounts of certain assets simply because they performed well in the second half of 2008.5 But there is more that could be done. One idea would be to test whether individual firms that are revealed by the tests to be vulnerable to serious stress might engage in asset fire sales that could produce knock-on damage to other firms. Another would be to incorporate more assumptions pertaining to the increased cost of, or reduced access to, funding in stressed environments, when lots of credit lines may be drawn simultaneously. In short, we do not regard the supervisory stress test and CCAR as finished products. In fact, we should never regard them as finished products, since to do so would be to overlook changes in the real economy, financial innovations, and shifts in asset correlations across firms. But I think it fair to say that supervisory stress testing and the CCAR have already made important contributions to financial stability and, in the process, have led the way in transforming supervision of the nation’s largest financial firms. First, they have played a key role in strengthening dramatically the capital position of the industry. The firms participating in CCAR have more than doubled their tier 1 common capital since 2009, an increase of $500 billion of additional, high-quality capital in the U.S. financial system. It is noteworthy that supervisors in other countries have themselves been moving toward greater use of stress tests as a centerpiece of efforts to build strong capital positions for their banks. Most members of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision now use some form of stress testing.6 The European Union and the United Kingdom are currently conducting supervisory stress tests whose results will be publicly released. Second, they have been the leading edge of a movement toward greater supervisory transparency. The Federal Reserve’s decision in spring 2009 to disclose the results of the SCAP on a firm-specific basis proved to be an important step in re-establishing market and public confidence in the U.S. financial system. In the Dodd-Frank Act, Congress endorsed the practice of disclosing both supervisory and firm stress test results in normal times, as well as in crisis periods. During the past five years we have progressively increased disclosures of firm-specific information, the methodologies we use, and the details of the stress test scenarios. From the outset, we have published the broad framework and methodology used                                                  4  Prior to CCAR 2014, the Board sent CCAR participants a letter detailing the Federal Reserve’s procedure for independently projecting the firms’ balance sheets and risk-weighted assets in the supervisory stress test and the implications of the independent projections. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), “Federal Reserve Independent Balance Sheet and RWA Projections,” December 16. 5  See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2014 Supervisory Scenarios for Annual Stress Tests Required under the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Testing Rules and the Capital Plan Rule (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, November 1), p. 5. 6  See Bank for International Settlements (2012), Peer Review of Supervisory Authorities’ Implementation of Stress Testing Principles (PDF) (Basel: BIS, April), p. 8. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches in the supervisory stress test, including information about the types of models we use.7 We solicited comments on our design framework for scenarios in 2012, and incorporated into the final document some of the ideas we received – such as providing more information about the economic and financial conditions represented by paths of the variables in the scenarios.8 And this past spring, we published the additional set of stress test results that described how the firms would perform under the adverse scenario, in addition to the results of the severely adverse scenario, which we had previously released.9  Because bank portfolios are often quite opaque and thus difficult for outsiders to value, this information should allow investors, counterparties, analysts, and markets more generally to make more informed judgments on the condition of U.S. banking institutions. Coupled with other regulatory measures, this transparency should in turn increase market discipline. This level of transparency also subjects us to greater outside scrutiny and analysis, a process that increases our accountability as regulators and helps us improve our assumptions and methodology over time. These choices for greater transparency in the supervisory stress tests and CCAR have prompted healthy discussion on the merits of disclosure in other supervisory areas. As I think everyone in this audience knows, we have not disclosed the supervisory models themselves. We do not want firms simply to copy our modeling in their own assessment of risks and capital needs. And we certainly do not want them to construct their portfolios in an effort to game the model – a kind of analogue to teaching to a test. But even though we do not publicly release the models, we have put systems in place to ensure oversight and accountability. The models are evaluated by a special model validation group made up of experts within the Federal Reserve who do not work on the stress tests. We have also created a Model Validation Council made up of outside experts to provide independent views and advice.10  The third important effect of the supervisory stress tests and CCAR has been to pave the way for other horizontal, simultaneous supervisory exercises. We created the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) in 2010 to implement an approach to supervision of systemically important firms that was better coordinated, more data-driven, and more focused on the largest institutions as a group.11 While CCAR includes a number of firms that are not in the LISCC portfolio, the stress tests and CCAR have been the proving ground for LISCC, and as the committee has evolved to administer these programs more efficiently, these exercises have shown the way to other horizontal supervisory exercises or assessments. Some, like the newer Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review, which focuses on assessing liquidity sufficiency and banks’ internal liquidity risk-management practices, are intended to be recurring. Others are ad hoc efforts responsive to more episodic or transitory concerns. Fourth, and in some sense an extension of the prior point, CCAR in particular has defined an approach toward developing and maintaining better risk management within the banking organizations subject to these exercises. Let me turn now address this topic in somewhat greater detail.                                                  7  See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2014: Supervisory Stress Test Methodology and Results (Washington: Board of Governors, March) (PDF). 8  See Board of Governors, “Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing,” p. 71437. 9  See Board of Governors, Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2014, p. 39. 10  For more information about the Model Validation Council, see www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/mvc.htm. 11  For information on LISCC, see www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/large-institution-supervision.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Ensuring strong risk management Here again, the origins of our current program lie in our experience with the SCAP in 2009, during which we learned a great deal beyond just post-stress loss and capital numbers. The horizontal, cross-firm nature of the exercise also allowed us to evaluate and compare the effectiveness of the firms’ processes for determining and addressing their own capital needs. We discovered that, at the time, many of the firms had critical deficiencies in the fundamental risk-measurement and risk-management practices necessary to assess their capital needs. Many firms did not have a systematic program for assessing their capital needs and even lacked the basic data on firm-wide risks and exposures needed to begin such a program. Not surprisingly, there appeared to be a correlation between firms found to be insufficiently capitalized to withstand further financial and economic stress and firms lacking effective processes for assessing their risks and vulnerabilities. In response to these deficiencies, the Federal Reserve initiated the annual CCAR process for assessing the capital adequacy and internal capital planning processes of large, complex bank holding companies (BHCs). CCAR is premised on the belief that thorough, rigorous risk management must underpin all the activities of all such firms. Risks that are identified and understood can be evaluated and, where appropriate, assumed with proper safeguards and capital planning. Risks that are overlooked, misunderstood, or taken outside of a well-considered and comprehensive risk-management framework plant the seeds for serious trouble for individual firms and potentially for the financial system. Through CCAR, we have sought to ensure not only that all large BHCs have strong capital positions as determined through our supervisory stress test, but also that they have strong capital planning practices that are appropriately focused on the capital needed to withstand possible losses from the specific risks in each firm’s business model. These processes, grounded in strong quantitative and qualitative risk management, also give supervisors a clearer window into each firm’s activities and thus increase the effectiveness of regular supervision. Since the first CCAR there has been notable improvement in the firms’ capital planning processes. Many firms have made meaningful investments in their risk-measurement processes, including significant enhancements to their internal data and management information systems. Many firms have adopted a formal framework to inform their capital planning through an analysis of their vulnerabilities and capital adequacy under a range of potential adverse scenarios. They have also taken steps to enhance the integrity of their risk measures, analysis, and the decision-making around their capital levels and distributions. Despite these advances, there is continuing need for improvement in the firms’ capital planning processes. Some firms still lack reliable information about their businesses and exposures. Firms also are sometimes unable to measure or understand how stressful conditions can change the performance of their material business lines. In particular, the capacity to assess the impact of tail risks remains in need of further development at many firms. These deficiencies are, in some instances, compounded by weak oversight by senior management and boards of directors, and lack of effective checks and accountability in the process. The qualitative assessment in CCAR The importance we attach to these risk-management and capital planning processes is reflected in the component of CCAR known as the qualitative assessment. This assessment covers a range of topics, including the extent to which the design of a firm’s internal scenario captures the specific risks from the firm’s activities, the firm’s methods for projecting losses under stress scenarios, and how the firm identifies appropriate capital levels and plans for distributions. As detailed in our CCAR regulation, where these processes are found to be inadequate, or to raise safety and soundness concerns, they may form the basis for an 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches objection by the Board of Governors to the capital distribution plans of a firm.12 If a firm’s internal processes are unreliable, supervisors will necessarily be concerned that a firm may not properly have assessed risks clearly and, where needed, assured adequate capital for the many risks that cannot be fully captured by standardized stress tests. As the process and expectations for the quantitative test have become better understood, attention has shifted a bit to the qualitative assessment. To place that part of the CCAR in context, let me make several additional points. First, as I have already noted, many firms had a long way to go to meet high standards of capital planning backed by strong risk management when we began CCAR. Given that initial gap, we have allowed time for firms to work toward full achievement of those standards. Thus, what may be perceived as a raising of the bar every year is better understood as our effort to provide a demanding, but still realistic, glide path for firms to reach that goal. We do, however, expect firms to continue to make steady progress each year. Second, the horizontal nature of the qualitative assessment does not mean that every year one or more firms must receive an objection on qualitative grounds. The comparative approach helps ensure that firms are evaluated consistently and fairly. And it does allow us to see where specific firms may be outliers from good practices followed in the rest of the industry. But this is not a PGA tournament – there is no foreordained cut that some participants will miss. Third, while there are minimum standards for all CCAR firms, the standards are more stringent for firms of greater systemic importance.13 It is not enough for the largest and most complex banking organizations to meet only the minimum standards in CCAR. We expect the more systemically important firms to establish and maintain the most sophisticated risk-management and capital planning practices. Their risk management and capital adequacy should be sufficiently strong to help ensure their resiliency to a range of unexpected stress events, since their distress could pose a threat to the financial system and to the broader economy. Fourth, precisely because of its importance to our supervisory program, the qualitative assessment will continue to be progressively more integrated into year-round supervision of the CCAR firms. While some important features of capital planning are observable only during the formal CCAR process, most of the risk-management and capital planning standards incorporated in CCAR are operative and observable by supervisors throughout the year. These should be an important focus of ongoing supervisory oversight and of discussions between firms and supervisors. Only in unusual circumstances should supervisors learn for the first time during CCAR of significant problems in the quality of the capital planning processes, and only in unusual circumstances should firms be surprised at the outcome of the qualitative assessment.                                                  12  See 12 CFR 225.8(e)(2)(ii). 13  It is also worth emphasizing that both elements of CCAR – the qualitative and the quantitative assessments – only apply to BHCs with $50 billion or more in total consolidated assets. The Dodd-Frank Act requires companies with between $10 and 50 billion in assets to conduct an annual company-run stress test. The Federal Reserve does not conduct a CCAR-like exercise to evaluate these company-run stress tests, although we do review the firms’ company-run stress tests and capital planning processes in the normal course of supervision. This review is tailored to the smaller size, reduced complexity, and limited systemic risk of these firms. See footnote 5, p. 14160, of Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2014), “Supervisory Guidance on Implementing Dodd-Frank Act Company-Run Stress Tests for Banking Organizations with Total Consolidated Assets of More Than $10 Billion but Less Than $50 Billion,” final supervisory guidance (Docket No. OCC–2013–0013), Federal Register, vol. 79 (March 13) (PDF). For other, smaller banking organizations – those with $10 billion or less in total consolidated assets – there is no supervisory expectation or regulatory requirement that these firms will conduct capital stress testing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 We have already taken steps to further this integration of CCAR and regular supervision. At the end of each CCAR process our supervisors send to each firm a letter detailing their conclusions concerning the qualitative assessment. To the extent weaknesses or areas for improvement are identified, those letters provide a basis for regular stocktaking by both firms and supervisors. More generally, last year we released a paper on our expectations for all aspects of capital planning, providing greater detail than what is included in the annual CCAR instructions.14  I anticipate that we will take additional steps to integrate ongoing supervisory assessments of risk-management and other internal control processes with the annual CCAR exercise, and to assure that communications in both directions are heard. One such step has just recently begun: The committee chaired by senior Board staff that is responsible for the oversight of CCAR, supported by the relevant horizontal assessment teams, will directly engage with firms during the course of the year to evaluate progress in remediating weaknesses or other issues identified in the post-CCAR letters. Increasingly, our regular supervisory work on topics such as risk-identification and internal audit will focus on processes that are critical to risk management and capital planning at the firms, areas of focus for CCAR. The aim of these and additional measures is to make CCAR more the culmination of year-round supervision of risk-management and capital planning processes than a discrete exercise that takes place at the same time as the supervisory stress tests. Finally, I would note that, to provide investors, counterparties, analysts, and the public with better information on the meaning of an objection on qualitative grounds to a capital distribution plan, we now release our decisions on each capital plan and, for firms whose capital plans were objected to, provide a summary of the specific reasons for those objections.15  Conclusion Although strong capital regulation is critical to ensuring the safety and soundness of our largest financial institutions, it is not a panacea, as indeed no single regulatory device can ever be. Similarly, supervisory stress testing and CCAR, while central to ensuring strong capital positions for large firms, are not the only important elements of our supervisory program. Having said that, however, I hope you will take at least these three points away from my remarks today. First, supervisory stress testing has fundamentally changed the way we think about capital adequacy. The need to specify scenarios, loss estimates, and revenue assumptions – and to apply these specifications on a dynamic basis – has immeasurably advanced the regulation of capital adequacy and, thus, the safety and soundness of our financial system. The opportunities it provides to incorporate macroprudential elements make it, in my judgment, the single most important advance in prudential regulation since the crisis. Second, supervisory stress testing and CCAR have provided the first significant form of supervision conducted in a horizontal, coordinated fashion, affording a single view of an entire portfolio of institutions, as well as more data-rich insight into each institution individually. As such, these programs have opened the way for similar supervisory activities and continue to teach us how to organize our supervisory efforts in order most effectively to safeguard firm soundness and financial stability.                                                  14  See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), Capital Planning at Large Bank Holding Companies: Supervisory Expectations and Range of Current Practice (Washington: Board of Governors, August) (PDF). 15  See Board of Governors, Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2014, p. 7. 
8 BIS central bankers’ speeches Finally, supervisory stress testing and CCAR are the exemplary cases of how supervision that aspires to keep up with the dynamism of financial firms and financial markets must itself be composed of adaptive tools. If regulators are to make the necessary adaptations, they must be open to the comments, critiques, and suggestions of those outside the regulatory community. For this reason, transparency around the aims, assumptions, and methodologies of stress testing and our review of capital plans must be preserved and extended. With that point, I end where I began – by emphasizing the importance of forums such as this one, and thanking you for your participation.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest monetary and economic developments and outlook Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, on the Monetary Policy Decision of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 25 June 2014. *      *      * The Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and approved today the monthly Monetary Policy Report. Based on the most recent economic and monetary developments in Albania, and following the discussions on their outlook, the Supervisory Council decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged, at 2.50%. The Council considers that the gradual transmission of earlier interest rate cuts to the financial markets will provide adequate monetary conditions for inflation to return to target over the medium term. Let me now proceed with an overview of the economic developments and key issues discussed at today’s meeting. *** Annual inflation rate was 1.6% in May, slightly down from the previous month. Inflation fell due to the reduction of health care prices, while prices of other items in the basket recorded low volatility. As with previous months, annual inflation continues to be determined by unprocessed food prices, which contribute around 88% to its final rate. From the macroeconomic perspective, the performance of consumer prices continues to reflect weak inflationary pressures, both from the domestic economy and the external sector. The negative output gap does not favour an increase in employment and wages, leading thus to a low increase of other production costs. Imported inflationary pressures remain subdued; inflation in Albania’s trading partners and the rise in commodity prices are at low levels, while the exchange rate is stable. Inflation expectations and the liquidity situation in the economy are in line with the low inflation rates for the period ahead. Indirect available data on economic activity signal for positive growth rates in the first months of the year. Aggregate demand improved, driven by both private domestic and foreign demand, while the consolidating fiscal policy pursued during this period did not contribute to an increase in demand. Incoming data for June have not changed our assessment on the performance of private consumption and investments. While these important components of aggregate demand were upward during the period, their performance remains weak. Their steady recovery continues to be impeded by uncertainties faced by households and businesses and reflected in the greater risk aversion of the real and financial sectors of the economy. The Bank of Albania expects further improvement in private consumption and investments for the rest of the year, reflecting, among others, its easing monetary policy. The pace of recovery of these two indicators will determine the short and medium-term dynamics of the country’s development. Data on public sector performance show a consolidating fiscal policy over the first five months of the year. This policy materialised in a budget deficit of about 68% lower than the previous year. The tightening fiscal policy is evident both on the revenue and expenditure side. Fiscal revenues increased 9.0% in annual terms, while budget expenditures were 7.5% lower than the previous year. Our monetary policy easing has also taken into account this feature of fiscal policy that the Bank of Albania has urged and supported. However, the Bank of Albania would like to bring to attention the need for a more uniform distribution of expenditures and budget deficit over the year, to enhance their effectiveness and avoid the fluctuations that their excessive concentration may cause to the country’s economic and financial indicators. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The improved foreign demand and positive dynamic of some sectors of the economy were reflected in an increase in annual exports by 10.3% in April. The detailed analysis of trade data reveals encouraging signals about re-exporting and agricultural activities. Trade deficit, however, expanded 1.8% in April, due to the simultaneous increase of imports by 6.0%. In particular, the energy situation continues to burden the trade balance of the country due to high levels of energy imports. Structural improvements to the economy and a more favourable external environment would pave the way for a faster growth of Albanian exports. The Bank of Albania considers this channel as the most appropriate tool to support the country’s sustainable growth in the medium and long term. Projections for low annual inflation rates, against the backdrop of below-potential economic growth, have dictated the pursuit of an easing monetary policy by the Bank of Albania. At the end of May, monetary stimulus was strengthened by a further cut in the key interest rate. Available information on financial markets shows that this cut has been fully transmitted to the interbank and government securities markets. It was also reflected in lower financing costs of the banking system, creating, in turn, premises for the transmission of stimulus to the lending interest rates and further to the economy. The Bank of Albania calls on the banking system to comply with this important link of the transmission mechanism. Despite the easing of monetary conditions, the economy’s demand for financial assets remains weak. Monetary indicators for April show a slower annual growth of money supply, to 0.7%. Its performance reflects the weak borrowing demand from the public sector and the contraction of credit to the private sector. In April, credit to the private sector was 2.4% lower than in the previous year, continuing to shrink for all but a year. The poor credit performance reflects mainly the contraction of credit to businesses. The analysis of credit demand and supply factors shows that there are uncertainties on both sides, which are materialised in high risk premiums. As we have previously stated, the steady improvement of crediting will follow the improvement of economic activity in the country. *** At the end of discussions, the Supervisory Council concluded that the incoming available information does not alter our baseline projections. The economy will see a gradual growth during the year, with an improved pace over the second half. Nevertheless, the increase of aggregate demand will remain below the economy’s potential even during 2014, thus determining the gradual return of inflation to target. At the end of discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged, at 2.50%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Sukhdave Singh: Global economic outlook and financial landscape – what has changed since the global financial crisis? Special address by Dr Sukhdave Singh, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the 18th Malaysian Banking Summit “Global Economic Outlook and Financial Landscape: What Has Changed Since the Global Financial Crisis?”, Kuala Lumpur, 20 June 2014. *      *      * I would like to thank ASLI for the invitation to address you today. Given that I am speaking right before your lunch, I do realise that I have been cast into the role of an appetiser and therefore, that I should be brief so that you can quickly get on to the main course. I plan to briefly go over the state of the global economy and its implications for the Malaysian economy. The news here is largely good. However, there are a number of concerns that could impact the quality and sustainability of growth going forward, and I will also discuss these. Global economic outlook and the changing financial landscape The good news is that after five years of rather turbulent conditions and what has been a rather bumpy economic ride, the global economy seems to be finally on the verge of sustained growth. The key to this development is the improved growth conditions that have emerged in many of the advanced economies (AEs), economies that were at the heart of the crisis. While we continue to believe that the growth in the advanced economies will remain low relative to historical levels, and there are a number of reasons for that, the signs are that these economies are finally able to achieve steady growth. And that is obviously good for the global economy. As for the emerging market economies (EMEs), they have done relatively well in the years since the crisis. Domestic demand had been supported by high commodity prices as well as expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. However, growth in the EMEs now seems to have hit a bump in the road. The commodities boom has tapered off and this has impacted incomes. The fiscal stimulus has increased government debt making further fiscal expansion less sustainable. On top of that, the low interest rate environment has led to an increase in household debt. These developments are now beginning to act as a brake on economic growth. This experience highlights the risks and limits of domestic demand driven by easy monetary policy, cheap credit and fiscal stimulus. Therefore, domestic demand in EMEs will grow at a slower pace. Nevertheless, EMEs will still be contributing a bigger share to global growth than the AEs. The re-emergence of growth in the crisis-affected AEs could be expected to strengthen external demand for the exports of EMEs, thereby mitigating the effect of slower domestic demand. Among the Asian economies, we do expect to see similar trends. Again, sustained domestic demand, while lower than in the past, will continue to support growth. There has been a lot of concern about the Chinese economy for obvious reasons – it having become the second largest economy in this world. And among many regional economies, it is now their most important trading partner. So, if the Chinese economy catches a flu, we will all feel the effects of its sneezing. Having said that, the Chinese economy will continue to grow and the policymakers there seem to be determined in ensuring that it does. Implications to Malaysia Malaysia will certainly benefit from the more positive growth environment, especially given the better growth of its major trading partner economies. The Malaysian economy is 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  projected to grow by 4.5–5.5%. This outlook is supported by the strong growth of 6.2% in the first quarter of 2014. The outlook has improved due to better external demand conditions. After growing by only 2.4% in 2013, Malaysia’s exports have grown by almost 13% so far in 2014. For a small open economy like Malaysia, and others like it, the experience of the crisis and the years since has certainly brought home the vulnerabilities and risks of being integrated with the global economy. But, I believe that it has also highlighted our dependence on the global economy and the need to be even more integrated with the global economy. At the risk of a slight diversion, allow me to elaborate a bit on this point. After the crisis, there was some excitement about domestic demand being the driver of growth, and there was some justification for such enthusiasm. There was certainly a component related to the growth in incomes and private demand. But there was also a significant component related to public spending and the rapid growth of domestic credit. The outcome is higher debt levels for both households and the Government. This is clearly not a sustainable strategy for growth. Indeed, the experience has shown that there are limits to how fast and how sustainably we can grow by relying on domestic demand alone. Therefore, going forward, while domestic demand will continue to support growth, we really need to strengthen our integration with both the regional and global economy, and by implication, strengthen our overall level of economic competitiveness, if we are to achieve sustainable growth over the long term. Returning to the economic outlook, the good news is that we are seeing more sustained growth around the world and that is already beginning to benefit Malaysia and creating more balanced growth of the Malaysian economy. Now what are the potential clouds over this rather sunny outlook? There are several, but in the interest of time, I will just mention five. The first of this is the slow recovery of investment in the AEs after the crisis. It has been noted that this recovery, unlike recoveries from past recessions, has been accompanied by rather lackluster investment. This is despite the fact that companies are sitting on large piles of cash. What have companies been using those cash piles for? Well, either they have been returning that cash in bucket-fulls to shareholders or using it to support their share prices through share buy-backs. It was reported in yesterday’s Financial Times that during the first three months of this year alone, the S&P 500 companies in the US spent a record US$241 billion to repurchase shares and pay cash dividends. While this may help to keep share prices high, they do not create new sources of growth. Meanwhile, capital spending by the S&P 500 companies has grown by an average of just 3.6 percent per year over the last five years. Ultimately, the quantity and quality of investment will determine the quality of growth now and well into the future. The second issue facing these economies is that despite the drop in unemployment, productivity growth has remained weak. The way we understand the recovery process, when demand picks up, companies will first try to meet it using its existing workers. Productivity increases. However, as demand continues to grow, the increase in productivity of existing workers will be insufficient and companies have to hire new workers to increase production. So employment increases. Therefore, an increase in productivity is accompanied by an increase in employment. We have not witnessed that phenomenon this time. In the US, the unemployment rate has fallen from its peak of 9.8% to 6.3% in May 2014 but productivity was only growing 1%, less than half of what it was in the years prior to the crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  There are a number of possibilities as to what is going on: • In the UK and US, it has been noted that the number of business start-ups has increased significantly in the post-crisis years. One interpretation of this is that, increasing number of people have given up on gaining employment and have decided to become self-employed. If this is true, it would help to explain the decline in unemployment and low productivity growth. Being in business means you are no longer unemployed and new businesses generally do not have very high productivity. • Another interpretation is that a significant part of the fall in unemployment has come not so much from more people being employed but rather from people leaving the labour force. The labour force participation rate in the US has fallen from 66% prior to the crisis to its current level of 63%. Essentially, the labor force is shrinking. In which case there would be no reason to believe that the decline in unemployment should be preceded by rising productivity. Another factor undermining productivity could be the fact that the number of part-time workers has also increased – in the US, from 3% of the working population to 5% in 2014:Q1. • The question of low productivity growth is not unrelated to the preceding issue of low investment. The rate of productive investment is a key determinant of the future growth and productivity of an economy. Whatever the reasons, if productivity does not pick up, it would have a dampening effect on the growth of wages and incomes, and consequently, on the strength of economic growth going forward. The third issue is related to the policy risk. There is what I call the “monetary policy pendulum”. In the post-crisis period, monetary policy in the AEs has gone where no central banker has gone before. My analogy to the pendulum simply means that the further out you pull on something in one direction, the further it is likely to go in the other direction when you let go. There is the risk that the process of normalisation from the extreme policy positions could create undesirable outcomes, especially given the level of risk taking that we have seen in the extended period of very easy global liquidity conditions and the resulting desperate search for yields. If economic conditions change faster than currently anticipated by policymakers, would a rapid and potentially large reversal of policy be possible, and if so, what could be the potential side-effects? It would certainly not be helpful to stability in the global financial markets. There has been increased interest among policymakers in these economies in also using macro-prudential tools to manage the build-up of risks in the low interest rate environment. The use of such tools may be helpful in these economies, but it also poses a potential risk to the rest of the world. For example, it could push even more capital flows in the direction of emerging economies like Malaysia. The crisis has also stretched the fiscal position of governments, both in the advanced and emerging economies. In some cases, such deterioration was related to dealing with the effects of the crisis (e.g., from bank rescues) and the low GDP growth post-crisis, in others it reflects the outcome of years of unwise fiscal spending. Whatever the reasons, constrained fiscal positions mean a reduced capacity to support economic activity and a reduced ability to deal with future crisis and shocks. It also means that monetary policy may be called on to do more than it can realistically deliver – a phenomenon we are already witnessing in the advanced economies. A related policy issue has to do with structural reforms. This is a topic that has been much discussed in the post-crisis years. The trans-Atlantic crisis was a blow-up of large imbalances and distortions – both real and financial – built over many 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  years. It reflects policymakers delaying or ignoring needed reforms. The experience has once again provided the lesson that the longer such imbalances are ignored and allowed to pile up, the bigger the mess when the whole pile finally comes crashing down. Structural reforms are certainly needed in many of the crisis affected advanced economies. But they are also needed in many EMEs, including in Malaysia. They are needed to ensure that economic growth is based on strong foundations and therefore will be more sustained and sustainable. Yet, the pace of structural reforms in most economies has been very slow and has lacked momentum. The main reason behind this inertia is often the stranglehold of vested interest. On this point, let me quote Mr. Travis Kelanik, the founder of the taxi service app Uber, which last week caused the black cab drivers in London to go on strike. He was reported in the Wall Street Journal as saying: “…there’s so much corruption and so much cronyism in the taxi industry and so much regulatory capture that if you ask permission up front for something that is already legal, you’ll never get it. There’s is no upside to them.” Clearly, the taxi industry is not the only one that has this characteristics, nor is it the only one that would be resistant to competition and structural change. Another reason for the inertia is that structural reforms often entail short-term pain even if they do provide long-term gain. Note the protests that have occurred in the crisis-affected economies in response to structural measures that governments in those economies have been forced to implement. The short-term pain makes structural reforms a politically difficult decision. There are sectors of society that would be adversely affected by these reforms and they will not take it kindly. Therefore, it takes political courage. The other point is that while reforms are occurring, they can adversely affect the pace of economic growth due to the dislocations caused. However, assuming that the Government has the fiscal strength, some of these dislocations can be mitigated through the use of fiscal policy. Therefore, in terms of the growth outlook, if countries seriously undertake structural reforms it may temporarily reduce growth, but would likely lead to much stronger longer-term growth. If such reforms are not undertaken, it would create a low and unstable growth path for the affected economies. The collateral consequence of this later outcome could be increased cross-border frictions. The fifth and final point I would like to mention has to do with income inequality. You cannot but have noticed that it has become a hot topic of discussion in the post-crisis period. The French economist Thomas Piketty, has become a superstar by writing a book on it. The reasons for this are obvious. Well-paid bankers caused the crisis and after the crisis most of them continue to have well-paid jobs. Many low and middle income workers lost their jobs, suffered sharp declines in their economic welfare, and many even lost their homes. Furthermore, the crisis has highlighted the large disparities in income in the AEs, and the fact that in the preceding period of prosperity, the benefits of growth have largely gone to a relatively small group in society. You can say that the crisis has let the genie out of the Gini-coefficient. How governments deal with this income disparity will not only be reflected in social and political outcomes, but also economic ones as it is the low and middle income groups that have the highest marginal propensity to consume. Similarly, a lack of success in dealing with the high youth unemployment in the crisis affected economies could have lasting consequences and put these young people on a permanently lower earnings path, further contributing to both income inequality and weaker growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  To conclude, let me summarise my key message: Economically, things are looking better than they have been in a long time. However, the legacy of the crisis remains and will remain with us for some time yet. And this will continue to cloud the outlook and will be a concern and challenge to policymakers as they try to steer the global economy out of the crisis on to a more sustained and sustainable growth path. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Haruhiko Kuroda: Toward the early achievement of the 2 percent price stability target and sustainable growth of Japan’s economy Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Keizai Doyukai (Japan Association of Corporate Executives) Members’ Meeting, Tokyo, 23 June 2014. *      *      * Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. Introduction It is my great honor to be invited to the Keizai Doyukai (Japan Association of Corporate Executives) Members’ Meeting and have the opportunity to address distinguished business leaders in Japan. In April last year, the Bank of Japan introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. More than one year has passed since then and QQE has so far been having its intended effects, with Japan’s economy on a path suggesting that the 2 percent price stability target will be achieved as expected. However, we are only half way there. The Bank will therefore continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. The topic I would like to talk about today is the Bank’s view concerning the current state of and outlook for economic activity and prices. Based on that, I will then talk somewhat in depth about the mechanisms based on which inflation is expected to increase toward 2 percent. In concluding, I will offer my views on the challenge of strengthening Japan’s medium- to long-term growth potential. I. Current situation of and outlook for economic activity and prices Economic activity Let me start with the economic situation. Domestic demand, including business fixed investment, remains resilient as a trend, although a decline in demand following the consumption tax hike in April this year – mainly in private consumption such as durable goods – can be observed. In this situation, along with the clear improvement in the employment and income situation, the virtuous cycle of economic activity has continued to operate steadily, and Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately as a trend. Looking ahead, as domestic demand is likely to remain firm and exports are expected to increase moderately, the virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending is likely to be maintained. Therefore, for the next three years or so, Japan’s economy as a trend is likely to continue growing at a pace above its potential, although growth will be affected by fluctuations in demand associated with the two rounds of consumption tax hikes (Chart 1). For the above scenario to materialize, two factors are of key importance. The first is that exports, fuelled by a recovery in overseas economies, start increasing again. The second is that domestic demand, which has been driving Japan’s recovery so far, remains firm. Let me discuss these two factors in more detail. Exports and overseas economies The first key factor is developments in exports. Exports have recently remained more or less flat and have been lacking momentum despite the correction of the excessive appreciation of the yen (Chart 2). These trends in exports are essentially due to cyclical factors, including, for example, the sluggishness in emerging economies such as the ASEAN countries. At the 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  same time, however, structural factors such as the increasing relocation of production overseas by Japanese manufacturers have also played a certain role. In addition, temporary factors have likely put downward pressure on exports. Examples include the fact that firms placed priority on domestic shipments in response to the front-loading of demand prior to the consumption tax hike and the effects of the unusually severe winter weather in the United States. Therefore, looking ahead, exports are likely to start increasing again, albeit moderately, once the effects of these temporary factors diminish and growth in overseas economies, including emerging economies, gradually picks up. Looking at the current situation of and outlook for overseas economies in more detail, overseas economies – in particular advanced economies such as the U.S. and European economies – are recovering, although economic performance remains lackluster in some emerging economies. As for the outlook, overseas economies are likely to continue to recover moderately. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) expects global economic growth, which fell to 3.0 percent in 2013, to accelerate gradually to 3.6 percent in 2014 and 3.9 percent in 2015 (Chart 3). Looking at individual countries or regions, the U.S. economy registered negative GDP growth in the January–March quarter due mainly to the unusually severe winter weather. However, since March, a number of economic indicators have rebounded as the severe winter weather waned, and the U.S. economy has returned to a moderate recovery trend, led mainly by private demand. Given the accommodative financial conditions, the pace of recovery is likely to accelerate gradually as improvements in the employment and income situation become more pronounced. In Europe, the year-on-year rate of change in consumer prices in the euro area, which has been struggling with structural problems such as excessive debt, has been less than 1 percent for more than six months, giving rise to concern over deflation. That being said, with business and household sentiment improving, forces to cyclically elevate economic activity have recently been at work and the economy has been recovering moderately, with GDP in the euro area registering positive growth for four consecutive quarters. The euro area economy is likely to continue recovering, reflecting not only the recovery in domestic demand, but also expected moderate improvements in external demand. As for the Chinese economy, the deceleration in growth observed since the beginning of the year appears to have come to a halt, and the economy is expected to continue growing stably at around the current pace due partly to the economic stimulus measures implemented by the government. Finally, other emerging economies and commodity-exporting economies will likely continue to lack growth momentum for the time being, but from a somewhat longer-term perspective growth is expected to gradually pick up against the background of the recovery in advanced economies. Nevertheless, looking at the outlook for advanced economies, which are expected to be the main driving force in the global economy for the time being, attention should be paid to the pace of recovery in the U.S. economy and the prospects for the European debt problem. In addition, it is necessary to keep an eye on issues such as excess production capacity and excess debt in China, developments in emerging and commodity-exporting countries that face structural problems such as a current account deficit or high inflation, and geopolitical risks emanating from some countries. Thus, there remain various uncertainties regarding the outlook for overseas economies, which all warrant vigilance. Sustainability of domestic demand Let me next talk about the sustainability of domestic demand, especially the current situation of and outlook for business fixed investment and private consumption (Chart 4). As for business fixed investment, while some argue that increases in investment cannot be expected due partly to the increased relocation of production overseas, recent figures show that investment has grown moderately. In the GDP statistics, for example, investment has registered quarter-on-quarter increases for four consecutive quarters. Quarter-on-quarter growth in the January–March quarter of this year, at 7.6 percent, was particularly high reflecting temporary upward momentum due to, for example, renewal demand stemming 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  from the ending of support for some software programs and to the front-loading of demand prior to the strengthening of gas emission regulations. Looking ahead, since corporate profits are likely to continue improving, business fixed investment is projected to follow a moderate upward trend as firms seek to expand capacity on the back of increased capacity utilization and as monetary easing continues to underpin demand for investment. With regard to private consumption, the outlook crucially depends on the effects of the consumption tax hike. To consider these effects, they need be divided into two aspects. The first aspect is the short-term effects of the decline in demand following the front-loading of consumption prior to the tax hike, while the second aspect is the longer-term effects of the decline in real incomes as a result of the tax hike, which will materialize only gradually. Economic indicators released so far indicate a clear decline following the tax hike in purchases of durable goods such as automobiles, demand for which increased substantially prior to the tax hike. However, many firms indicate that the magnitude of the decline in consumption following the tax hike has been broadly in line with expectations and that private consumption continues to remain resilient as a trend. At this stage, it therefore appears that the effect of the decline in consumption due to the front-loading of demand is likely to start waning in the coming few months. As for the adverse effects through the decline in real incomes, the key will be to what extent improvements in the employment and income situation can alleviate these effects. With labor market conditions continuing to improve steadily, employee income is expected to continue rising moderately, and private consumption is likely to remain resilient. How the tax hike affects consumption is something we will continue to examine in the coming months. Prices Let me turn to price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI, excluding fresh food) was plus 1.3 percent for four consecutive months from December last year to March this year, and, after excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, accelerated somewhat to plus 1.5 percent in April (Chart 5). Breaking down the year-on-year rate of increase shows that price increases have been seen in a wide range of items reflecting that Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately, while energy-related goods have stopped pushing up the year-on-year rate of increase. With regard to the outlook, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI after excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike is likely to be around 1¼ percent for some time, as upward pressure from import prices – in particular energy prices – will likely wane, while trend inflationary pressure – due mainly to the improvement in the output gap – will increase. Specifically, through the summer, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is expected to slow to around 1 percent. Subsequently, as trend inflationary pressure continues to strengthen, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is expected to follow an upward trend again from the second half of this fiscal year and reach around 2 percent – the price stability target – around the middle of the current projection period from fiscal 2014 through fiscal 2016, that is, in or around fiscal 2015. Thereafter, the rate of increase is likely to edge up, since medium- to long-term inflation expectations will converge to around 2 percent and the output gap is expected to continue expanding in positive territory (Chart 1). Hence, Japan’s economy is likely to achieve an inflation rate of around 2 percent and thereafter shift to a growth path that sustains such inflation in a stable manner. II. Path toward the price stability target of 2 percent The Bank’s outlook for prices I just outlined is fairly bullish compared to the average view of market participants and economists. Therefore, in the following, I would like to explain the mechanisms that, in the Bank’s view, underlie the increase in inflation toward 2 percent in a little more depth. To sum up in advance, we are of the view that upward pressure on prices will further increase in the future for the following two reasons. First, the output gap is likely to 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  improve steadily and, second, medium- to long-term inflation expectations are likely to rise, which in turn will influence actual wage and price setting. Upward pressure on prices from the output gap Let me start with the output gap. A key characteristic of the current economic recovery is that it has been led by domestic demand such as public investment and private consumption. As a result, the nonmanufacturing sector has been playing a central role in the recovery. Since the nonmanufacturing sector is more labor-intensive than the manufacturing sector, this, on the whole, has led to a further tightening in labor market conditions. Those who are here today may be aware of this in your daily business. In terms of economic data, the unemployment rate has been approaching the structural unemployment rate, which is considered to be around 3.5 percent, and the active job openings-to-applicants ratio has risen to 1.08, which is the same level as the peak reached before the global financial crisis (Chart 6). This tightening of labor market conditions has started to influence wages, and, in the regular annual wage negotiation this spring, the number of firms that raised not only bonuses but also base pay has increased substantially. In addition to this increase in the utilization of labor, a growing number of firms, particularly in the nonmanufacturing sector, are experiencing capacity shortages, and the output gap has been narrowing moderately. While the level of the output gap is subject to a considerable margin of error, the gap seems to have narrowed to close to 0 percent, that is, the long-term average (Chart 7). As for the outlook, inflationary pressure from the output gap is likely to strengthen further, given that the economy is expected to continue growing at a pace above its potential. Upward pressure on prices from inflation expectations Let me next outline developments in medium- to long-term inflation expectations. According to various surveys and market indicators, inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole (Chart 8). Looking at the mechanism behind this rise, it appears that, in the first instance, the Bank’s strong and clear commitment to overcome deflation through QQE, together with bold monetary easing to underpin this commitment, has affected expectations of economic entities, and inflation expectations started to rise. Subsequently, the actual increase in the inflation rate due to the narrowing of the output gap has then led to a further rise in inflation expectations. As mentioned earlier, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) has been above plus 1 percent. Except for the period of the surge in global commodity prices around 2008, this is the first time in the two decades since 1993 that the CPI has risen by more than 1 percent year-on-year for several months in a row. With firms and households experiencing these price increases, their inflation expectations have changed and have started to influence wage and price setting. As seen in the wage negotiations this spring, the increase in inflation has been taken into account in the wage negotiations between management and labor. In addition, a shift in firms’ price-setting strategies from strategies focusing on low prices to strategies seeking to raise sales prices while increasing value added can be observed. Given that the Bank continues to steadily pursue QQE and that inflation continues to be above 1 percent, medium- to long-term inflation expectations will likely follow an increasing trend, which will further reinforce inflationary pressure. Upward drift of the Phillips curve Although somewhat technical, let me summarize this price rise mechanism by using the concept of the Phillips curve (Chart 9). The Phillips curve depicts the relationship between the output gap and inflation, and illustrates the following mechanism: if economic conditions are favorable and the labor market and the market for goods and services are tight, inflation will rise. In the chart, the vertical axis depicts the inflation rate, while the horizontal axis depicts the output gap. The Phillips curve is assumed to be upward-sloping; that is, if economic conditions improve and we move to the right along the Phillips curve, the inflation rate will increase. Note that the inflation rate here depicts the year-on-year rate of change in 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  the CPI excluding food and energy, both of which are likely to be affected by changes in the exchange rate of the yen. Let us first look back at the situation before the introduction of QQE. The green curve is based on data up to the first half of the 1990s, while the blue curve is based on data since the second half of the 1990s. Comparing these two, you can see that the Phillips curve shifted downward during the prolonged period of deflation. As a result, the relationship between economic activity and prices had become such that even when the output gap is zero – when the economy is in a normal state – inflation is about 0 percent. Under these circumstances, the view that prices will decline or not rise had become firmly entrenched among firms and households. QQE aims at drastically changing this deflationary mindset of firms and households and at raising inflation expectations toward 2 percent. In terms of the Phillips curve, this means that the Bank aims at shifting the Phillips curve upward, slightly above the green curve, so that the relationship between economic activity and prices is such that inflation will be 2 percent when the output gap is zero, that is, when the economy is in a normal state. Developments in the past year In light of this aim, how much progress have we made? Let us next look at changes since the introduction of QQE. The red circles in the chart illustrate developments over the past year and indicate the following. First, with the economy growing at a pace above its potential under QQE, the output gap has improved and we have moved to the right. Along with this, there has been upward pressure on prices. Second, the red circles are located above the blue Phillips curve for the deflation period. This suggests that inflation has been higher than can be explained solely by the improvement in the output gap. There are likely several reasons behind this. One is that the depreciation of the yen may have affected items in the CPI other than food and energy, which, as I mentioned earlier, are already excluded. Another reason is that factors that exerted strong downward pressure on wages and prices during the deflation period, especially in the mid-2000s, such as the increase in non-regular workers and inflows of low-priced imports from emerging economies, are unlikely to put further downward pressure on wages and prices. Yet another reason is that, under QQE, inflation expectations seem to have risen and the Phillips curve has started to drift upward. This is confirmed, as mentioned earlier, by developments in inflation expectations gauged through various surveys and market indicators as well as recent patterns in wage and price setting. It is difficult to clearly disentangle the contributions of these different factors. However, the fact is that we have seen inflation rates that are notably higher than anticipated by many people at the time of the introduction of QQE in April last year. Moreover, the very least we can say is that the relationship between economic activity and prices over the past year has been different from that seen previously. At the Bank, we believe that this is because QQE has been having its intended effects. Prices so far have been developing almost in line with the outlook for prices published by the Bank in April last year, so that in our eyes there has been no unexpected inflation. So far, CPI inflation has increased and reached around 1¼ percent according to the mechanisms we envisaged at the time of the introduction of QQE. With these mechanisms continuing to work, inflation is likely to approach the target of 2 percent. However, the aim of QQE is not to temporarily achieve 2 percent inflation but to maintain it at that level in a stable manner. To that end, it will be necessary for inflation expectations to converge toward 2 percent and to ensure that they stay there, that is, to anchor them. Put simply, we need to achieve a world in which people engage in economic activities based on the assumption that 2 percent inflation is a given. To reach this world, it is 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  necessary to further raise both actual inflation rates and inflation expectations. This is the reason why I said earlier that we are only half way there. The Bank will therefore continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. If the outlook changes due to the manifestation of some risk factors, the Bank will make adjustments without hesitation if this is judged necessary for achieving the price stability target. III. Toward strengthening Japan’s medium- to long-term growth potential As I explained, Japan’s economy has been recovering moderately and is on a path suggesting that the 2 percent price stability target will be achieved as expected. Against this backdrop, discussions on labor shortages and supply capacity constraints have increasingly come to the forefront. Although the decline in the potential growth rate was clearly recognized as one of the key challenges facing Japan, this was overshadowed by concerns over excess labor and excess capacity, which were considered to be the most immediate problems, since demand was weak. However, the situation has changed in the past year or so. With the increase in demand thanks to large-scale monetary easing, fiscal spending, and the rejuvenation of private-sector activity, the supply capacity constraints that were lurking below the surface have now become apparent. In this situation, it seems to have become widely recognized that it is important to enhance supply capacity from a medium- to long-term perspective. In my view, with the supply capacity constraints having surfaced, this is a golden opportunity to push ahead with initiatives to address the challenges Japan is facing. Therefore, I would like to offer my view on the issue of Japan’s medium- to long-term growth potential. An economy’s medium- to long-term growth potential, in other words, the potential growth rate, depends on the growth in production factors, that is, capital and labor, as well as improvements in productivity through innovation and the like. Japan’s potential growth rate has been declining as a trend since the 1990s (Chart 10). Looking in more detail at the reasons for the decline in Japan’s potential growth rate, the deceleration in capital accumulation and in productivity growth in the 1990s played a major role. During this period, Japanese firms were weighed down by the need to resolve the so-called three excesses – excess labor, capital stock, and debt – that had piled up during the preceding bubble period and could not sufficiently respond to changes such as increasing globalization and the revolution in information and communication technology. In addition, the adjustment of excesses itself did not progress smoothly and inefficient parts of the economy were preserved. This to some extent led to a slowdown in the metabolism of the economy as a whole and a decline in productivity. In addition, the decline in labor input as a result of demographic trends and the decrease in working hours as the economy matured and shorter working hours became more common have put downward pressure on the potential growth rate. Protracted deflation and the additional shock of the global financial crisis led firms to defer fixed investment, so that growth in the capital stock has been subdued. As a result of these various factors that have successively exerted downward pressure on the economy, Japan’s potential growth rate has been declining since the 1990s and recently seems to have been hovering around 0.5 percent. What should be done to raise medium- to long-term growth potential? In short, it is critical to promote initiatives that address the aforementioned factors affecting the potential growth rate. Namely, it is essential to (1) encourage forward-looking investment by firms and increase the capital stock, (2) enhance labor supply capacity by raising the labor participation of women and the elderly as well as utilizing high-skilled foreigners, and (3) raise productivity through regulatory and institutional reforms. In this regard, the government has formulated a growth strategy, the Japan Revitalization Strategy, to stimulate private investment and has been implementing measures included in the Strategy. Taking into account subsequent 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  discussions, the government is now in the process of revising the Japan Revitalization Strategy. The Bank strongly hopes that the government will push ahead with the steady implementation of its growth strategy. Concluding remarks In concluding, let me briefly touch on the relationship between strengthening the growth potential and monetary policy management. While initiatives to strengthen the growth potential are critical, these are medium- to long-term challenges. Some time is required for such initiatives to bear fruit and growth potential to actually rise. It is of course desirable that the potential growth rate increases steadily. However, even if the potential growth rate does not rise, this would not make it any more difficult for monetary policy to achieve the price stability target. I believe that by steadily pursuing QQE, the Bank can achieve the target of 2 percent based on the aforementioned mechanisms, that is, through improvements in the output gap and a rise in inflation expectations. The Bank’s mission to ensure price stability remains unchanged irrespective of the level of the potential growth rate. The Bank will pursue monetary policy management on its own accord to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. While strengthening the growth potential is mainly the responsibility of the government and its growth strategy as well as private entities and their actions in response to the growth strategy, there may be ways in which the Bank can help. That is, in a deflationary environment, proactive initiatives such as conducting business fixed investment provided little reward in terms of the risks and returns for individual firms, and it was rational for firms to hoard cash and maintain the status quo. Changing the environment from one of deflation to one of 2 percent inflation will change firms’ incentives and can be expected to lead to a more proactive investment stance and greater efforts to raise productivity. Against this background, let me assure you again that the Bank will steadily pursue QQE and achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. I would like to conclude my speech by expressing the hope that the Bank’s policy conduct provides an environment that helps your firms to take proactive actions. Thank you.    
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11  
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mario Draghi: Interview in De Telegraaf Interview with Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, in De Telegraaf, published 21 June 2014. *      *      * When Mario Draghi took over as President of the European Central Bank in November 2011, he stepped into the eye of the hurricane. The euro area was confronted with serious problems. After the financial misery in Greece, Portugal and Ireland, larger countries like Spain and Italy were also threatening to collapse. Panic was widespread, both among politicians and among investors. As of his very first day in office as the President of the central bank, the Italian had to take crisis measures. The most serious concerns are a thing of the past, but Europe is still experiencing economic woes. Draghi remains outwardly calm despite the turbulence he has had to deal with. Did he ever have doubts about taking on the job? “No, no, I never hesitated. Things happen.” Mario Draghi is 66 years old and has a further five and a half years ahead of him in Frankfurt. He met the reporters of De Telegraaf for an exclusive interview on the 35th floor of the ECB tower. In the near future, he will be moving to gleaming new premises, but at the moment he is still surrounded by what his predecessors Jean-Claude Trichet and Wim Duisenberg have left him. “Only the books are different – they are mine.” He is happy to take up the Dutch debate on the euro. He doesn’t think much of politicians who promise the earth outside the single European currency. “Some people think we should move back in time, thirty or forty years back. I prefer to go forward.” And that also means to continue to build up Monetary Union because it has by no means been completed. Minister Dijsselbloem said recently that the crisis was over. What is your view? “The recovery has now been ongoing for around nine months. It is still weak and unevenly distributed across the euro area. And it is vulnerable. Accidents could happen in the global economy that can quickly change the situation. That might be a disruption on the financial markets, or geopolitical risks. In addition, unemployment has now been stabilising for some six months. Very slowly it has been going down. Also in crisis countries such as Portugal. But the level of unemployment is still very high. That alone poses a risk to the recovery because it leads to lower consumer demand.” You would thus define a recovery as any growth above zero? “No, but economic activity is gradually, though slowly, picking up. Both manufacturers’ and consumers’ confidence has been quite good in recent times. However, in the first quarter of this year we saw slower growth.” The troubles in Iraq are causing oil prices to surge. How much of a risk is that? “Our mandate is to ensure price stability. If inflation in the medium term is higher than the target of close to, but below, 2%, we are concerned. But we are also concerned if it is far lower. We are constantly asking ourselves why inflation is so low in the euro area. Initially, this was due to lower energy and food prices. Later, US dollar prices of these products stabilised, but the euro appreciated, causing inflation to fall still further. Higher oil prices are sure to have an impact on inflation, at least if we do not experience a further appreciation of the euro. But it is also good news for the countries that produce energy, as in the case of the Netherlands with its gas.” 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  At least if the winter is not too mild, since that cost the Netherlands quite a bit in terms of gas sales at the beginning of the year. “Yes, indeed. Is it not remarkable that the significant fall in economic activity in the Netherlands in the first quarter was due primarily to this fact? Many people simply don’t realise just how large the energy sector is. Incidentally, one has to acknowledge that too low inflation, while being generally negative for growth and especially so in the euro area, does support real disposable incomes. That is one of the reasons why consumption in the euro area is rising.” Compared with the United Kingdom and the United States, economic activity in Europe is still rather weak. “Our recovery is in an earlier stage that that in the United States, the United Kingdom and Japan. That is why the ECB adopted a number of policy measures on 5 June: a lower interest rate (and for banks a negative deposit rate), the introduction of support for banks that is linked to the provision of credit, the so-called TLTROs and preparations for a programme for purchases of packaged corporate loans, asset-backed securities. In April, I already said in Amsterdam that there are three situations that could induce the ECB to take action. One was an unwarranted tightening of the monetary policy stance that is reflected in an increase in short-term interest rates. That could lead to higher medium-term interest rates, and thus also impact economic growth and price stability. The second was an ongoing deterioration of lending. That was also a matter for our attention because lending has now been weak for a very long time. The third development was a deterioration of the prospects for price stability over the medium term.” And all three occurred at one and the same time? “No, we responded primarily to the first two. We have not seen any deflation in the sense of prices declining across the whole spectrum in the euro area, with households and firms postponing consumption and investment because they are waiting for lower prices. What we do see is that low inflation persists for a long time. If it lasts too long, adjustment in the crisis countries is made more difficult. In a situation of low inflation, wages in these countries need to really decline in absolute terms in order to improve their competitiveness.” Does the fact play a role that debt weighs more heavily when inflation is low? “Certainly, that is yet another consequence of low inflation. The reduction of debt levels, which is of great importance in large parts of the euro area, becomes more difficult in the event of low inflation.” Private and public sector debt? “Yes, both private and public debt.” Low interest rates are detrimental for savers, and for people’s pensions. How would you answer such concern? “It is a very understandable concern. Many life insurance policies and pension plans promised far higher value at the time they were agreed.” How long will interest rates continue to remain low? “We have prolonged banks’ access to unlimited liquidity up to the end of 2016. That is a signal. Our programme in support of bank lending to businesses will continue for four years. That shows that interest rates will remain low over a longer period. But thereafter they will increase when the recovery will firm up.” If the United States were already to raise interest rates in spring 2015, would Europe have to wait until spring 2017? “We will have to wait and see what happens, but the extension to the end of 2016 is a signal. Incidentally, the United States has reduced the growth figure for the first quarter.” 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  In view of the impairment of pension entitlements, people are spending less because they have to set more aside. “We do not see this. There is no lack of spending in the countries that are affected most by the low interest rates. I understand the concerns about the low interest rates, but on the other hand, they are what leads to more investment and higher growth. And we need to take into account precisely which interest rate we are talking about. These pension products invest in government bonds with long maturities. Many of the reasons why interest rates on government bonds are low have nothing to do with the ECB. They are low because countries such as the Netherlands and Germany have become safe havens. Prior to the crisis, life insurers invested in bonds issued by all countries, both ‘core’ countries and ‘non-core’ countries. The interest earned on their investment was thus higher because weaker countries had also been included. The crisis created financial fragmentation in that insurers all used government bonds issued by their own countries to fulfil obligations. That caused insurers in the north to be confronted with low yields. Returns in the south were particularly good. Once there is renewed confidence in the euro area, the northern countries will no longer be the only safe havens. Money will then again flow freely and the recovery of confidence will lead to higher yields in the northern countries. Besides that, we have to conduct monetary policy for the whole euro area. We cannot consider only one single point of interest.” Do you have any understanding for the fact that people in the north feel that they are having to pay for the mistakes made by the south? “I am well aware of this conflict. Some months ago, I held a lecture on Monetary Union in the United States. I said then that there were major imbalances between various euro area countries, large debtor and large creditor countries. I said that it was never a goal of Monetary Union to create permanent creditors and permanent debtors. That would have to change in order to have a balanced Union. An American in the audience responded to this by saying ‘what you are saying does not hold water because here in the United States, the State of Oklahoma has always been a debtor, while New York has always been a creditor, and that is no cause for us to worry. So why should you be worried about it?’ I think that this touches on the heart of the matter. The debts of US citizens are all treated equally, irrespective of where they come from.” Because the United States is a political union. “Indeed. The Dutch have a problem with paying for the Greeks, but not with paying for other Dutch. But let’s look at that ‘paying’. It is not at all clear what some countries have really paid for other countries. In Greece, there was a write-off on debts held by the financial sector, but there was no further default. It has cost the euro area countries far more to save their own banks.” Will Greece ever be able to repay its debt? “If Greece continues with its structural reforms, restores order to its public finances and improves its competitiveness, growth there will increase. If that happens, Greece will be able to do so. Greece has less debt to service over the next five years than Belgium. Much of Greek debt has a very low interest rate and very long maturities.” The ECB has taken many measures, but has not undertaken any quantitative easing, i.e. has not purchased bonds. What needs to happen before you would start doing so? “That would be the answer to the third situation that I mentioned in Amsterdam, a deterioration of inflation expectations over the medium term. At the moment, however, we are focusing on the measures announced on 5 June.” Is it legally possible to buy up government bonds? There is still a court case pending on this issue. “This is indeed possible within our mandate, namely if the purchases are aimed at ensuring price stability. We are not permitted to provide Member States with monetary financing.” 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  You were very happy about the unanimity of the decision taken on 5 June. Would a unanimous decision also be possible on quantitative easing? “Any guess would be premature. Quantitative easing can include not only government bonds, but also private sector loans. We will discuss that when the time comes.” Your statement “whatever it takes”, to save the euro at any cost, made at the time of the announcement of a new government bond purchasing programme, marks a turning point in the euro crisis. Do you feel that you no longer need to follow through on it? (Smiles) “In contrast to both the initial purchases of government bonds and possible quantitative easing, the programme of Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) is aimed at a very specific risk, namely the so-called tail risk of the euro area falling apart.” Did you ever fear that that might happen? “In July 2012, there were more than enough reasons for concern. In my short statement in London, I said that one of the mistakes many people make is to underestimate how much political capital has already been invested in the euro. I was very much aware of that fact. Just before I made that statement, the political leaders had fully committed themselves to the euro at the European Summit, within the scope of which the Banking Union was created.” Are the OMTs some kind of nuclear bomb, a threat that will never be carried out? “The markets reacted in a way that made it unnecessary to use the programme. The spreads between the interest rates [on bonds] of southern euro area countries and Germany narrowed sharply. That was something that could not have been achieved by any other monetary policy measure.” Were you surprised by this effect? “By the magnitude of the effect? Yes, certainly. We were all surprised.” Or were you relieved that you had merely had to promise action without following through with it? “In order to be credible, we also had to be sure that we could actually use the instrument. We were not bluffing, most certainly not.” The other side to the coin is that you bought so much time for politicians that they no longer needed to implement reforms so rapidly. Do you also see this other side? “Yes and no. We have a mandate to safeguard price stability. We are not responsible for how politicians make use of the time they have. I do not want to mix the responsibilities of the central bank with those of governments. But look at the extent of the reforms undertaken by governments since 2012. You will then need to admit that considerable progress has been made. Take Spain, for example, which has restructured its banking sector and reformed the labour market. Portugal is another example and Ireland yet another. And even in Greece progress has been remarkable.” You have said repeatedly that the euro is an irreversible project. It is understandable that you say that, but is this not something for politicians to decide? “Our mandate is to ensure price stability. There was more than enough evidence that a collapse of the euro would endanger price stability, and therefore our action was squarely within our mandate.” You saved the euro. In doing so, did you not take a political decision? “No, certainly not. The issue is by no means political. My statement in July 2012 was aimed at price stability. There was unjustified uncertainty about the future of the euro, not political uncertainty but a financial one. Unjustified speculative expectations about a break-up of the euro had been self-fulfilling in a vicious spiral for several months. They had produced a very 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  high level of interest rates. These rates were harming the real economy and the banking sector. The consequence might have been a new credit crisis and the impairment of our monetary policy, and therefore of our ability to maintain price stability. There has far too often been criticism that it was a political decision, but that is simply not true.” Much has been undertaken to close the gaps in Economic and Monetary Union, stricter budget rules and a banking union. Is everything now in place? “The banking union is a major step forward in the direction of a more complete monetary union. The crisis has shown that the economic policies of one country have a clear impact on other countries. Economic policy cannot be a purely national matter. Where fiscal policy is concerned, a certain degree of Union-wide discipline is already given. But the marked imbalances between euro area countries are due to a lack of structural reforms in some countries. The next step to be taken is to subject structural reforms, too, to Union-wide discipline.” Current economic policy coordination in the euro area is merely a first step? “Yes, indeed, it is merely a first step.” What will the second step look like? “That is a matter for the political domain to decide. In the case of the budget agreements, sovereignty has been shared among Member States. That should also be done with respect to the labour market, competitiveness, bureaucracy, agreements on the internal market. Sovereignty needs to be shared at a level other than the national sphere. That is where I stop. Because now there are several options for politicians to choose from. You could grant greater powers to the European Commission, or to the Member States within the European Council, or you could create new European institutions. That is not for me to decide.” The contention of some politicians that EMU is complete is thus not correct? “No, far more is necessary for a perfect monetary union.” Is a budgetary authority necessary at the euro area level, a fund for the compensation of weak countries? “That is a highly political issue. Compliance with existing rules would be enough. But it is clear that my predecessor in office, Trichet, made a strong case for a budgetary authority.” Returning to your example of the State of Oklahoma, would that not be a form of financial solidarity that is needed in the euro area? “There is at least one difference. The United States is a single country, the euro area is not. Given the more complex structure, we must seek a design that best ensures that economic policy is regarded as being of common interest.” Do you understand the concerns about such a transfer of powers? The outcome of the European elections can also be viewed against that background. Do you have a solution to this issue? “Are we really so sure that it would have been better if we all still had our own currency? Would we have been better off over the past ten, fifteen years? In the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s, we experienced a whole number of currency devaluations with often high inflation as a result. We currently have a formidable degree of price stability, a low rate of inflation. That offers enormous opportunities for growth and job creation. It is not the fault of the euro that economic policy went wrong in some countries. But let us please conduct that debate. It is important as such. Some people feel that we should turn time back thirty or forty years, but I prefer to move forward.” 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Do you understand that people see the euro as the cause of the crisis, and of unemployment? “The crisis and the unemployment are the result of a very severe financial crisis and partly also of wrong economic policies. The euro may have masked it but it has not caused it. We must end the crisis in Monetary Union and enable it to create prosperity and jobs again.” That sounds terrific, but the many EU Summits on growth and job creation have all led to nothing. What needs to be done? “That is a complicated issue. We cannot accept the present because we currently have low growth and insufficient job creation. On the other hand, we should not dream of a past that cannot be brought back and that cannot by any means be clearly taken to be better. We must work for the future in order to achieve not only stability, but also growth and employment.” 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Cyril Roux: The new regulatory and supervisory roadmap for Europe Address by Mr Cyril Roux, Deputy Governor (Financial Regulation) of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Banking Union Conference, Dublin, 23 June 2014. *      *      * Good morning. My thanks to the Irish Banking Federation for inviting me to address this distinguished audience. It is my pleasure to be here with you.  The last few decades have seen countries going back and forth between conducting banking supervision within or without central banks. But one thing remained constant: the domestic nature of supervision. To coordinate supervision within the EU, we have established in the past two main mechanisms: home host arrangements, and colleges of supervisors, in charge of Joint Risk Assessment Decisions. The SSM is a very big step beyond these two mechanisms for cooperation: as the name implies, we are now putting in place a unified banking supervisor in the eurozone. Creating an international banking supervisor spanning 18 countries and trillions of assets is unprecedented. It is the most significant change ever made in European banking supervision. As the other two pillars fall into place, it forms the basis of the European Banking Union, which is arguably the main European project of our time. We have just heard from Danièle Nouy the operational challenges and opportunities presented by the Single Supervisory Mechanism as seen from the ECB, so I will share with you how we at the Central Bank prepare for the implementation of SSM on 4 November this year. I will provide you with an update on the work we are doing to transition to this new regime of supervision, how it impacts upon the way we will organise ourselves and what it means for Irish banks. Our transition to SSM We have established a programme of work to prepare for implementation of SSM in the Central Bank – this project is called Project Europe. This the most significant project currently in progress in the Central Bank. It involves eleven divisions across the bank, from HR to Banking Supervision and IT to Legal and Enforcement, among others. They work together under 23 separate work streams to ensure that we are prepared for 4 November. So what are we working on precisely? We revise our internal governance, reporting and decision making processes. We develop a Supervisory Board briefing process akin to that of the Governing Council. We are preparing to change our divisional structure in banking supervision We plan, devise and roll out training for all staff involved in SSM We update all our publicly available material on banking supervision and enforcement. We upgrade the receipt, validation and transmission tools of supervisory and statistical data We revise our fitness and probity regulations and our internal workflow around same. We support the Department of Finance in its drafting of transposing legislation. In so doing, the establishment of the SSM provides us with the opportunity to improve and strengthen our tools and procedures so that we can be an even better supervisor. Our aim is not only to ensure that we will have completed all preparatory tasks in support of the ECB’s 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  preparations but also to make the necessary organisational changes to allow us to deliver on our supervisory mandate ever more effectively. In doing so we seek to ensure that we are giving full expression to the aims and objectives of the SSM – not the mere implementation of the minimum required to be compliant with SSM methodologies and structures. But of course, we cannot do this in isolation. We have recently had the pleasure of hosting a series of visits by senior management of the SSM in recent weeks, and we are also looking forward to the visit of Danièle this afternoon. In April, we were visited by Dr Korbinian Ibel who is the Director General in charge of DG IV of the SSM, which, among other tasks, is in charge of developing the SSM policies and methodologies and ensuring that all national supervisory authorities apply the SSM rules and procedures consistently, for significant and less significant institutions alike. We held a series of meetings with colleagues from different divisions, including our risk division. Our risk based approach to supervision which was introduced by the Central Bank in 2011 has been considered in detail when devising the SSM approach of judgment based, forward looking supervision that Danièle has described. As she already indicated, the system which will be used by the SSM will be based on the PRISM system that we currently use. This software will be adapted to the SSM methodology. More recently, in early June, we welcomed Stefan Walter and Ramon Quintana, Directors General of DG I and DG II of the SSM, with their Deputies, for another fruitful day of meetings and engagement which some of you will recall being involved in. This afternoon, we will introduce Danièle to the Banking Supervision team and also to the wider Project team which includes colleagues from a variety of divisions including our policy and risk divisions, HR, IT, Statistics, Enforcement and Legal. We will host a town hall style meeting with all staff affected by the changes brought about by SSM. This is a fantastic opportunity for our staff to ask questions directly to the Chair. The Central Bank of Ireland has made and continues to make a significant contribution to the SSM, at every level. Like my fellow eurozone peers, I take part every fortnight in supervisory board meetings chaired by Danièle, with Patrick Brady as my alternate, while Derville Rowland and Joe Gavin represent us in the Legal Committee of the ECB when it meets in SSM composition. Other ECB committees address IT, data, HR and Communication issues for the SSM. In banking supervision matters, we also contribute to many more technical meetings that take place in Frankfurt and around Europe at an ever increasing pace. We also contribute to the staffing of the SSM. 200 staff from authorities all over Europe have been seconded to the SSM to date; 11 are from the Central Bank of Ireland and we hope to increase that figure. This is indicative of our commitment to the success of the single supervisory mechanism. Comprehensive assessment – update Of course, in parallel with all of these change projects, is the Comprehensive Assessment. You will all be more than aware that the ECB launched the Comprehensive Assessment in November of last year. In fact, some of you here today are heavily engaged in the exercise. This project, which is a kind of entrance examination for all significant credit institutions, includes an Asset Quality Review (AQR), Stress Test and Supervisory Risk Assessment. The AQR is a point-in-time examination of a bank’s assets and will result in the determination of provision adequacy and, as the case may be, identification of capital requirements. The 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Stress Test builds on the AQR by providing a forward-looking view of banks’ shock-absorption capacity under prescribed macro-economic scenarios and constraints. We are well advanced for the AQR exercise. This has involved the examination of credit and market exposures, for both on and off-balance sheet exposures, covering all material asset classes. It will result in more than 50 per cent of assets by risk weight being reviewed by national competent authority teams. For us, this means having engaged auditors to review over 4,000 credit files and resultant collateral valuations. We have covered not only the three largest Irish banking groups but also large subsidiaries of foreign banking groups, be they headquartered elsewhere in the eurozone, in the UK or in the US. The AQR has also resulted in completion by the Central Bank of Processes, Policies & Accounting Reviews, Level 3 Fair Value Asset Revaluations and Collective Model Reviews. The project organisation ensures a high level of quality assurance and it is intended that the results of the AQR will be fully integrated with the results of the stress test. Our recent Balance Sheet Assessment, conducted last year, is taken into account in the AQR and the determination of the results. The approach to the stress test is as per the EBA methodology that was published in April and will be performed by the EBA and ECB in close co-operation. We are expecting the first submission of the constrained bottom-up results at the end of the month. Why not publish the results now, or afford you a sneak preview? Because the first sets of preliminary results may well turn out to require a lot of validation, consistency checking, supervisory dialogue, integration and rework before we can all stand behind them. The next four months will see a period of challenge, quality assurance, integration of the AQR results and finalisation. The results will then be published by the EBA for all banks in their sample. For those banks that are also part of the SSM, it is expected that results of the Comprehensive Assessment will be published thereafter – recognising the unique integration of AQR results into the forward-looking stress test capital requirements. Significant credit institutions and the “Joint Supervisory Team” Danièle has taken us through, in some detail, the operational challenges and opportunities which go hand in hand with the SSM. One of focus point of supervision in the SSM of the significant institutions are the Joint supervisory teams or JSTs, that is to say teams comprising ECB and national central bank staff who will work together in the ongoing supervision of each significant institution. A JST Coordinator will lead the JST and will be based in the ECB. The JST co-ordinator will be supported by our current team leaders and the line supervisors working with them The JST coordinators will be responsible for the planning and execution of the annual supervisory programmes and the coordination of communication with their institutions. They will also make proposals for formal decisions to the Supervisory Board, and monitor the implementation of such decisions. This will apply to the banks currently subject to the Comprehensive Assessment (AIB, BOI, PTSB, UBIL, BOAML). As these banks differ in size and complexity, they will be supervised in 4 different divisions in the SSM; two of these divisions are in DG I and two in DG II. Except for the JST coordinator in Frankfurt, JST members for these banks will be from our Banking supervision directorate led by Sharon Donnery and working here at the Central Bank. The day to day work, the on-site inspections and most of the supervisory engagement will continue to be performed by Sharon’s teams. For the JSTs to become effective and operational there will obviously have to be much dialogue, cooperation and information sharing. Some of this information sharing has commenced but the process is at its infancy and JSTs are only now becoming formed. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  JST coordinators for Irish banks will come soon to Dublin to meet with Central Bank staff, learn about these institutions, their risk profiles and current issues. They will also meet with the institutions that they will be directly responsible for. You can expect to hear from your new supervisory team shortly. Less significant institutions While the significant institutions undergo this change to their supervisory personnel, the other less significant institutions, or “LSIs”, which we supervise will continue to be supervised directly with us here in Dublin. We will not adopt this JST structure for them. When we talk of less significant institutions I would like to make the point that it does not mean lower risk or, less important. In fact, very often smaller institutions may carry more risk insofar as systems, controls and governance are concerned but the impact of that risk crystallising is not as significant on the EU wide financial landscape. Yet these institutions are often essential to the provision of services to the economy, consumers, business or to other sectors. We will continue our direct supervision of these less significant institutions. We will retain the responsibility for supervision but the ECB will have oversight, through DG III led by Mr Jukka Vesala. This will ensure a harmonised approach and consistency of quality. What will change is that, just like for significant institutions, we will move away from our current PRISM engagement model as we will now supervise in accordance with the SSM Supervisory Manual. The IMF, in its Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC), issued in the beginning of this year, invited the Central Bank to review its supervisory engagement and its mix of onsite and offsite supervision for Medium Low and Low Impact banks. The fund recommended that the analysis of regulatory returns should be strengthened as well as greater focus on testing and sampling of risk management processes. It is very important for us that we continue to supervise to the highest international standards of best practice. We will therefore be reviewing our supervisory engagement model for these banks in tandem with the ECB this year in order to address these findings and take action as necessary. Let me also mention that, while there will be no JST for these banks, we expect that SSM staff or staff from other supervisory authorities may join us on inspections or as part of our supervisory work. Organisational change at the Central Bank The Central Bank will make organisational changes to reflect the SSM operations and to align with what you will experience in terms of interaction and communications. As you all know the SSM has four Directorates, to which I have already referred: two for Significant Institutions, one for Less Significant Institutions and one for what are referred to as Horizontal Functions. The Horizontal directorate includes 11 different divisions containing functions that provide services across all supervisory directorates and one of these is the centralised management of on-site inspections. We have given some consideration to how we should organise ourselves in the SSM and held discussions with SSM management and with other national supervisors. It is clear to us that we need to change our structure to accommodate the SSM structure: • to create a very clear distinction between on site and off site activities; • to facilitate the creation of clear linkages and relationships between the Central Bank and the SSM; 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  • to respond to quantitative analysis that are to become ever more prevalent • to build reporting capability; • to build the skills and capabilities of our staff and ensure their development and retention. This implies a three way split, involving the creation of specific on-site inspection teams on the one hand, and on the other hand teams focused on the ongoing, off-site supervision of all banks. The introduction of separate on-site inspection teams that will be tasked with discrete inspection mandates and will be independent from the on-going supervisory work with an institution is new territory for the Central Bank. Currently we incorporate on-site work into our on-going supervisory work and do not have independent teams performing this work. Combined with this, and in mirroring the SSM structure, we recognise the need also for a third horizontal division, which would comprise specialised teams on liquidity, credit, internal models, and the like. We expect to change structurally in the coming months. We shall ensure that we build the necessary skills and capabilities of our staff so that we continue to deliver on our supervisory mandate post November. Transition to SSM for institutions What will this mean to you in terms of the engagement you will have with the SSM and with my teams at the Central Bank? What will you need to do differently? Obviously banks will now be part of a eurozone system of supervision, with the coordinator of the JST based in Frankfurt. Therefore, stakeholder engagement will be very important and increasingly demanding on institutions supervised by the ECB. At a high-level, the individual risk elements of a risk assessment are largely consistent with the approach that we currently take to assessing the risks. However, many finer elements will change. The supervisory manual is more prescriptive than our current processes, and it provides greater linkage between individual risks and a quantitative outcome. Final SREP decisions – including taking account of the Comprehensive Assessment – will likely be taken shortly after SSM commencement and within the construct of the new Joint Supervisory Teams. Altogether the SSM approach will probably be more formal, with greater emphasis on a commonality of approach and treatment and on peer reviews. However I am sure I will not disappoint when I tell you it will not be less intensive! The on-site inspections will be more prominent and more formalised with different aspects of the engagement led by different functional experts and possibly led by Heads of mission from a different national supervisory authority. The horizontal functions in SSM will be providing special expertise to JSTs – identifying early focus points and trends by sector-wide analysis, ensuring consistency, adequacy and best practices; and, focusing supervisory action. To do this successfully the ECB will probably want to leverage the specialist capabilities of horizontal functions of NCAs. You may find that you will be engaging with teams from multiple supervisory authorities. There will be a significant increase in the volume of data required to complete assessments, the use of key risk indicators, and the level of prescription within the assessment themselves (e.g. use of questionnaires in each of the risk categories). In general you can expect the requests for data to increase and therefore banks must continue to develop their data warehousing and analytics capabilities. There is a wide movement towards more granular data requests as this allows the supervisors to conduct their own analytics. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Non SSM tasks While it is clear that a lot will change in the Irish Central Bank over the coming months, the supervisory priorities remain. We will continue to focus on our overall strategic and statutory objectives – safeguarding stability, protecting consumers. We will continue to supervise all credit institutions with respect to their compliance with non-prudential rules, including consumer protection and anti-money laundering, that fall outside the remit of the ECB and the SSM. We will continue to strengthen our coverage of Anti Money laundering and to monitor compliance with the Criminal Justice Act through our specifically focused Anti Money Laundering Division. We will also continue to be solely responsible for conduct supervision. Enforcing proper behaviour will continue to be a key focus for us at the central Bank, in particular the adherence to our Code of Conduct on mortgage arrears. On that note, post programme monitoring of the Troika will continue throughout 2014 and beyond in relation to Ireland’s progress in fixing its mortgage arrears crisis. It shall continue to be a top priority. The high level of arrears weighs on Ireland’s banking, acting as a drag on the economy, new lending and profitability. Banks and borrowers need closure. The targets that we set need to be achieved and banks must continue to progress resolutely to resolve this issue. Conclusion In conclusion let me emphasise that the successful implementation of SSM is a key priority for us at the Central Bank of Ireland. It is also an extremely exciting challenge. Work is well advanced under Project Europe at this stage and I am confident that we will effectively accomplish the transition to SSM in time. We look forward to working with our colleagues in the SSM and in the other supervisory authorities around Europe as we converge to a single mechanism of supervision, where we become one team of supervisors. This combination of skills and experience cannot but succeed. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jean-Pierre Danthine: Situation at Swiss banks from a financial stability perspective Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Vice Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the media news conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 19 June 2014.  *      *      * As my colleague Thomas Jordan has explained, economic and financial conditions continue to be challenging. Against this background, I would like to examine the situation at Swiss banks from a financial stability perspective, looking first at the big banks and then moving on to a discussion of domestically focused banks. Big banks: strengthening resilience Over the past year, the Swiss big banks have further improved their capital situation. In terms of loss-absorbing capital – defined as Common Equity Tier 1 capital plus high-trigger contingent capital instruments – their risk-weighted capital ratio either already exceeds or is close to the 13% requirement that will apply from 2019. They also meet or are very close to meeting the corresponding leverage ratio requirement of 3.1%. In terms of total capital, both big banks have also substantially improved their ratios. However, they have yet to meet the corresponding requirements applicable from 2019.1 The SNB welcomes the significant progress made by the big banks in improving their capital situation and their compliance with some of the requirements applicable from 2019. The SNB recommends that they continue to improve their resilience and, in particular, their leverage ratios. This is important for two reasons. First, the loss potential for the Swiss big banks – estimated under the different adverse scenarios considered – continues to be substantial relative to their capitalisation. These adverse scenarios are not forecasts. They represent unlikely, highly unfavourable but coherent developments in economic and financial conditions. For financial stability in Switzerland, it is important that the big banks remain adequately capitalised in the event of such scenarios occurring. In addition, irrespective of the scenario considered, substantial losses can also result from operational and legal risks, as recent experience has shown. Second, an international comparison reveals an uneven picture of the Swiss big banks’ capitalisation, depending on which capital measure one examines. Although their risk-weighted ratios are above average for large globally active banks, the same cannot be said for their leverage ratios, as calculated according to various common definitions. Leverage ratios are gaining in importance as a measure of banks’ resilience. Experience shows that these ratios quickly become the focus of market attention during a crisis. Moreover, the international requirement, effective from the beginning of 2015, to disclose the Basel III leverage ratio will enable a direct comparison between large globally active banks. This is why it is essential for banks to have a solid leverage ratio.                                                 1 Total capital comprises going-concern loss-absorbing capital (Common Equity Tier 1 capital plus high-trigger contingent capital instruments) and low-trigger contingent capital instruments. The latter are primarily aimed at ensuring the maintenance of systemically important functions and the orderly resolution of the residual bank, and are therefore important in a “gone concern” perspective.  
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Increasing the credibility of model-based risk-weighted assets Increasing the credibility of risk-weighted assets (RWA) based on banks’ internal models remains an important goal. As discussed in the 2013 Financial Stability Report, model-based RWA are being called into question by market participants, analysts and authorities worldwide. This is particularly significant as RWA are at the heart of the capital regulations for banks. It is widely accepted that a bank’s risks can, in principle, be more accurately quantified using the model-based approach than using the standardised approach. Yet banks’ internal models are highly complex and can vary widely between institutions, thus making it difficult to accurately assess a bank’s resilience and compare one bank with another. The SNB welcomes the efforts by the Swiss big banks to increase transparency with regard to their risks. For example, both institutions recently started to disclose changes in their RWA, broken down by cause. Of particular interest is the proportion of the reduction in RWA which is attributable to model adjustments. In addition, Credit Suisse has been publishing a statistical measure of total loss potential for some time now, and UBS recently started to publish a statistical measure of loss potential by business division and a scenario-based post-stress capital ratio. The SNB encourages the big banks to further increase transparency with regard to their risks. It continues to recommend that the big banks disclose RWA according to both the model-based approach and the model-independent standardised approach. This recommendation is in line with increasing efforts being made at international level. Disclosing RWA according to the standardised approach would provide market participants with additional information for assessing the level of, and changes in, model-based RWA. In this context, the analysis of RWA being carried out by FINMA with the support of the SNB will play an important role. The big banks have already provided the necessary data by calculating RWA based on the standardised approach. Now the analysis will focus on the question of whether, and why, RWA based on the banks’ internal models differ from those based on the model-independent standardised approach. Differences must be well explained and have a sound economic rationale. If the analysis does not reveal any substantial and inexplicable differences, this would strengthen the credibility of the model-based approach. Conversely, if substantial differences cannot be explained, corrective measures would need to be considered. Domestically focused commercial banks I would now like to turn to the domestically focused commercial banks. In 2013, these banks further increased their already high exposure to mortgage and real estate market risk. First, growth in domestically focused banks’ mortgage lending was almost unchanged from the previous year. By contrast, the big banks’ lending growth decreased significantly in 2013. Second, domestically focused banks’ risk appetite in mortgage lending remained high overall. While there has been a decline in the share of new mortgage loans with a high loan-to-value (LTV) ratio since the last Financial Stability Report, no trend towards lower affordability risks is discernible. Third, they continued to carry a historically high level of interest rate risk in the banking book. As a result, these banks are particularly vulnerable to adverse scenarios which assume a significant interest rate increase coupled with a price correction on the residential real estate market. While domestically focused banks’ exposure to risk is high, their current capital ratios are also significantly above the regulatory minimum. As a consequence, substantial capital buffers are available in the system to absorb losses from negative developments in the economic and financial environment. Nonetheless, from a financial stability perspective, the banks’ high exposure to risk, coupled with the imbalances on the mortgage and real estate markets, is a source of concern. The situation calls for a prudent lending policy, both to limit banks’ future loss potential and to help prevent a further build-up of imbalances. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Regarding the latter, the different measures taken thus far by the authorities appear to have had some positive impact. Measures such as the revision of the self-regulation rules in July 2012 and the activation of the countercyclical capital buffer (CCB) in early 2013, which contributed to strengthening banking sector resilience, seem to have helped contain market momentum. Nonetheless, imbalances built up further in 2013, thereby justifying the increase in the level of the CCB, decided by the Federal Council in January 2014. Since then, imbalances have remained almost unchanged. On the one hand, momentum on the mortgage market slowed somewhat during the first quarter of 2014. On the other, during the same period, the rate of real estate price growth remained similar to that observed over the last few quarters, only slightly exceeding the growth of fundamental factors. From a financial stability perspective, these are welcome developments. Experience shows, however, that short-term changes in momentum do not necessarily imply a change in trend. Given the persistence of the low interest rate environment, banks and authorities should remain alert and take the necessary steps to keep risks for financial stability in check. First, measures giving banks stronger incentives to pursue a more cautious mortgage lending policy should be considered. Such measures should target both the owner-occupied residential property and the residential investment property segments. Efforts should now be directed towards preparing regulatory measures that could be implemented swiftly should momentum pick up again on the mortgage and residential real estate markets. Second, interest rate risk exposure in the banking book should be appropriately backed with capital. Under the aegis of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, international standards on capital requirements for interest rate risk are currently being developed. Given the significance of this risk factor, domestically focused banks should ensure they adopt a prudent stance towards measuring and managing this risk. In this context, the SNB fully supports FINMA’s efforts to ensure that risk-taking by individual banks is reduced or backed by specific capital charges whenever the risk exposure is deemed exceptionally large by historical or industry standards. In parallel with these measures, the SNB will continue to monitor developments on the mortgage and real estate markets closely, and will reassess the need for an adjustment to the CCB on a regular basis. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Luis M Linde: Snapshot of the Spanish economy within the international environment Testimony by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, before the Parliamentary Committee on Economic Affairs and Competitiveness, Madrid, 17 June 2014. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, I appear before this Committee in connection with the presentation of the Banco de España Annual Report for 2013. I will briefly review the international economic environment before setting out developments in the Spanish economy, which has been characterised by a gradual recovery in activity and progress in the internal adjustment process. I will then address aspects relating to the situation of and outlook for the banking system, concluding my testimony with some thoughts on the challenges our economy faces in seeking to set sustainable growth firmly in place. The international environment In 2013 the global economy grew by around 3%, slightly down on the previous year, although it did move on a gradually recovering path which is expected to hold in 2014. The euro area initiated a phase of recovery in 2013 Q2, starting then to emerge from the recessionary phase affecting it since late 2011. This recovery has been marked by the strengthening of the developed economies – particularly in the United States, where expectations have held that monetary conditions are progressively normalising – and by lesser momentum in the emerging economies, central to which is the moderation of growth in China. Contributing to this lesser momentum, on one hand, has been the change to a more moderate growth model in China; owing to lower Chinese demand for commodities and the interrelated effect on global production chains, this has been instrumental in the lower growth in the other emerging economies. Further, the expectations that global financial conditions will normalise have led to fewer capital flows towards certain emerging economies, exposing their vulnerabilities linked to their dependence on external funding. In any event, exchange rate flexibility or sizeable volumes of reserves have enabled them to withstand, in better conditions than in past periods, this episode of reversed capital flows. In sum, this new outlook reveals greater certainty about the recovery of the global economy and a shift in the central points of uncertainty from the developed economies – and in particular from the euro area countries – to the emerging economies. As regards price developments, the current phase of recovery is marked by the absence of inflationary pressures in the main advanced economies, with the exception of Japan, with inflation rates significantly below the targets set by central banks being recorded. Contributing factors here were the persisting slack in labour markets, the low levels of capacity utilisation and the moderation of commodities prices, in particular of oil. The absence of inflationary pressures has been conducive to an accommodative monetary policy stance being maintained globally, with official interest rates anchored at levels very close to zero and extraordinary liquidity provision measures still in force.  This monetary policy stance has meant that long-term interest rates in the advanced economies have held at very low levels, while very generous pricing in certain financial markets has been the case. Indeed, some prices are at all-time highs, in a setting in which 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  investor yield search appears to be playing a predominant role compared with other considerations based more on the fundamentals of these assets. This scenario on international money and financial markets poses risks, as it is likely to undergo abrupt changes in the face of expectations emerging over the withdrawal of monetary stimuli or, what comes down to the same, of expectations over sustainable improvements in growth rates that advise less expansionary monetary policies. Developments in and outlook for the Spanish economy In the course of 2013 the Spanish economy showed a degree of dynamism and, from the third quarter onwards, positive GDP growth rates. This trajectory has continued into 2014, meaning that the year might finalise on a path in line with the forecast forwarded in the Spanish Economic Projections Report published by the Banco de España in March, that is to say, with annual average growth of 1.2%. This recovery has also been discernible in the labour market. The pace of job destruction slackened in 2013, until showing slight job creation in the closing months of the year. The improvement has progressively strengthened to date in 2014. On the latest available data for May, the official number of registered unemployed fell by almost 112,000, placing the year-on-year rate of change at –6.5%, 0.8 pp better than in April. Social Security registrations increased this same month by 198,000, or at a year-on-year rate of 1.6%, 0.4 pp above the growth recorded in the previous month, marking four consecutive months of growth. This change in the Spanish economy has arisen from a combination of external and domestic factors. Let me take the former first. The external boost to recovery in the Spanish economy First, the rise in activity and global trade in the second half of 2013 and the resumption of economic growth in the euro area shaped a favourable environment for our exports. Second, a favourable impact has also been exerted by the measures adopted by euro area Member State governments in terms of fiscal consolidation and the approval of structural reforms, particularly visible in those economies that were subject to financial tensions. The support programmes for Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Cyprus also unfolded favourably. Indeed, Ireland and Portugal have already exited their respective financial assistance programmes without resorting to any additional precautionary mechanism. Greece, for its part, posted a primary fiscal surplus in 2013, indicating that its public finances have been redressed. But the challenges ahead remain significant, as highlighted by the European Commission in the annual revision of the exercise on macroeconomic imbalances within the area.  Measures by the ECB are contributing to shaping a setting favourable to recovery. Since the onset of the crisis, monetary policy has been strongly accommodating, more so both in 2013 and in 2014 to date. On the conventional front, official interest rates have been cut on three occasions since January last year. As a result, the main refinancing operations rate has reached, for practical purposes, its lower bound (0.15%). And the remuneration banks receive for their deposits in the Eurosystem stands, following the recent decisions adopted on 5 June, in negative territory (–0.10%), which should promote a greater and lasting injection of liquidity into the markets. As regards liquidity, moreover, it was resolved at the Governing Council meeting on 5 June to extend the current policy of fixed rate full allotment tender procedures at least until 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  December 2016. It was also decided to suspend the fine-tuning operation sterilising the purchases under the Securities Market Programme. The ECB thereby ensures the continuity and scope of the policy of generous provision of liquid funds adopted since what was practically the very onset of the crisis. Finally, regarding unconventional measures, and following the adoption last year of forward guidance, significant additional steps have been taken in June. Firstly, targeted long-term refinancing operations explicitly geared to promoting bank lending to households and firms were announced. Further, it was decided to step up the work under way to enable a framework to be designed for outright ABS purchases by the ECB. The aim of these purchases is to improve the functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, which is still adversely affected by the financial market segmentation induced by the crisis. Progress in the internal process of adjustment The turnaround in the Spanish economy would not have been possible had the internal process of adjustment not been sustained and deepened. Thus, in 2013, there was progress in correcting the imbalances in terms of competitiveness, fiscal consolidation, private-sector debt and financial system reform. I shall briefly discuss each of these developments. Competitiveness and correction of the external imbalance The continuity of the ongoing moderation in labour costs and prices allowed further gains in competitiveness to be built up during 2013. On the indicators available, based on unit labour costs, the gap opened up since Spain joined the euro area is expected to have closed. The internal devaluation process is exerting a favourable effect on our foreign trade. The year ended with our first current-account surplus since 1997. That said, our continuing excessive dependence on imported energy and the persistent deficit on the incomes balance, owing to our high external debt, stood in the way of an even bigger improvement.  Fiscal consolidation Turning to public finances, once the extraordinary effects of the aid to financial institutions is excluded, the year 2013 closed with a deficit of 6.6% of GDP, 0.1 pp above the objective set, in a macroeconomic environment marked by cyclical weakness and by higher interest payments. The fiscal adjustment drive has been most significant, as shown by the structural primary balance (the cyclically adjusted balance, excluding interest payments), which posted a correction of 1.2 pp of GDP. 2013 was the first full year of application of the mechanisms of the Budgetary Stability and Financial Sustainability Law approved in 2012. Moreover, measures were taken to improve the sustainability of public pensions (the sustainability factor and revaluation index). Private-sector deleveraging and bank lending To conclude this section, I will refer to the correction of private-sector overindebtedness. The Spanish economy’s cyclical position suggests, along with past experience, that several quarters of economic growth will still be necessary before lending at the aggregate level resumes positive growth rates. However, there were actually signs of an improvement in this connection in 2013. Since mid-year, lending to companies has been shrinking at increasingly lower rates, a change which has begun to be discernible also in the case of households since early 2014. The more disaggregated analyses conducted by the Banco de España support the idea that the contraction in debt at the aggregate level is proving compatible with a shift in the mix of 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  debt towards those companies in a sound position which are, therefore, better placed to channel funds to new investments that translate into more growth and more employment. Spanish banking sector I will now refer to the position of and outlook for our banking sector. For the Spanish banking industry, the year 2013 marked the culmination of a major reform in the framework of the financial assistance programme agreed with the European authorities. This programme began in 2012 and, as you know, concluded last January. The reform has seen the clean-up, recapitalisation and restructuring of the sector. In a complex macroeconomic and financial environment, which required the adjustment of the imbalances that have built up in the previous expansionary phase, the Spanish banking sector has demonstrated notable adaptability. I will briefly review some of the basic parameters marking developments at our banks, in particular the changes in the structure of their balance sheets, non-performing loans and results. I will then underscore the importance of the capital conservation measures in the current setting. Changes in the structure of bank balance sheets Last year, the banking sector significantly reduced the size of its balance sheet, as well as changing its structure. On the asset side, the reduction in lending to the private sector persisted. This reduction was, however, compatible with an increase in the weight of assets relative to the total balance sheet, whereas other asset items – such as deposits at central banks and credit institutions, and derivatives operations – contracted at very high rates. In turn, on the liabilities side, there was a shift towards private-sector deposits, thereby furthering the reduction in funds borrowed from the Eurosystem. In addition, the sector also increased its own funds, the relative weight of which on the balance sheet has gained in significance. Non-performing assets Private-sector non-performing assets continued to rise in 2013. This increase and the aforementioned decrease in credit explain the growth in the non-performing assets ratio. Also playing a role in this increase was the reclassification of refinanced loan portfolios required by the Banco de España in 2012. In any event, banks’ non-performing loans have a clearly cyclical component. In this respect, in line with the onset of the recovery of the economy, the latest data, which relate to early 2014, show a slight fall in non-performing assets in month-on-month terms. This trend can be expected to firm as the recovery of economic activity gathers steam. Results The banking sector in 2013 reported consolidated profit of €11 billion in 2013, following heavy losses in 2012, basically due to the sizeable provisions made by banks. Although provisions continued to eat up a considerable portion of profit, their relative significance in 2013 was appreciably less than in 2012. Margins and efficiency The more moderate provisions noted above helped to offset the lower margins in the 2013 income statement compared with 2012. Thus, against the background of a smaller volume of 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  activity and of lower interest rates, net interest income (the difference between accrued interest revenue and costs) dropped by nearly 10% year-on-year in 2013. In 2013 Spanish banks persisted in their efforts to increase efficiency, readjusting their operating capacity by pruning staff and branch numbers in their business in Spain, which, compared with the highs in mid-2008, were down by around 20% and 25%, respectively. In an environment characterised by persisting downward pressure on earnings from factors such as weaker lending, low interest rates and still-high provisioning needs, banks have to persevere in reducing their operating costs and improving their efficiency. Conservation of banks’ capital In 2013 the banking sector strengthened its solvency. The aggregate core capital of all deposit institutions stood at 11.5% at the end of that year, up somewhat more than 2 pp on end-2012. From a medium- and long-term standpoint, the banking sector has to maintain its capital conservation policies.  The economic recovery is still incipient and some fragmentation persists in the euro area financial markets. Moreover, the new solvency legislation which came into force in Europe last January implementing the requirements of the Basel III Accord, but whose application has yet to be completed, calls for, inter alia, higher levels and quality of capital. The Banco de España, recognising that it is desirable to conserve capital and strengthen solvency levels, last February renewed its recommendation that banks should limit their dividend pay-out policies. Challenges facing the Spanish economy and the role of economic policy I shall conclude with some thoughts on the challenges facing the Spanish economy and the role of economic policy. Our economy is currently setting its growth on a firm footing. However, the effects of the crisis in terms of unemployment and indebtedness of the resident sectors have been sizeable and their absorption will require time. The improvements in competitiveness and the reduction of private-sector debt must continue. And this in an environment of low inflation in the euro area and of high euro exchange rates, which poses an additional difficulty. In the area of national policies, the leeway for applying demand-side policies is scant. In this respect, let me discuss in more detail the challenges ahead for fiscal policy. Fiscal policy challenges As I have already indicated, progress in the correction of European fiscal imbalances has been significant. The data for 2013 show, however, that six years after the economic crisis began, ten countries in the European Union countries had budget deficits of over 3% of GDP and public debt levels stand at record highs in many member countries. Having now emerged from the phase of financial and banking instability, the need for fiscal consolidation will continue to condition economic policy in Europe over the coming years, although the adjustments planned are on a lesser scale than those already implemented. In the case of Spain, the consolidation drive still ahead remains substantial. According to the latest Stability Programme Update, the planned reduction in the budget deficit between 2014 and 2017 is 5.5 pp of GDP, and rises to 6.4 pp of GDP in terms of decreasing the primary deficit. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Completing the fiscal consolidation process must remain an overriding priority of Spain’s economic policy. This effort is necessary to maintain the confidence of economic agents, to continue to advance in the normalisation of financing and to restore the room for manoeuvre in budget policy. Meeting targets is crucial first for containing and, subsequently, reducing the public debt/GDP ratio. It will be difficult to curb the rising trend of public debt now the latter has reached high levels and the outlook for economic growth and inflation is moderate. If the interest on the debt is higher than the nominal growth rate of the economy, the public debt/GDP ratio grows inertially, even when public revenue and spending are balanced. This effect stems from the pressure generated by the interest burden, arising from high debt which cannot be countered by growth in real GDP and changes in inflation. In this situation, then, in order to avoid an increase in debt, it is not enough to attain an overall balanced budget (that is, net of the interest burden); rather, sizeable primary surpluses must be achieved and maintained, which is particularly difficult in a setting of low growth and low inflation. Furthermore, the short-term negative effects on economic growth of the fiscal adjustment should be considered, which contributes to the above-mentioned inertial increase in debt. Against the backdrop of a brighter economic outlook, it is to be expected that, unlike in recent years, the reduction of the budget deficit will foreseeably be boosted by a more positive performance of tax revenue and a decrease in those expenses more closely linked to the economic cycle, particularly unemployment benefits. The efforts to contain spending should desirably be accompanied by public spending and revenue arrangements which help to ensure that the public sector makes a better contribution to economic activity and to achieve a lasting adjustment. As for public spending, various actions have already been undertaken in the area of public employment in the health and education sectors, as well as in reforming local government administration and streamlining the public sector, among others, which should continue to generate savings over the coming years. In line with the recommendations of the European Council, this process would gain in depth and consistency if it were accompanied by a public spending assessment and review. Given the degree of decentralisation in Spain, such an exercise requires the active collaboration of the regional governments. Of the various public expenditure items, spending on pensions is particularly important given its high share and the challenges faced in relation to its sustainability in the medium term. Progress in this area has been significant as a result of the various reforms approved. In particular, in 2011 the retirement age and the period for calculating the regulatory base were increased, and in 2013 the so-called “sustainability” factor was defined and the revaluation index of pensions was introduced. These measures will help to ease the pressure in the medium term arising from population ageing. The next step should be to develop the mechanisms to increase saving for retirement so that in the future this may complement defined-benefit public pensions. Turning to public revenue, according to the findings of the Committee of Experts – which delivered its report in March 2014 – and the recommendations of international agencies, a reform is needed to redress the problems which have become visible during the crisis. These problems include most notably the low revenue-raising capacity of the tax system, the high legal rates of taxation alongside low effective rates of taxation due to the proliferation of tax benefits, and a bias towards a more distortional system of taxation for economic growth and employment, namely, that levied on labour and capital. Given this diagnosis, the proposals of the Committee of Experts and international agencies coincide as to the need to increase the weight of indirect taxation to permit a reduction in the taxation of labour, particularly social security contributions, and also a lowering of the taxation of capital income. Additionally, the Committee suggests that tax rebates, reductions 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  and allowances be eliminated and that progress be made towards greater neutrality across savings instruments. These recommendations underline that is important that any future changes to taxation, in addition to improving efficiency, should not jeopardise the fiscal consolidation required. Medium-term economic growth The fiscal consolidation process has been accompanied by a series of reforms whose effects are becoming discernible or will be perceived shortly. The increased sensitivity of prices to the economic cycle has prompted a correction of the competitiveness gap of the Spanish economy, while the more flexible labour framework has undoubtedly been conducive to wage moderation. A change is also perceptible in the role of past inflation in the process of determining costs and income. This change will be bolstered by the implementation of the legislation on the deindexation of the economy. The effects in terms of job creation are more tentative, yet promising. Foreseeably, as a result of the more flexible labour framework, employment will grow at rates which, while moderate, are relatively high in relation to the growth in GDP. Undertaking reforms to increase competition is also unavoidable. Progress in this area has also been significant: we may recall the laws on entrepreneurs, single market guarantee and insolvency. However, it must be acknowledged that in some cases their actual implementation is encountering difficulties or has been delayed. Thank you.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Vítor Constâncio: Recent challenges to monetary policy in the euro area Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Athens Symposium ‘‘Banking Union, Monetary Policy and Economic Growth’’, Athens, 19 June 2014. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, Seven years have passed since the financial market turmoil in the summer of 2007 marked the beginning of the financial crisis and the ensuing recession. These years have been challenging for all central banks. They have marked the end of a long period of remarkably stable, good macroeconomic performance. The widespread adoption of an explicit price stability objective had been conducive to low inflation outcome in an environment of prolonged economic growth. Existing monetary policy strategies – mostly variants of the inflation targeting model, though with notable exceptions at the ECB and at the Federal Reserve – appeared to be adequate and sufficient to attain this goal. Consistently with the Tinbergen principle, the primary objective of price stability was achieved everywhere through a single, conventional monetary policy instrument: a short-term interest rate. The global financial crisis changed this situation abruptly. Since then, some central banks have been endowed with additional macro-prudential instruments and a more explicit mandate to preserve financial stability. While no explicit change in monetary policy strategies has taken place, it is fair to say that there has been a generalised increase in the attention paid to banks’ balance sheet conditions and to the evolution of credit. By far the most visible innovation since the beginning of the Great Recession however, has been the increase in the array of instruments used for monetary policy purposes, particularly forward guidance about interest rates and most notably the use of central banks’ balance sheets through Large Scale Assets Purchases (LSAP, i.e. Quantitative Easing or QE). In theoretical debates, other proposals were made namely, to change the targets of monetary policy to price level targeting or to nominal GDP or simply, to increase the established objective of 2% in inflation targeting regimes to 3% or 4%. For practical reasons, these proposals were not retained and forward guidance and QE were the new instruments of choice for many central banks. Before the crisis, the established instrument of monetary policy was a short-term interest rate steered either by traditional open-market operations of buying and selling securities or through temporary lending to banks via repos, like in the ECB’s case. After the crisis, all major central banks significantly increased their balance sheets and the respective monetary base.   
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Chart 1   It would, nevertheless, be misleading to compare the changes in balance sheet size as if they were originated by the same policies and, consequently, had the same impact. The case of the ECB is different from the other central banks as the expansion of the balance sheet happened as the result of lending to the banks through repos of different maturity. The increase in the balance sheet was dependent on the demand of primary liquidity by the banks, facilitated however, by the provision of liquidity through a regime of fixed rate full allotment of banks’ demand, introduced in September 2008. The impact on overall monetary conditions was, as before the crisis, dependent on the behaviour of the banks to pass-through the higher monetary base into credit and broad money, which did not happen. What did happen was a justified fulfilment of the role of lender of last resort but not a new type of monetary policy instrument in the sense of aiming at a new transmission channel. The adoption of a fixed-rate full allotment regime of liquidity provision, which has been in place since and was recently extended until December 2016 (at the very least) was indeed an extraordinary unconventional measure. It supported the banking sector and avoided a more detrimental credit crunch. However, the size of our monetary base declined significantly during 2013 when banks decided to start the repayment of their previous high borrowings. On the other hand, as per the following table, total outright purchases of assets by the ECB under two different programmes was not behind the increase of the balance sheet as they represent a relatively small proportion of total assets compared with other central banks.   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Table 1   Before the crisis, both methods of conducting liquidity management transactions (via outright purchases or lending to the banks) previously mentioned, had the objective of steering a short-term interest rate close to the policy rate decided by the central bank. It would therefore be misleading to interpret the increase of banks’ balance sheets through LSAP or QE as just an increase in scale of the traditional outright purchases. There is a different objective of intervening directly in different asset markets and in higher maturities in order to influence the respective prices or yields. The intention and the composition of the assets purchased are thus relevant and different from what was previously done to manage short-term rates. QE has several transmission channels: besides the direct impact on prices/yields of the purchased assets (Treasuries or ABSs), it triggers portfolio adjustments on other assets, like equities or exchange rates, and is accompanied by wealth effects. While the theoretical debate on the exact channels of transmission remains active, many event and time-series studies have tried to measure the QE effects. John Williams (2013) presents a survey of several studies and reports that USD 600 billion of FED asset purchases achieves a result equivalent to a cut in the federal funds rate of 0.75 to 1 percentage point.1                                                  1  For a survey of results, see John Williams (2013), President of the San Francisco FED, “Lessons from the financial crisis for unconventional monetary policy” NBER Conference, October. See also Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2013), “The Ins and Outs of LSAPs,” presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Jackson Hole Symposium on the Global Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary Policy; IMF Policy Paper on “Global impact and challenges of unconventional monetary policies”, October; Neely, C. (2013), “Unconventional Monetary Policy Had Large International Effects”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper 2010–018E, updated August 2013; Joyce, M., M. Tong and R. Woods (2011), “The United Kingdom’s quantitative easing policy: design, operation and impact”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q3. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches The concerns expressed by various economists and the media that the extraordinary increases in the monetary base in many countries would lead to significant inflation rates, never materialised. As the following slide illustrates, there was no transmission in the prevailing economic situation by the banks, to credit or broad money aggregates. Inflation did not respond, putting in doubt the quantitative vision about its origin. When asked about what Japan should do to overcome deflation, Milton Friedman answered in 2000: “It is very simple. They can buy long-term government securities and they can keep buying them and providing high-powered money until the high-powered money starts getting the economy into an expansion”.2 The more recent Japanese experience is still open to analysis but the channels envisioned by Milton Friedman have seemingly not been operating in the other advanced economies. As mentioned, the transmission channels at play in the recent QE experiences are indeed different from the traditional quantitative view. Chart 2  The ECB monetary policy in the European crisis. As the financial crisis led to the Great Recession and then evolved into the European sovereign debt crisis, the ECB started providing liquidity in fixed-rate full allotment mode, progressively and considerably extended the maturity of its loans to commercial banks, widened the set of eligible collateral, made medium-scale purchases of financial assets and announced the Outright Monetary Transactions programme. As a result of these extraordinary measures, at the end of 2012 calm started returning in financial markets, leading to lower financial spreads and a reduction in volatility. The initial                                                  2  Quoted by Michael Woodford in his 2012 Jackson Hole paper “Methods of policy accommodation at the interest rate lower bound”. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 signs of economic recovery started appearing. Preliminary formal analyses indicate that non-standard measures were instrumental in supporting financial intermediation and economic activity in the euro area.3 Despite these recent, encouraging developments on the financial side, real economy recovery has been weak and inflation outcomes have been surprisingly low. The new challenge we face in the euro area today is to avert the risk of a prolonged period of excessively low inflation. Euro area annual HICP inflation was 0.5% in May 2014, after averaging 0.7% in the first four months of the year. The June 2014 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections foresee a gradual increase in annual HICP inflation towards levels consistent with our definition of price stability. The pace of the increase is, however, slow. From 0.7% in 2014, inflation is expected to reach 1.1% in 2015 and, more uncertainly, 1.4% in 2016. All three figures have been revised downward in comparison with the March 2014 ECB staff macroeconomic projections and portray a situation distant from our objective of keeping inflation below but close to 2% in the medium-term. Inflation developments alone go a long way in motivating the combination of the measures announced by the Governing Council of the ECB on 5 June, to provide additional monetary policy accommodation and to support lending to the real economy. This package included further reductions in the key ECB interest rates, new longer-term refinancing operations targeted to stimulate credit creation, and preparatory work related to outright purchases of asset-backed securities. In addition, the ECB committed to an extension of the fixed-rate full allotment regime in tender procedures and decided to suspend the weekly fine-tuning operation sterilising the liquidity injected under the Securities Markets Programme. Over time these measures will contribute to a return of inflation to levels closer to 2% and safeguard the anchoring of medium to long-term inflation expectations. Nevertheless, with policy interest rates close to the effective lower bound and persistently timid growth prospects, there is a small, but non-insignificant risk that any additional adverse shock may open the door to a more protracted period of low inflation. Against this background, I would like to organise the rest of my remarks today around three issues. First, why do we find ourselves in the current, low inflation predicament? I sustain that inflation fluctuations have been somewhat surprising ever since the beginning of the Great Recession. In part, they were the result of adverse exogenous shocks. To some extent however, they were also connected with unwarranted variations in markets’ expectations of the future stance of monetary policy. Second, I will argue that the Governing Council meeting at the beginning of June is important not only for the decisions that were actually adopted. It is important also for the clear signal that we provided about the determination to do more in the future, in the event of additional downward pressures on inflation. I will develop these two points which deal with the way our recent policy decisions will produce effects. The third question is: how would the ECB react, should the risks of a protracted period of low inflation materialise? At this point in time, this is essentially a scenario analysis – and specifically an analysis of a low probability scenario. Outright purchases of a range of financial assets would be effective in this situation, but structural reforms would also be essential to spur economic growth.                                                  3  See Giannone, D., M. Lenza, H. Pill and L. Reichlin (2011): “Non-standard policy measures and monetary developments”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1290; De Pooter, M., R.F. Martin, and S. Pruitt (2012): “The effects of official bond market intervention in Europe”, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, mimeo; Eser, F., and B. Schwaab (2013): “The yield impact of central bank asset purchases: The case of the ECB’s Securities Markets Programme”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1587 and Ghysels, E., J. Idier, S. Manganelli, and O. Vergote (2014): “A high frequency assessment of the ECB Securities Markets Programme”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1642; Altavilla, C., D. Giannone, and M. Lenza (2014): “The financial and macroeconomic effects of the OMT announcements”, CSEF Working Paper No. 352. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Inflation developments since the Great Recession Euro area inflation developments over the past six years have been remarkably volatile. From the 4.1% peak of July 2008, HICP inflation fell markedly at the trough of the recession and reached negative levels in the short period between June and October 2009. However, in the second half of 2009, prices started increasing again, also due to a rise in energy prices. In spite of a persisting level of economic slack, the HICP inflation climbed rapidly and steadily up to a peak of 3% from September to November 2011. Similar developments could be observed in the U.S., where inflation remained stable after a decline in the first months of 2009 and gave rise to a debate on the “missing disinflation”.4  If those developments were somewhat surprising for their swiftness, more recent inflation dynamics have displayed a remarkably high degree of persistence. As of 2012, euro area inflation started falling again, and has continued to do so to date. Since October 2013, the year-on-year rate of growth of the headline HICP has oscillated between 1% and 0.5%, in spite of the slowly consolidating economic recovery. A situation of low inflation is now common to many advanced economies, creating a moral general puzzle. All in all, the lack of a tight relationship between inflation developments and estimates of slack in economic activity, such as the output gap, is not surprising from the point of view of modern monetary theories. The new Keynesian Phillips curve suggests that, net of erratic factors, inflation is determined by the whole path of expected future output gaps, not just its current level. Hence, economic slack at any given point in time need not be associated with a deflationary episode, if it is accompanied by expectations that the output gap will eventually turn sufficiently positive. In turn, expectations of the future stance of monetary policy play a key role in determining expected future output gaps. The absence of persistent disinflation in 2009 may thus be ascribed to the monetary accommodation imparted by many central banks between the end of 2008 and 2009 through both standard and non-standard tools. The monetary policy easing was commensurate to the size of the shock, i.e. such as to roughly offset the disinflationary pressures produced by the recession.5 The recent fall in inflation could equivalently be ascribed to unwarranted fears of a possible tightening of the monetary policy stance not too far into the future. Such fears could clearly be observed one year ago, when the Federal Reserve announced the tapering of its large-scale asset purchases. In spite of clear Fed communication on the disconnect between this decision and the timing of “lift-off” of policy interest rates, the tapering announcement quickly led to a rise in forward interest rates on both sides of the Atlantic. The ECB’s adoption of forward guidance in July 2013 was largely the result of these unwarranted developments. Recent studies confirm that our forward guidance was successful in reversing the previous increase in forward-rates and in clarifying the persistently accommodative intonation of the ECB policy stance.6 The same market logic that led to the interpretation of the Fed’s tapering announcement as a signal of a forthcoming tightening of policy interest rates may also have been applied to interpret the implications of the reduction in the size of the ECB balance sheet that occurred                                                  4  See, for example, Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2013), “Is The Phillips Curve Alive and Well After All? Inﬂation Expectations and the Missing Disinﬂation,” NBER Working Paper 19598; see also Hall, R.E. (2011), “The Long Slump,” American Economic Review 101, pp. 431–469; and Ball, L. and S. Mazumder (2011), “Inﬂation Dynamics and the Great Recession,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 337–402. 5  For a formal analysis of this point, see Del Negro, M., M. Giannoni and F. Schorfeide (2013), “Inflation in the Great Recession and New Keynesian Models”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 618. 6  Schwaab, B. (2013): “The impact of the ECB’s forward guidance”, ECB mimeo. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 over the past couple of years. From a total dimension equal to over 32.5% of GDP in June of 2012, our balance sheet has shrunk to 19% in May 2014, as a result of banks’ decision to exercise the early repayment option for outstanding 3-year LTROs. The contraction in the ECB balance sheet is particularly striking when compared to the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve, which continued expanding from 19% of GDP at the end of 2012 to 25.7 % in May 2014. These developments, which are accompanied by a similar evolution of the respective monetary bases, if jointly interpreted as signals of the relative evolution of future policy rates in the two monetary areas, may have contributed to sustain the appreciation in the exchange rate of the euro which, against the U.S. dollar, went from 1.21 in July 2012 to a peak above 1.39 in May 2014. The lagged impact of the marked euro appreciation played an important role in determining the recent, low inflation outcomes. Since mid-2012 the exchange rate appreciation is estimated to explain a decrease of 0.5 percentage points in our inflation rate. Together with falling energy and food prices, it explains the bulk of the imported downside pressure on euro area consumer prices. Of course, the euro appreciation may also have reflected other factors, for example changes in attitudes towards risk. Such factors can be expected to produce only temporary effects on inflation, and would therefore not normally require a monetary policy response. Unwarranted fluctuations in markets’ perceptions over the future stance of monetary policy, however, could be a more persistent source of low-inflation risk. In this case, a monetary policy reaction would be necessary to steer perceptions away from unlikely future outcomes. How will our recent policy decisions make a difference? From this standpoint, I believe that there are three clear channels through which the decisions adopted by the Governing Council in June is effective. The first channel is standard and has to do with the expansionary impact of the measures on the real economy and inflation. To gauge the extent of such an impact, it is useful to refer again to the ECB macroeconomic projections and recall that they are conditioned on a number of technical assumptions. These assumptions relate to the evolution of macroeconomic and financial variables, which specifically include market expectations of short-term interest rates and of exchange rate developments over the projection horizon. The conditioning assumptions for the June 2014 projections were computed based on information available on 14 May 2014. Over the past month, financial market prices have adjusted to reflect the ECB decisions in early June. As a result, expected short-term rates have fallen by 10 basis points at all horizons and the euro has depreciated since May by 2.5% to 1.354. If taken as new conditioning assumptions, these developments would move the whole path of the inflation projections upwards and ensure a faster return to price stability. The second channel through which the recent ECB decisions will be consequential is the credit channel, which is expected to be positively impacted by the new targeted LTRO facility and the extension of the ACC programme.7 The third channel has to do with expectations. The announcement of the measures adopted at the beginning of June has been accompanied by a clear communication concerning the future path of policy. In his Press conference, President Draghi emphasised again that “key ECB interest rates will remain at present levels for an extended period of time in view of the current outlook for                                                  7  The Additional Credit Claims (ACC) programme is an extension of our collateral policy to accept directly loans to non-financial firms as eligible collateral for banks to borrow from the ECB. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches inflation”. He also added that “if required, we will act swiftly with further monetary policy easing. The Governing Council is unanimous in its commitment to using also unconventional instruments within its mandate should it become necessary to further address risks of too prolonged a period of low inflation.” With this statement, the ECB has left no doubts about its resolve to avoid any downward turn in the euro area inflation developments, because such developments would be extremely harmful. With interest rates at their effective lower bound and persistently timid growth prospects, lower than expected inflation rates would increase the real value of debt, slowing down the deleveraging process of borrowers, both public and private. If a low inflation outlook became entrenched in the expectations of firms and households, the real interest rate would rise, leading consumers and investors to postpone their expenditure plans. A vicious circle of lower demand and lower prices could ensue. How would the ECB react, should the risks of a protracted period of low inflation materialise? But what exactly could the ECB do in the face of a protracted period of low inflation and economic stagnation? As I have already mentioned, the ECB stands ready to deploy additional unconventional instruments, should the likelihood of this scenario increase. The policy response would involve a broad-based asset-purchase programme. The experience of other countries with such programmes testifies that they can be effectively designed. As previously mentioned, various empirical studies suggest that the large purchases carried out in the U.S. and in the U.K. were instrumental in decreasing yields by several tens of basis points, with spillover effects on other asset prices, including mortgage rates and exchange rates. In turn, GDP growth and inflation rates also appear to have been significantly affected. After all, even if they have to use new instruments, central banks cannot avoid their responsibility in ensuring price stability, as long as inflation continues to be determined by monetary policy. Broad-based asset-purchases would allow the ECB to continue pursuing its mandate even under more adverse circumstances. It is however important that other policies also play their part. An extreme adverse scenario that has recently appeared in the public debate is that of a “secular stagnation”.8 This is effectively a situation where the “natural” long run growth rate of the economy falls significantly and permanently, e.g. because of a fall in the growth rate of population or because of a fall in technological progress, or both. This scenario is only still a possibility, but it is illustrative of a broader need for structural policies to again unleash the growth potential of our economies. Public spending should be redirected towards public investment in infrastructures and education. International trade and labour mobility should be fostered. These are the best recipes to ensure that the secular stagnation will remain a purely academic hypothesis. Conclusions Today, I have focused on the low inflation challenges, but let me conclude with a quick reminder that we remain watchful of financial market developments. A necessary condition to ensure the effectiveness of our intended monetary policy stance is to alleviate credit supply constraints. This explains why new targeted LTROs are part of the package of measures decided by the Governing Council in June.                                                  8  See e.g. Krugman, P (2013) “Secular Stagnation, Coalmines, Bubbles, and Larry Summers” http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com; Krugman, P. (2014) “Inflation Targets Reconsidered”, presented at ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra; Summers, L. (2013) “Remarks at IMF Fourteenth Annual Research Conference in Honor of Stanley Fischer’’; Eggertsson, G. and Mehrotra, N. (2014) “A model of Secular Stagnation”, mimeo. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 To sum up, the main challenge monetary policy faces in the euro area today is to avert the risk of a prolonged period of excessively low inflation. The ECB has adopted significant new measures in June to ensure a return of inflation to levels closer to 2% and to safeguard the anchoring of medium to long-term inflation expectations. It also has powder left for an additional expansion of the monetary policy stance, in case of downward departures of inflation and inflation expectations from current projections.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Citi Microentrepreneurship Awards – more than an awards program Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central bank of the Philippines), at the Media Launch of the 2014 Citi Microentrepreneurship Awards (CMA), Manila, 18 June 2014. *      *      * Citi Philippines CEO Batara Sianturi; our 2013 Citi Microentrepreneurship Awardees; colleagues from the BSP; fellow advocates of microfinance; our special guests from the media; ladies and gentlemen, good morning! I am pleased to confirm the good news: the microfinance sector continues to grow and empower more microentrepreneurs across the Philippines. As of September 2013, 183 banks provided 8.1 billion pesos in microfinance loans to over a million borrowers – 1,017,351 Pinoys to be exact. This translates to an average bank loan of eight thousand pesos per borrower. Seven years ago – in December 2006, the total microfinance loan portfolio of banks was 4 billion pesos for 650,000 borrowers or an average of 6,150 pesos per borrower. In other words, bank loans to microenterprises increased by 102% in seven years, while the number of microentrepreneurs who accessed micro loans from banks increased by 56%. Over the same period, average micro loans increased by 30%. Equally significant, the accumulated bank savings of microentrepreneurs jumped from P1.4 billion in 2006 to P8.8 billion, an increase of 525%. This means the average deposit per microentrepreneur increased from two thousand pesos in 2006 to 8,650 pesos in 2013, an improvement of 332% in seven years. We realize these are cold figures. However, the stories behind these figures prove the power of microfinance to transform and improve lives. As co-chair of the selection committee for CMA for 10 years now, I have personally witnessed how microentrepreneurs survived scarcity by making their business a reliable source of family income – all because they accessed and sensibly used microfinance loans. As a regulator, it is a joy to see tangible proof that our microfinance policies and regulations have such a powerful impact on families and communities. And so today, we are pleased to present to you the 2013 CMA winners who will share their unique stories, challenges, and how they finally found the road to success. They are the latest batch of inspiring good role models for other entrepreneurial Pinoys. So far, this annual search for outstanding microentrepreneurs has generated 93 winners since it was jointly launched in 2002 by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, the Microfinance Council of the Philippines and Citi. Since then, this award-winning program has been replicated by Citi in 32 other countries. I am also pleased to announce that even as the global survey of Economic Intelligence Unit consistently ranks the Philippines as having the best regulatory framework for the development of microfinance, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas continues to work on regulatory enhancements in response to changing market needs and developments. Among others, the BSP has done the following: • raised the average daily balance of microdeposits to promote higher savings rate among microfinance clients; 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  • enabled microinsurance providers to expand coverage to families of microfinance clients; • improved procedures in the product approval of housing microfinance loans and micro-agri loans to simplify the process by which banks can offer innovative microfinance products; • allowed the acceptance of alternative Identification Documents (IDs) to open bank accounts, including those issued to persons with disability or under government welfare; & • institutionalized a Consumer Protection Framework to provide comprehensive protection for all financial consumers, including microfinance clients. Ladies and gentlemen. While we celebrate our milestones, we know that there is so much more that we can do to improve the lives of Filipinos, particularly those who live in poverty. We can help them help themselves by showing them the opportunities microfinance can provide. As we launch this year’s search for new CMA awardees, we hope we can gain the interest of more Filipinos to join the microfinance sector. Let us therefore continue to spread the word about microfinance and the stories of our CMA winners some of whom are with us today. Through them, we are reassured again and again that microfinance is a viable option for entrepreneurial Pinoys. Mabuhay ang microfinance! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat!  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Seppo Honkapohja: International spillovers from unconventional monetary policy easing and exit – what do we know? Remarks by Mr Seppo Honkapohja, Member of the Board of the Bank of Finland, in the panel session “Unconventional Monetary Policy and Its Reversal: Policy Options for Growth and Stability”, Asian Economic Panel, Helsinki, 9 June 2014.  *      *      * Introduction: the global financial crisis and the crisis in Europe The start of the global financial crisis can be dated in different ways. One plausible date is almost seven years ago in August 9 in 2007 when significant turmoil in financial markets appeared. This unrest continued and in September 2008 a financial panic brought financial markets to a halt and the resulting economic downturn in 2008–2009 which for a while resembled the pace of developments in the Great Depression.1 In Europe, a further stage of the crisis appeared in 2010 when a sovereign debt crisis hit some euro area countries. Some of the roots in the Euro crisis were due to specific features of construction of the European Monetary Union, but the crisis was also triggered by the second-wave shocks from the global financial crisis. The first-round effect of the 2007–2008 panic was a vast deterioration of balance sheets of banks and other financial institutions. Growing uncertainty about asset and collateral quality squeezed credit and dried up liquidity. The downward spiral of the financial system, unseen in developed countries for eight decades, called for prompt and extraordinary policy actions. Monetary policy responses Management of short-term interest rates became the key policy tool and the stabilization of inflation the central policy objective during the Great Moderation period. This standard policy framework turned out insufficient to contain the panic. The Federal Funds Rate in the United States hit the zero lower bound in December 2008 and has remained at this level ever since. The European Central Bank also started a series of reductions of its Main Refinancing Operations (MRO) rate. With little or no room for further interest rate reductions, the central banks in developed countries turned their attention to highly unconventional measures, previously regarded as inconsistent with the inflation targeting paradigm. The objective of these measures was to maintain financial liquidity and stability. However, the move towards longer-term maturities was also designed to flatten the yield curve and stimulate real investment. In November 2008 the Federal Reserve started the first round of quantitative easing and began to buy a wide class of assets, including mortgage-backed securities, long-term government debt and bank debt. By mid-2010 the stock of these assets at the FED reached 2.1 trillion dollars. In the second round, it bought another 600 bln USD. Similar non-standard measures have been taken by the Bank of England and Bank of Japan. The unconventional measures of the ECB in response to the crisis have been somewhat different. ECB’s tools focused on supporting liquidity and funding for the banking system. The ECB introduced the fixed rate and full allotment principle to all refinancing operations in October 2008. It extended collateral eligibility to less liquid assets. Between 2009 and 2011, the Longer-Term Refinancing Operations (LTROs) were extended to maturities of up to                                                 1 Rajan, R. (2013), A step in the dark: unconventional monetary policy after the crisis. Andrew Crockett Memorial Lecture, BIS, 23 June 2013. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  3 years. The ECB also started a purchase program of covered bonds which are a key source of funding credit for private banks in many Euro area countries.2 Most importantly, the ECB did not initiate purchases of government bonds. However, in 2010–2012 the ECB operated the Securities Market Programme (SMP), which amounted to sterilized interventions on public and private bond markets (in practice only public). This was done to to facilitate monetary policy transmission in countries that faced severe sovereign debt problems. The culmination of the Eurozone crisis in mid-2012 was tamed by the creation of the ECB’s OMT (Outright Monetary Transactions) program. I quote President Draghi’s promise that “Within [its] mandate, the ECB is ready to do whatever it takes to preserve the euro”.3 OMT is a conditional promise to buy in the secondary market without limit government bonds of selected Euro area countries. OMT has worked and remarkably, there has so far not been any need to activate the program. International spillovers Liquidity support operations by central banks at different stages, explicit state guarantees to banks and expansionary policies succeeded in stopping the recession, which changed the course of developments in comparison to the 1930’s. These unconventional policy measures were not implemented in a group of economically disconnected islands, but in a globalized world with synchronized financial cycles and few borders for capital.4 It is therefore important to ask what the consequences of these new forms of monetary policy for other countries are and how strong are the potential spillovers. One new line of theoretical research points to positive effects of international spillovers.5 If country-specific shocks have global repercussions and intermediaries in both countries face similar balance sheet constraints (think USA and the Euro area), a policy implemented in one county will help the other one as well. However, if these policies are costly, they may lead to a free-rider problem in which both countries wait for the policy being implemented in the other. These predictions seem to be confirmed empirically, at least in the US case. The first round of QE seems to have substantially reduced bond yields not only in the US, but also in Germany, Japan and the UK.6 It also contributed to the weakening of the US dollar, although the impact on net exports is a bit harder to assess.7 The evidence for ECB policy spillovers is, on the other hand, much weaker. This may in part be due to the fact that the European Central Bank focused on reducing intra-Euro yields. These operations actually lifted German bond yields as the safe heaven effect subsided and in fact strengthened the Euro. The net sale of Eurozone bonds (i.e. net inflows) was strongly                                                 2 See e.g. Cour-Thimann and Winkler (2013), “The ECB’s non-standard monetary policy measures”, ECB Working Paper No. 1528, April 2013. 3 Speech by Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank at the Global Investment Conference in London 26 July 2012 (www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2012/html/sp120726.en.html).  4 Rey Hélène (2013), “Dilemma not Trilemma. The global financial cycle and monetary policy independence”, paper presented at the Jackson Hole Symposium, August 2013.  5 Dedola L., Karadi P., Lombardo G. (2013), “Global implications of national unconventional policies”, Journal of Monetary Economics, No.60, 2013.  6 Neely Ch. (2013), “Unconventional Monetary Policy Had Large International Effects”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper 2010–018D, August 2013.  7 Glick R., Leduc S. (2013), “The Effects of Unconventional and Conventional U.S. Monetary Policy on the Dollar”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper, 2013–11, May 2013.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  reflected in the financial account dynamics and closely co-moved with the exchange rate since the beginning of the crisis. More generally, however, spillovers seem to be asymmetric, with significant impact of the FED abroad, but not the other way round. For Japan and the UK, the smaller size of these operations may be one explanatory factor.8 At the very least, therefore, unconventional policies had marked effects on exchange rates. In the Eurozone, the impact was in the opposite direction than in economies which implemented QE. Currency depreciations of large economies, in turn, clearly recall thoughts about beggar-thy-neighbor policies9 and procyclical waves of capital flows going abroad.10 This leads me to discuss the impact of unconventional policies on emerging economies. It has been widely acknowledged that the low returns on assets in the developed world have substantially increased capital inflows to emerging economies, which offer higher yields. For example, a substantial increase of non-financial corporate debt was observed.11 Equity prices went up and sovereign yields subsided.12 The side effect of this demand was real appreciation of these currencies. In fact, the international spillovers of FED’s QE seem to affect emerging economies more strongly than advanced ones, or even for the US itself.13 The implications of currency depreciation in one country may theoretically have some positive effects as well. In an integrated world negative demand shocks spill over and can create a liquidity trap in both countries.14 The solution to escape it is to inflate the economy. Done in isolation, this leads to currency depreciation and beggar-thy-neighbor effects. But if both countries inflate, then depreciations cancel out and both economies can get out from the trap. Appreciation may be a problem for a small open economy facing its own zero lower bound, because the bound makes its own monetary policy less effective.15 But if the goods that the economy produces are complements of those produced in the U.S. (think of commodities used as input in production), the net effects might be positive. Tapering Since September 2012, the FED has been purchasing MBS and treasuries at 85 bln per month. In May 2013 it announced a gradual unwinding of QE3, which was then put off/postponed in September. Eventually, the tapering started in January 2014, and it is currently 45 bln USD per month.                                                 8 Rogers J., Scotti Ch., Wright J. (2014), “Evaluating Asset-Market Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: A Cross-Country Comparison”, International Finance Discussion Papers, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, No. 1101, March 2014.  9 Eichengreen B. (2013), “Currency War or International Policy Coordination?”, mimeo, January 2013.  10 Reinhart C. and Reinhart V. (2008), “Capital Flow Bonanzas”, NBER Working Paper No. 14321, September 2008.  11 Lo Duca M., Nicoletti G., Vidal Martinez A. (2014), “Global Corporate Bond Issuance. What Role for US Quantitative Easing”, ECB Working Paper No. 1649, March 2014.  12 Fratzscher M., Lo Duca M., Straub R. (2013), “On the International Spillovers of US Quantitative Easing”, ECB Working Paper No. 1557, June 2013.  13 Chen Q., Filardo A., He D., Zhu F. (2012), “International spillovers of central bank balance sheet policies”, BIS Papers No.66, October 2012.  14 Jeanne O. (2009), “The Global Liquidity Trap”, mimeo, October 2009.  15 Haberis A., Lipinska A. (2012), “International Policy Spillovers at the Zero Lower Bound”, Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2012–23, April 2012.  
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The announcement and postponement episode stirred some unease internationally, not least in emerging economies. The economic debate has then focused on whether the tapering will trigger a pull-out of capital from the emerging world and potentially trigger a new wave of turbulence, akin to those from 1990s and 1980s.16 Preliminary research suggests that news about tapering did have indeed an impact abroad. Announcements by chairman Bernanke were are associated with larger nominal exchange rate depreciations, stock market contractions as well as increases of credit default swaps.17 Although the initial impact of these announcements has not been necessarily correlated with the strength of the country’s fundamentals, over time the attention of financial markets has turned towards more fragile countries. This includes mainly economies which initially witnessed sharp inflows and real appreciations reflected in large current account deficits.18 India, South Africa, Turkey, Argentina had to increase interest rates early this year to contain exchange rate slump. Nevertheless, the currency depreciations have not been a unifying story in the developing world. In fact, according to the January 2014 World Bank report, over 60% of developing countries witnessed appreciation throughout the taper-talk period (April–August 2013).19 In many emerging countries, e.g. Chile, Malaysia, and Mexico, the depreciations were much more pronounced. The diversity of responses to tapering across different countries, even those within the same geographic region, suggests that domestic factors are the key in amplifying or absorbing these foreign shocks. One clear aspect is the degree of leverage in the banking sector, which has been on the rise in many Asian countries since early 2000s.20 It remains a valid question whether and to what extent can the potential negative effects of tapering be spared. The way of implementing the tapering may play a role per se. There are two aspects of this problem. The first is the degree of commitment to policy announcements.21 The second is the potential for policy synchronization and cooperation. The mandate of all major central banks is focused solely on domestic policy objectives. Nevertheless, the interconnectedness of global financial markets means that domestic policy decisions which are harmful abroad may ultimately backfire at home. The financial crisis has proved that the interpretation of the legal mandate can be subject to some interpretation, depending on the severity of circumstances. It can also be noted that international coordination of monetary policies is not without precedent. One example is the Plaza Accord in 1985, a joint intervention to weaken the US dollar. Also, in October 2008 four major central banks cut their key policy rates in a coordinated fashion. At this junction it is not clear if tapering is going to have clear negative effects in emerging economies. The World Bank documents made negative forecast revisions of GDP growth internationally after May 2013. On the other hand, for financially stable economies, moderate                                                 16 Calvo G., Leiderman L., Reinhart C. (1993), “Capital Inflows and Real Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America”, International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 40:1, March 1993.  17 Aizenman J., Binici M., Hutchison M. (2014), “The Transmission of Federal Reserve Tapering News to Emerging Financial Markets”, NBER Working Paper No. 19980, March 2014.  18 Eichengreen B., Gupta P. (2013), “Tapering Talk. The Impact of Expectations of Reduced Federal Reserve Security Purchases on Emerging Markets”, mimeo, December 2013.  19 World Bank Global Economic Prospects, January 2014.  20 Forbes K. (2014), “Capital Flow Volatility and Contagion: A Focus on Asia”, Reserve Bank of India – Asian Development Bank volume on Managing Capital Flows, forthcoming.  21 Woodford M., “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound”, paper presented at the Jackson Hole Symposium, August 2012.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  depreciations may turn expansionary.22 Finally, unwinding unconventional monetary policy is ultimately a signal of US recovery and should therefore be interpreted as good news. Another piece of good news might be that, at the end, the spillover effects of policies like QE seem to work through standard, well understood channels, i.e. through exchange rate movements and interest rate differentials. From this perspective it is hard to say what makes these unconventional policies distinct.23                                                 22 Céspedes L., Chang R., Velasco A. (2004), “Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate Policy”, American Economic Review, Vol.94, No.4, September 2004.  23 Chinn M. (2014), “Global Spillovers and Domestic Monetary Policy. The Effects of Conventional and Unconventional Measures”, paper prepared for the 12th BIS annual conference “Navigating the great recession: what role for monetary policy?”, 20–21 June 2013, Luzern, Switzerland.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Barry Whiteside: Microfinance initiatives in Fiji Opening address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the launch of the 2014 Microfinance Awards, Reserve Bank of Fiji, Suva, 2 June 2014. *      *      * Fellow National Financial Inclusion Taskforce Members Our valued sponsors of the Microfinance Awards: Life Insurance Corporation of India and the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme All our Stakeholders in Financial Inclusion Colleagues and members of the Media Ladies and Gentlemen A very good evening to you all. It is with great pleasure that I welcome you all to the launch of our 2nd National Microfinance Awards. A number of us were fortunate to be present during the first Awards presentation ceremony last October, which coincided with the Pacific Microfinance Week Conference in Nadi. At the time we experienced the great excitement amongst our winners, but what was also gratifying were the emotions and sentiments shown by all the regional participants at the Conference. The National Microfinance Awards is a special event in the RBF calendar. This is when we get the opportunity to pay tribute to the key stakeholders and recognise the valuable contribution that microfinance makes to the national economy. More importantly it is about recognizing and supporting our budding micro-entrepreneurs. I am pleased to learn from last year’s winners, that participating in the Awards has helped them raise their strategies, goals and ways to improve and achieve a better future. Furthermore it has inspired their respective communities, highlighting the hard work and discipline that is needed in keeping a small business running. At the Reserve Bank we are pleased to learn that as these micro-businesses have grown the business owners often involve their family members. This has provided valuable work experience, especially for their young ones. The extra income to the family translates into important advantages, including a chance for a better education. Micro-entrepreneurs not only create a path to economic self-reliance but they also bring positive social and economic benefits to their local communities and the economy as a whole. We all know many examples of large successful companies in Fiji today that started from very humble beginnings. In 2013, there were approximately 4,200 micro, small and medium enterprises or MSMEs in Fiji accounting for approximately 12 percent of our GDP or around $800 million. MSMEs, when given the right support, have the potential to lift the economy and can contribute strongly to employment, an issue which has been very much at the forefront of our development and growth objectives. I am pleased that the Reserve Bank of Fiji has been at the forefront of developments of microfinance initiatives in Fiji. But I am also deeply proud of the goodwill of all our fellow stakeholders who have come forward in a great partnership at the national level to drive our financial inclusion programs. At the Bank we continue to encourage the financial services providers such as the commercial banks and microfinance institutions, not to just look at the extension of credit as a means of expanding economic opportunities. We would like them to seriously consider viable partnerships, synergies and developing innovative products and services. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches In recent years, microfinance providers here in Fiji have expanded their services to deliver financial education and training, entrepreneurial training, micro-insurance and various other services to budding entrepreneurs. The goals of these supplementary activities are twofold: firstly to improve the survival rate of the borrowers’ start-up businesses and secondly to mitigate credit risks for the lender. Ladies and gentlemen, I want to affirm the important role that microfinance plays in creating opportunities for those who most need them, allowing our small entrepreneurs the ability to create a viable business. Successful microbusinesses provide jobs as well as valuable products and services to their communities. What is clear is that microfinance, and financial inclusion in general, has grown and adapted considerably during its short history in Fiji. In 2010 we set ourselves a target of reaching 150,000 unbanked Fijians by the end of this year and we celebrated achieving that target well ahead of schedule in March. I hope that our entrepreneurs and service providers will sustain their energetic spirit of innovation and experimentation as they strive to become more self-sufficient and adapt to our ever-changing economy. Concluding statements Ladies and gentlemen, it is difficult for one organisation to run these Microfinance Awards on its own. We are therefore extremely grateful that our supporting partners from the inaugural awards have again stepped forward this year. So thank you very much to the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme and the Life Insurance Corporation of India. The Reserve Bank acknowledges your continuous support towards our financial inclusion initiatives and we look forward to yet another exciting event this year. The Microfinance Awards categories remain as follows:  Category 1 – Best Microfinance Entrepreneur (Individual);  Category 2 – Best Microfinance Entrepreneur (Partnership); and  Category 3 – Best Microfinance Service Provider. The Awards ceremony is scheduled for the 6th of November 2014 and I understand that nominations are now being accepted. I wish this year’s candidates all the very best and now take much pleasure in inviting our sponsors to say a few words. Thank You. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 R Gandhi: Role of Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs) in financial sector – regulatory challenges Text of the Frank Moraes oration lecture by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Chennai, 16 June 2014. *      *      * Assistance provided by Ms. Sindhu Pancholy is gratefully acknowledged. 1. Good evening Ladies and Gentlemen. 2.  It is with a great feeling of pride that I stand before you to deliver this oration in memory of the legendary Frank Moraes. I congratulate the United Writers Association and Frank Moraes Foundation for regularly organizing the distinguished Frank Moraes Oration lecture. I join everyone here in congratulating Chevalier Dr. K. Thiagarajan on being accorded with the prestigious Celebrity Champion Honour instituted by Community Welfare Foundation, in recognition of his pioneering initiatives relating to birth-control and outstanding community service rendered for over four decades. 3.  Frank Moraes was an eminent journalist who was known for having extended the realm of journalism to socio-political dimensions of development, fearless comment of the highest in the land and a broader vision of India, both within and outside the country. He was fiercely independent, with full faith in his own convictions. He is rumored to have kept his resignation letter in his pocket. Basically a lawyer, Moraes became a journalist and later a writer with a passion for writing contemporary Indian history. My heartful thanks to the United Writers Association and to Chevalier Dr. Thiagarajan in particular for giving me this privilege to deliver this oration in Frank Moraes’ memory. 4.  I have chosen the Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs): Regulatory Challenges as the subject for this oration. 5.  If it looks like a duck, quacks like a duck, and acts like a duck, then it is a duck – or so the saying goes. What about an institution that looks like a bank, acts like a bank and behaves like a bank? Is it a bank? Often it is not a bank – it is a shadow bank. Shadow banks 6.  The term “shadow bank” was coined by economist Paul McCulley in a 2007 speech at the annual financial symposium hosted by the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank in Jackson Hole, Wyoming. In McCulley’s talk, shadow banking had a distinctly U.S. focus though there were shadow banking institutions in the UK, Europe and even in China. He referred mainly to non – bank financial institutions that engaged in what economists call maturity transformation. Commercial banks engage in maturity transformation when they use deposits, which are normally short term, to fund loans that are longer term. Shadow banks do something similar. Further, they do much more. They are the hedge funds; they were the conduits for asset backed securities; they were the special purpose vehicles for highly leveraged activity, with serious asset liability mismatch. 7.  The Financial Stability Board (FSB), an organization of financial and supervisory authorities from major economies and international financial institutions, developed a broader definition of shadow banks that includes all entities outside the regulated banking system that perform the core banking function of credit intermediation (that is, taking money from savers and lending it to borrowers). 8.  Why are they called shadow banks? Because there was so little transparency, it often was unclear who owed (or would owe later) what to whom. Most of their liabilities were off balance sheet; so also most of their assets. As someone put it, the shadow banking entities were characterized by a lack of disclosure and information about the value of their 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches assets (or sometimes even what the assets were); opaque governance and ownership structures; little regulatory or supervisory oversight of the type associated with traditional banks; virtually no loss-absorbing capital or cash for redemptions; and a lack of access to formal liquidity support to help prevent fire sales. 9.  How did they come on scene? Why nobody bothered about them? That was because they did not mobilize demand deposits and did not engage in payment services. Maturity transformation i.e. raising funds and indulging in lending and investment activities is a legitimate economic activity. Since public funds were not to be called upon to rescue these institutions, they were not regulated. 10.  However, during the financial crisis of 2007 and 08, these shadow banks received heightened attention, because of their role in precipitating the crisis. The world woke up rudely to the crisis and more specifically to the existence of shadow banks. 11.  Demands for regulating them attained increasing crescendo. Economist Paul Krugman said that the shadow banking system was the core cause of the crisis. “As the shadow banking system expanded to rival or even surpass conventional banking in importance, politicians and government officials should have realized that they were re-creating the kind of financial vulnerability that made the Great Depression possible – and they should have responded by extending regulations and the financial safety net to cover these new institutions. Influential figures should have proclaimed a simple rule: anything that does what a bank does, anything that has to be rescued in crises the way banks are, should be regulated like a bank.” 12.  The International Monetary Fund (IMF) also voiced that the spillover effects of the shadow banking system onto systemic risk needs to be contained. The G-20, duly prodded by the FSB declared that the shadow banking system should be regulated. The USA brought them under regulation in 2010 under the Dodd Frank Act. The UK goes further to even accord them central bank liquidity. Shadow banks in India 13.  Do we have shadow banks in India? The answer is yes. It is yes, because we have financial institutions which accept deposits and extend credit like banks, but we do not call them shadow banks; we call them the Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs). Are they in fact shadow banks? No, because these institutions have been under the regulatory structure of the Reserve Bank of India, right from 1963 i.e. 50 full years before the developed west is doing so. Evolution of regulation of NBFCs in India 14.  In the wake of failure of several banks in the late 1950s and early 1960s in India, large number of ordinary depositors lost their money. This led to the formation of the Deposit Insurance Corporation by the Reserve Bank, to provide guarantee to the depositors. (Later by adding a credit guarantee element, it became the DICGC). While this provided the necessary safety net for the bank depositors, the Reserve Bank did note that there were deposit taking activities undertaken by non-banking companies. Though they were not systemically as important as the banks, the Reserve Bank initiated regulating them, as they had the potential to cause pain to their depositors. 15.  Later in 1996, in the wake of the failure of a big NBFC, the Reserve Bank tightened the regulatory structure over the NBFCs, with rigorous registration requirements, enhanced reporting and supervision. Reserve Bank also decided that no more NBFC will be permitted to raise deposits from the public. Later when the NBFCs sourced their funding heavily from the banking system, it raised systemic risk issues. Sensing that it can cause financial instability, the Reserve Bank brought asset side prudential regulations onto the NBFCs. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 NBFCs of India 16.  The definition of the term “NBFC” entails a very wide meaning. NBFCs include not just the finance companies that the general public is largely familiar with; the term also entails wider group of companies that are engaged in investment business, insurance, chit fund, nidhi, merchant banking, stock broking, alternative investments, etc. as their principal business. Today I would be concentrating only on those NBFCs that are under the regulatory purview of the Reserve Bank. 17.  Traditionally, India has had a bank-dominated financial sector. Even so, there have always been NBFCs. These were in early times small family run businesses for deposits acceptance and lending activities. Even today, the sector may be “small” as compared to banking sector with a total asset size of just around 14 percent of that of scheduled commercial banks (other than RRBs). However, there is no denying that the sector has grown tremendously over the years in size, form and complexity, with some of the NBFCs operating as conglomerates having business interests spread to sectors like insurance, broking, mutual fund and real estate. Concomitant with the above, interconnectedness and systemic importance of the NBFC sector also have increased. 18.  NBFCs being financial intermediaries are engaged in the activity of bringing the saving and the investing community together. In this role they are perceived to be playing a complimentary role to banks rather than competitors, as it is a known fact that majority of the population in the country do not yet have access to mainstream financial products and services including a bank account and therefore the country needs institutions beyond banks for reaching out in areas where banks’ presence may be lesser. Thus NBFCs especially those catering to the urban and rural poor namely NBFC-MFIs and Asset Finance Companies have a complimentary role in the financial inclusion agenda of the country. Further, some of the big NBFCs viz; infrastructure finance companies are engaged in lending exclusively to the infrastructure sector and some are into factoring business, thereby giving fillip to the growth and development of the respective sector of their operations. Thus NBFCs have also carved niche business areas for them within the financial sector space and are also popular for providing customized products like second hand vehicle financing, mostly at the doorstep of the customer. In short, NBFCs bring the much needed diversity to the financial sector thereby diversifying the risks, increasing liquidity in the markets thereby promoting financial stability and bringing efficiency to the financial sector. 19.  At the same time, their growing size and interconnectedness also raise concerns on financial stability. Reserve Bank’s endeavour in this context has been to streamline NBFC regulation, address the risks posed by them to financial stability, address depositors’ and customers’ interests, address regulatory arbitrage and help the sector grow in a healthy and efficient manner. Some of the regulatory measures include identifying systemically important non-deposit taking NBFCs as those with asset size of ₹100 crore and above and bringing them under stricter prudential norms (CRAR and exposure norms), issuing guidelines on Fair Practices Code, aligning the guidelines on restructuring and securitization with that of banks, permitting NBFCs-ND-SI to issue perpetual debt instruments etc. NBFCs as components of the financial sector 20.  A broad picture of the role of NBFCs and the interconnectedness they have in the financial sector can be gauged from the details given below: General 21.  The total number of NBFCs as on March 31, 2014 are 12,029 of which deposit taking NBFCs are 241 and non-deposit taking NBFCs with asset size of ₹100 crore and above are 465, non-deposit taking NBFCs with asset size between ₹50 crore and ₹100 crore are 314 and those with asset size less than ₹50 crore are 11009. As on March 31, 2014, the average leverage ratio (outside liabilities to owned fund) of the NBFCs-ND-SI stood at 2.94, 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches return on assets (net profit as a percentage of total assets) stood at 2.3%, Return on equity (net profit as a percentage of equity) stood at 9.22 % and the gross NPA as a percentage of total credit exposure (aggregate level) stood at 2.8%. Asset liability composition Liabilities* of the NBFC sector 22.  Owned funds (23% of total liabilities), debentures (32%), bank borrowings (21%), deposit (1%), borrowings from Financial Institutions (1%), Inter-corporate borrowings (2%), Commercial Paper (3%), other borrowings (12%), and current liabilities & provisions (5%). Assets* of the NBFC sector 23.  Loans & advances (73% of total assets), investments (16%), cash and bank balances (3%), other current assets (7%) and other assets (1%).  * The data pertains to only reported deposit taking NBFCs and those non-deposit taking NBFCs with asset size of ₹100 crore and above. All figures are as on end March, 2014. Role of NBFCs in financial inclusion 24.  Financial inclusion has been defined as the “provision of affordable financial services” to those who have been left unattended or under-attended by formal agencies of the financial system. These financial services include “payments and remittance facilities, savings, loan and insurance services”. Micro finance has been looked upon as an important means of financial inclusion in India. Microfinance is not just provision of micro credit but also other services in small quantities to the poor i.e. providing essential financial services to the poor in an affordable way. Financial Inclusion also is aiming at the same by providing the poor with not only deposit accounts or credit but also insurance and remittance facility. 25.  As articulated by the Committee on Comprehensive Financial Services for Small Businesses and Low Income Households (Mor Committee) in its report, on both Financial Inclusion (defined as the spread of financial institutions and financial services across the country) and Financial Depth (defined as the percentage of credit to GDP at various levels of the economy) the overall situation remains very poor and, on a regional and sectoral basis, very uneven. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 26.  While the Reserve Bank’s model for financial inclusion is essentially bank-led, we believe that non-bank entities do have space to partner banks in the financial inclusion initiatives. We have enabled non-bank entities as Business Correspondents of banks to achieve the larger goal of financial inclusion. Since September 2010, MFIs that are bank-SHGs, Trusts, Societies or Section 25 companies have been permitted to become Banking Correspondents (BCs). At the same time several non-bank entities on their own are part and parcel of this greater goal, for e.g. NBFC-MFIs that form the significant part of the MFI sector have deeper reach in the rural areas. NBFC-MFIs do not formally figure in the bank led model of financial inclusion but they by their wider and deeper reach can be catalysts in providing the necessary handhold to the poor borrowers to gain access to essential financial services. 27.  While the new banks that are being envisaged would definitely give fillip to the country’s financial inclusion initiatives, juxtaposing the humungous task of complete financial inclusion against it also brings to focus the need for exploring alternative ways to achieve the goal. The Mor Committee has observed that each of the channels, be they large National Banks, regional cooperative banks, or Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) have a great deal of continuing value to add by focusing on its own differentiated capabilities and accomplish the national goals of financial inclusion by partnering with others that bring complementary capabilities to bear on the problem. Role of NBFCs in capital market 28.  Investment activity of NBFC sector comprises around 16% of their total assets. These constitute mainly investments in capital market. There are specialized NBFCs that are exclusively engaged in capital market investment i.e. trading in securities. These NBFCs therefore help in giving liquidity to the capital market. Further, NBFCs also lend to investors for investing in capital market. Regulatory challenges in this regard might come in the form of probable overheating of the market, which could be addressed through appropriate regulatory measures including enhanced disclosures. Role of NBFCs in factoring 29.  Factoring as defined in the Factoring Regulation Act, 2011 involves acquisition of receivables (by a Factor) thereby getting entitled to undivided interest on the receivables or financing against the security interest over any receivables but does not include credit facilities provided by a bank in its ordinary course of business against security of receivables. Subsequent to the notification of the Factoring Regulation Act by the Government, Reserve Bank formed a new category of NBFCs called NBFC-Factors and issued directions to them. NBFC-Factors are almost exclusively engaged in providing factoring service. Factoring service which is perceived as complimentary to bank finance is expected to enable the availability of much needed working capital finance for the small and medium scale industries especially those that have good quality receivables but may not be in a position to obtain enough bank finance due to lack of collateral or credit profile. By having a continuous business relationship with the Factor in place, small traders, industries and exporters get the advantage of improving the cash flow and liquidity of their business as also availing ancillary services like sales ledger accounting, collection of receivables, credit protection etc. Factoring helps them to free their resources and have a one stop arrangement for various business needs enabling smooth running of their business. 30.  The Reserve Bank has recently also taken the initiative of mooting a “Trade Receivables and Credit Exchange” for financing of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, which is under development stage. The exchange will bring together the MSMEs, the Factors and the corporate buyers under one platform whereby MSME’s bills against large companies can be accepted electronically and auctioned so that MSMEs are paid promptly. The objective is to build a suitable institutional infrastructure which will not only enable an efficient 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches and cost effective factoring / reverse factoring process to be put in place, but also ensure sufficient liquidity is created for all stakeholders through an active secondary market for the same. Role of NBFCs in vehicle financing / second hand vehicle financing 31.  Talking about the niche sectors that NBFCs cater to, vehicle financing especially second hand vehicles need special mention. Certain NBFCs that are classified as Asset Finance Companies have gained expertise in this segment and play a significant role in providing a livelihood to customers who are drivers. From the Reserve Bank’s side, to encourage the productive activity that these NBFCs are engaged in, we have accorded certain additional dispensations to them in the form of enhanced bank credit, higher exposure norm ceiling and provision of ECB under automatic route for leasing related to infrastructure. Role of NBFCs in infrastructure financing 32.  Infrastructure Finance Companies and Infrastructure Debt Funds are NBFCs exclusively into financing the infrastructure sector. Some of these companies have asset books running to lakhs of crores of rupees and are experts in long term project financing. Recognising their significance, the Reserve Bank has given special dispensations in the form of enhanced bank credit, higher exposure norm ceiling and provision of ECB under automatic route for on-lending to infrastructure sector. The asset liability pattern however, is a matter of concern in the case of IFCs as these are lending long term against comparatively shorter term liabilities. The regulatory challenges 33.  So, you may wonder, if the NBFCs are performing such a wonderful service to the economy, by being partners in financial inclusion, providing niche financing in the areas like infrastructure, factoring, asset financing, etc. what is the concern that the Reserve Bank can have? Why have you indicated in the title for this oration “Regulatory Challenges”, you may ask me. Let me explain. 34.  The need for regulating the financial institutions arise primarily because of the high leverage with which they operate that can cause financial instability, the asset liability mismatch which can pose serious risks to the investors and depositors, and their capacity to engender havoc to the real sectors of the economy. 35.  Traditionally, regulation of banks has assumed greater importance than that of their non-banking counterparts. One reason, of course, is that protection of depositors has been traditionally an important mandate of banking supervisors. Banks are at the centre of payment and settlement systems and monetary policy transmission takes place through them. Banks play a critical role in credit intermediation through maturity transformation, i.e. acceptance of short term liabilities and converting them into long term assets viz. loans and advances. Along with economic value, this function also creates potential liquidity risk. Moreover, banks also operate on a significantly higher leverage compared to any other type of organisations which could amplify their vulnerability. For all these reasons, banks are subject to a detailed and a rigorous regulatory framework. 36.  Non-banks also have depositors; these depositors also need some assurance about the safety of their funds. Non-banks also lend their resources as loans and advances, thus carrying out credit intermediation through maturity transformation and thereby creating liquidity risk. Further non-banks also operate on a significantly higher leverage than an ordinary commercial institution. Thus, when non – bank financial entities undertake bank-like functions, large risks are created which could potentially be destabilizing for the entire system. Moreover, the global financial crisis demonstrated many ways in which shadow 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 banking can have an impact on the global financial system, both directly and through its interconnectedness with the regular banking system, prompting the move to overhaul the regulation of shadow banking system. Like banks, a leveraged and maturity-transforming shadow banking system can also be vulnerable to “runs” and generate contagion, thereby amplifying systemic risk. Shadow banking can also heighten pro-cyclicality by accelerating credit supply and asset price increases during upswings and exacerbating fall in asset prices during downswings. These effects were powerfully revealed during the global financial crisis in the form of dislocation of asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) markets, the failure of an originate-to-distribute model employing structured investment vehicles (SIVs) and conduits, “runs” on MMFs and a sudden reappraisal of the terms on which securities lending and repos were conducted. 37.  Now you may say “Yes, we agree that the NBFCs need to be regulated. But, why are you saying that there are challenges? Don’t you have the law enabling you to regulate them?” 38.  Yes, we have the law. And it has evolved over the time. The challenges today are as follows: 39.  First, there are law related challenges i. there are a number of companies that are registered as finance companies, but are not regulated by the Reserve Bank, ii. there are unincorporated bodies who undertake financial activities and remain unregulated, iii. there are incorporated companies and unincorporated entities illegally accepting deposits, iv. there are entities who camouflage deposits in some other names and thus illegally accepting deposits. The law as it stands today is inadequate to deal with these issues. In order to correct these and initiate action against violations, we need to bring in suitable amendments to the statutory provisions. Reserve Bank is working with the government for such improvements in the law. 40.  Secondly, as the entities, especially the unincorporated ones, can sprung in any nook and corner of the country and can operate with impunity unnoticed, but endangering their customers’ interest, we need arrangements and structured for effective market intelligence gathering. The Reserve Bank is restructuring its organisational setup, especially in its regional offices, for gathering market intelligence. 41.  Thirdly, empowering law and gathering intelligence by themselves are not sufficient. Enforcement of the law is a challenge. This is primarily because of the various agencies involved in regulating the non-banking financial activities of entities. Right from the central government ministries like finance and corporate affairs, agencies like CBI and FIU-IND, regulatory agencies like the Reserve Bank, SEBI, the Registrar of Companies, the state government agencies like the police and others, all have to share information and coordinate and cooperate to bring in an effective, timely and unified enforcement of the law. The Reserve Bank’s State Level Coordination Committees (SLCC) are being strengthened and a National level Coordination Committee is also being considered. 42.  Fourthly, as was mentioned earlier, world over there is an increasing demand that the shadow banks be brought under tighter regulations. G-20 has already expressed it as a mission to be achieved by 2015. In our case, bringing them under regulation is not the issue, as they already are. The challenge for us is how differentially or how closely we should regulate the NBFCs? The demand from the NBFC sector is that they should be subjected to light touch regulation. As mentioned earlier, NBFCs were brought under regulatory ambit of the Reserve Bank since 1963; we brought them under prudential regulatory framework since 1997. Nevertheless, the NBFC sector came under pressure during the 2008 crisis due to the funding inter-linkages among NBFCs, mutual funds and commercial banks. NBFCs-ND-SI relied significantly on short term funding sources such as debentures (largely non - convertible short term debentures), and CPs, which constituted around 56.8 percent of the total borrowings of NBFCs-ND-SI as on September 30, 2008. These funds were used to finance assets which were reportedly largely a mix of long term assets, including hire 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches purchase and lease assets, long term investments, investment in real estate by few companies, and loans and advances. These mismatches were created mainly as a business strategy for gaining from the higher spreads. However, there were no fall back alternatives in cases of potential liquidity constraints. The ripple effect of the turmoil in American and European markets led to liquidity issues and heavy redemption pressure on the mutual funds in India, as several investors, especially institutional investors, started pulling out their investments in liquid and money market funds. Mutual funds being the major subscribers to CPs and debentures issued by NBFCs, the redemption pressure on MFs translated into funding issues for NBFCs, as they found raising fresh liabilities or rolling over of the maturing liabilities very difficult. Drying up of these sources of funds along with the fact that banks were increasingly becoming risk averse, heightened their funding problems, exacerbating the liquidity tightness. The Reserve Bank undertook many measures, both conventional as well as un-conventional, to enhance availability of liquidity to NBFCs’. Conclusion 43.  To conclude, I may say that the challenge therefore for the NBFC sector is to grow in a prudential manner while not stopping altogether on financial innovations. The key lies in having in place adequate risk management systems and procedures before entering into risky areas. As for the regulator, it is the constant endeavour of Reserve Bank to enable prudential growth of the sector, keeping in view the multiple objectives of financial stability, consumer and depositor protection, and need for more players in the financial market, addressing regulatory arbitrage concerns while not forgetting the uniqueness of NBFC sector. The Bank presently is in the process of reviewing the regulatory framework for NBFCs in the context of recent developments including the Nachiket Mor Committee and others. 44.  Thank you very much for your patient attention.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 François Groepe: Impact of the global financial crisis on South Africa Keynote address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at a luncheon hosted by the Western Cape region of the Institute of Internal Auditors, Cape Town, 6 June 2014. *      *      * Members of the Institute of Internal Auditors and other guests, Thank you for the invitation to join you at this lunch networking event, hosted by the Western Cape region of the Institute of Internal Auditors of South Africa, and for the opportunity to address you at this event. Today, I wish to focus my remarks on the impact of the global financial crisis on South Africa, in particular with reference to the challenges it poses to financial regulation and the increased focus on macro-prudential financial regulation. In this regard, I will take you through the kinds of reforms the Bank is implementing, particularly in regard to its regulatory role and which forms part of the package of responses to the global financial crisis. Lastly, I would like to touch on the role that the auditing profession can play in support of achieving this objective. The global financial crisis There is no doubt that the global financial crisis has permanently changed the course of the global economy and has established a new normal. The severity of the 2008 financial crisis brought about significant damaging effects to both developed and developing countries. Although the emerging market economies performed better than the advanced economies, and became the engines of global growth through the crisis, they were nonetheless affected through the trade and finance channels and as a consequence their growth rates, too had been negatively impacted. In addition, the crises that started out as a banking crisis, then morphed into a sovereign debt crisis, and brought with it particular challenges for central banks and their previously well-defined mandates, for example:   Many central banks now look much more closely at the build-up of imbalances in the financial system; and  As part of its focus, regulatory reform is dealing with the central banks’ role with regard to financial stability – or macro-prudential regulation (which concerns itself with more than just idiosyncratic risk and the soundness of individual institutions but is concerned with the soundness and stability of the entire financial system i.e. systemic soundness). Rationale for a financial stability focus The ultimate objective of economic policy is to create a sustainable level of economic growth through investment, employment and production. This is best achieved when contributions are made by all sectors in the economy, including the financial sector, which historically has made substantial contributions to the levels of economic growth achieved in many advanced and developing economies. This sector is therefore important and hence there rests a responsibility on policymakers to ensure its continued health. In this regard, government has an important role to play in creating a stable environment underpinned by a legal framework that brings about certainty and supported by regulatory and supervisory arrangements that help to ensure constructive incentives for financial market participants. The central bank too has a role to play as it is tasked with the responsibility of 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches contributing towards the achievement and maintenance of both price and financial stability. Instability in either of these carries significant costs, as we have witnessed. According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), direct costs of banking crises in the past 15 years exceeded 10% of the GDP in more than a dozen cases. The relationship between monetary policy and financial stability is important and central banks must ensure that monetary policy actions themselves do not contribute towards financial instability. Hence, central banks have an important role to ensure that the possible formation of asset price bubbles that may threaten financial stability are kept in check. The increasing interdependence of economies and the interconnectedness of the global financial system have led to significant initiatives aimed at safeguarding financial stability, including the development of standards that are material in strengthening the global financial system. A concerted effort through various international bodies has seen agreement on common standards and principles for financial regulators and has, furthermore, resulted in central banks focusing more closely on financial stability and macro-prudential analysis. What is financial stability? Matters relating to monetary policy and monetary stability come naturally to central bankers. Monetary stability relates directly to the stability of the price level and the value of the currency and speaks directly to the mission of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB). Traditionally, the main objective of central banks – often enshrined in the constitutions of countries – has been to ensure price stability. For the Bank this responsibility is defined as “to protect the value of the currency in the interest of balanced and sustainable economic growth…”. It was commonly believed that if central banks could achieve price stability (defined as a target rate or target range of inflation), financial stability would automatically follow. This assertion was found to be incorrect! Therefore, the concept of financial stability is, in general, newer, more controversial, less quantifiable and more difficult to define. Several attempts have been made to come up with a generally acceptable definition. I will use the definition of the Bank of Canada, “…when households, businesses and financial-service firms can reliably hold and transfer financial assets, without a meaningful risk of disturbances that would undermine financial exchange fundamentally and lead to macroeconomic costs”. The SARB’s mandate of price stability has been expanded with an explicit responsibility to oversee and maintain the stability of the South African financial system. While the price stability mandate of the Bank is narrowly defined and measureable, its mandate for financial stability is much broader and is a shared responsibility with other stakeholders in the financial and public sectors. During the East Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s, however, countries with low inflation rates experienced severe instability in their financial systems as banks failed, exchange rates depreciated and financial markets experienced severe volatility. As a result many central banks focused increasingly on financial stability and it became an implicit secondary objective. In South Africa, this objective was mainly pursued through the regulation and supervision of banks, which has been the responsibility of the Bank Supervision Department within the Bank. It soon became clear, however, that sound and profitable individual banks did not guarantee a sound banking and financial system. Banks often have inter-linkages and might have significant common exposures to risks that will not be visible from the supervision of individual banks.  Hence the need for macro-prudential surveillance, or the monitoring of the “prudence” of the “broader” financial system was identified and which culminated in the SARB creating such capacity for this purpose as far back as 2001. The SARB further was given the objective of contributing to the stability of the financial system in South Africa, following the global financial crisis. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Following the publication of a policy document by National Treasury in February 2011 called “A safer financial sector to serve South Africa better” the SARB’s responsibility for financial stability became more explicit. This policy document eventually culminated in the Financial Sector Regulation Bill, which states that “…the South African Reserve Bank has primary responsibility for promoting financial stability…”. The Bill sets out further details to give effect to the Bank’s financial stability mandate and is expected to be promulgated during 2014. It is important to note that financial stability is a shared responsibility with other stakeholders such as the prudential and market conduct regulators and the National Treasury. Careful consideration needs to be given to co-ordinating monetary policy and financial stability objectives, which at times may result in diversion of policy choices. In South Africa, cross membership between the Bank’s monetary policy and financial stability committee structures facilitates such coordination. The Bill also recommends a single committee structure for financial stability, namely the Financial Stability Oversight Committee (FSOC), chaired by the Governor of the Bank. The FSOC’s mandate will be to continuously monitor the financial system for risks and initiate any action necessary to mitigate or remedy a risk. The FSOC thus will have a financial stability responsibility, in the same way as the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) does for price stability, and will be able to hold to account various authorities or economic agents on actions to be taken to mitigate against/reduce systemic risk. The Bank’s expanded mandate for financial stability will not impact on its price stability mandate, which, eluded to above, is a narrowly defined, formal and explicit mandate. The Bank will therefore still be independent and free from influence in pursuing its primary objective of achieving and maintaining price stability. Given this expanded role, it will require of central banks to evolve and to face up to the increased demands for greater accountability. Central banks will need to communicate on matters relating to financial stability, manage situations where conflicts arise in the goals of monetary policy and financial stability, and moderate unrealistic expectations of what can be achieved by financial stability policies. South Africa, as a member of the Group of Twenty (G20), is committed to promoting financial stability and contributing towards strengthening the resilience of the global financial system. The role of the auditing profession in supporting financial stability There are a number of important and close linkages between the financial stability objective of the central bank and the auditing profession. As mentioned earlier, one of the four main aspects of the Bank’s financial stability mandate is to promote the robustness of the financial system architecture. This is performed through a process of benchmarking the financial architecture of South Africa against the Financial Stability Board’s twelve standards for sound financial systems. Amongst these standards are International Standards on Auditing (ISA) issued by the International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (IAASB). As part of the Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC) initiative, the World Bank has established a programme to assist its member countries in implementing international accounting and auditing standards for strengthening the financial reporting regime. This enables authorities to analyse comparability of national accounting and auditing standards with international standards and to develop and implement a country action plan to strengthen the country’s corporate financial reporting regime. In addition to that, well-functioning financial markets require accurate information to ensure the efficient allocation of capital and other productive resources in the economy. Market participants need to have confidence that the system of financial exchange is transparent and fair. The market system depends on trust, and in this regard, good corporate governance is critical to ensure economic and financial stability as a breakdown in governance could significantly erode business efficiency. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches In a testimony to the US Congress by the then Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board in 2002, Alan Greenspan stated that lawyers, internal and external auditors, corporate boards and rating agencies often fail to detect and blow the whistle on those who breach the level of trust essential to well-functioning financial markets. This could lead to widespread misinformation to shareholders and potential investors. The question is why corporate governance checks and balances that served the world well in the past broke down during recent years.  Both external and internal auditors have a key role to play in strengthening corporate governance as they are the third line of defence within the combined assurance frameworks. The Committee on Internal Audit Guidance for Financial Services in the United Kingdom has issued its recommendations for effective internal audit in the Financial Services Sector in July 2013. If implemented, these recommendations will improve the relevance of the internal audit function by repositioning the focus from testing and reporting on the internal control environment to supporting both executive and non-executive management in the effective management of key risks. The guidance for example suggests that the scope of internal audit include, inter alia: (i)  The risk and control culture of the organisation This should include assessing whether the processes (e.g. appraisal and remuneration), actions (e.g. decision making) and “tone at the top” are in line with the values, ethics, risk appetite and policies of the organisation. Internal Audit should consider the attitude and assess the approach taken by all levels of management to risk management and internal control. This should include Management’s actions in addressing known control deficiencies, as well as Management’s regular assessment of controls. (ii)  Risk of poor customer treatment giving rise to conduct of reputation risk Internal Audit should evaluate whether the organisation is acting with integrity in its dealings with customers and in its interaction with relevant markets. Internal Audit should evaluate whether Business and Risk Management are adequately designing and controlling products, services and supporting processes in line with customer interests and conduct regulation. (iii)  Capital and liquidity risk Internal Audit should include within its scope the management of the organisation’s capital and liquidity risks.  Conclusion After much discussion and debate, we have to accept that, after nearly seven very challenging years, new challenges are being faced, which poses specific risks for emerging economies in particular. Some of these challenges include the unwinding of the extraordinary monetary policy actions in the US which is largely untested territory as there is no prior history to guide us. Nonetheless, I will not delve into this topic at present as we could spend many hours discussing the various issues surrounding it. Let me stop here and thank you for the opportunity to talk to you today and to share a few ideas on the fascinating topics of financial stability and corporate governance. There is no question that good corporate governance and sound accounting and auditing standards and effective audit functions contribute significantly to sound, stable and well-functioning financial systems. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Jens Weidmann: Dinner speech Dinner speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 20th Dubrovnik Economic Conference, Dubrovnik, 12 June 2014. *      *      * 1. Introduction Governor Vujčić, dear Boris It is a great pleasure to be in this wonderful and picturesque Mediterranean town. So thank you very much for the kind invitation to give a speech at this conference dinner. You will not need reminding that today marks the beginning of the World Cup football tournament in Brazil. Kick-off of the opening match between Brazil and Croatia is in less than two hours’ time. With this in mind, I will try to be brief. Over the next month, football will be at the centre of attention all over the world. National football teams are promoting their own national identity. According to a German sports economist, there is a high correlation between a national football team’s performance and a country’s reputation. The teams are contributing significantly to the “branding of nations”. For now, at least, nobody would even dream of fielding a European Union team, even if it were considered to be unbeatable. I am quite sure that people continue to feel as nationals rather than as Europeans – at least where football is concerned. Rivalry in football, however, does not imply that there is no European team spirit. Nor does it suggest that the European project is not one of the greatest ideas in post-war times. The European idea is still an appealing one. And despite all prophecies of doom concerning the crisis in the euro area, European integration remains attractive. This has been demonstrated, not least, by the accession of Croatia to the European Union as of 1 July 2013. By becoming a member of the EU, Croatia has also expressed its willingness to join the European Monetary Union one day, when the convergence criteria have been fulfilled. And the intention of Lithuania to introduce the common currency as of 2015 shows that joining the euro area is still considered attractive. For the time being, the crisis in the euro area has slipped from the focus of public awareness. Nevertheless, it is too early to claim victory over the crisis in the euro area. Even though financial markets might suggest otherwise, the crisis is far from over. In particular, the sovereign bond yield spreads of the euro-area countries most affected have decreased significantly over the past two years. The fall in long-term interest rates has reduced those countries’ borrowing costs considerably. Markets are rewarding adjustment progress in the stressed countries. It is clear to me, however, that the decline in sovereign bond yield spreads has also been supported by central banks’ actions. The ECB’s announcement of conditional but unlimited purchases of sovereign bonds has – unsurprisingly – calmed investors’ fear of losing money. You may know that I was not in favour of this measure. While sovereign bond purchases are a widely used monetary policy tool, they are not without risks. They bring monetary policy very close to monetary financing of governments, which could undermine the central bank’s ability to maintain its mandate of price stability. Monetary policy may face the danger of being dragged and driven by fiscal policy, and find it very difficult to free itself. The more so as governments become increasingly accustomed to bond purchases that keep the interest rates low. In this sense, sovereign bond purchases may act like a sweet poison for the governments. The rude awakening may come when the purchases are reduced or stopped altogether. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches One particular problem with sovereign bond purchases in a monetary union is that they redistribute risks among the taxpayers of different countries. Any such decisions, however, should be taken by democratically elected governments and parliaments. The rallying markets are also being sustained by exceptionally easy monetary policy conditions the world over. Nevertheless, there is a risk that market valuations may be running ahead of the adjustment processes. The current long-term yields on some European government bonds already appear to have factored in the required adjustment to a large extent. This, however, creates a setback potential. It is therefore all the more important that policymakers ensure that the necessary economic progress is actually achieved. Their determination to implement reforms is pivotal. In any case, low interest rates do run the risk of creating incentives to postpone necessary reforms. Thus, the current environment necessitates an even stronger political will. There is no question of there being a quick fix to eliminate the causes of the crisis. Considering that the risk potential built up over many years, it is obvious that it will also take time to reduce it. 2. How to make EMU more resilient The question is: How do we best go about making EMU more resilient? As a starting point for the analysis of the crisis, it is helpful to recall the institutional set-up of the European Monetary Union. When EMU was established, monetary policy was centralised while fiscal and economic policies remained in national hands. This set-up created vulnerabilities. It gave rise to a deficit bias, allowing the costs of fiscal imprudence to be partially shifted to other countries. If the fiscal situation in one country is unsustainable, this implies repercussions for the monetary union as a whole. Moreover, abandoning the national currency in favour of a single currency has two major implications. First, member states cannot regain lost price competitiveness by depreciating their currency against their trading partners’ currencies and internal devaluation as a substitute is much more painful. And second, each member state issues debt in a currency not of its own making. Fiscal discipline is therefore of the essence and even more important than in a country that has its own national currency. This applies to an even greater extent, as there are no explicit fiscal transfers among governments. However, although fiscal transfers were deliberately ruled out, the central banks’ balance sheets can serve as a conduit for shifting risks among national taxpayers. This undermines both the countries’ individual fiscal responsibility and the central banks’ independence. The founding fathers of the euro clearly foresaw the risk of unsustainable public finances for a stability-oriented monetary policy. Therefore, precautions in terms of fiscal rules were put into place to safeguard sound public finances. They took the form of the no bail-out clause, the Stability and Growth Pact and the prohibition of monetary financing of government deficits for the reasons I have just mentioned. As it turned out, however, these precautions were not sufficient to prevent the crisis. The introduction of the euro and the associated disappearance of exchange rate risks led to strong capital flows to countries which previously had high interest rates. Unfortunately, the capital inflows were not always put to productive use; banks and capital markets failed in many cases to allocate the money efficiently. Instead of financing productive investment, they shifted money into booming real estate sectors, for example. And the governments of some member states missed the opportunity 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 of lower interest rates to consolidate public finances. Instead they enjoyed a more relaxed budget restriction. Capital inflows also enabled higher wages while, at the same time, productivity growth was weak. This resulted in rising unit labour costs and so undermined price competitiveness. Economies became less competitive on export markets, leading to large and persistent current account deficits. They suffered from a sudden halt in external funding during the financial crisis when lenders reined in their risk appetite and fled from risky investments to safe havens. Current account deficits as well as budget deficits became hard to finance – so hard that private funds had to be substituted by public funds. Fiscal stabilisation measures by the euro area countries, the EU and the IMF as well as central bank operations by the Eurosystem helped the stressed countries to bridge the finance gap and to prevent the financial system of the euro area from collapsing. However, while this bridge saved the economies from an immediate and tough adjustment process, it did not remedy the underlying problems of the crisis. In order to foster the groundwork of EMU, three challenges have to be met. The macroeconomic adjustment process has to be continued. This adjustment process has to be accomplished primarily in the deficit countries, but the other countries – including Germany – face challenges, too. Regarding the adjustment of the euro-area periphery countries, remarkable progress has been made so far. Current account deficits and public deficits have been reduced significantly and structural reforms on labour and product markets have been implemented. Nevertheless, the necessary adjustment has not been completed yet. In footballing terms, I would say “the half-time whistle has been blown” but there is no time for a break. And let’s not forget that the second half is usually more exhausting than the first, and we may even have to go into extra time. Actually, there are signs of growing reform fatigue and rising reluctance to implement further austerity measures. However, it is crucial to stay on the ball. In this respect I also wish to look at the large euro-area economies which have significantly lost competitiveness. Both France and Italy need to implement structural reforms to make up for these losses and thereby act as a role model for the crisis countries as well as for all other EU countries. The second requirement for a stable monetary union is a more resilient financial system. Owing to regulatory weaknesses, the financial system acted as an amplifier of the crisis. It has become apparent that the financial system is the Achilles’ heel of European monetary union. Without a sound banking system there will be no stable monetary union. The establishment of a banking union including a single supervisory and a resolution mechanism provides the opportunity to make the financial system more resilient and to boost investors’ confidence. At the current juncture, the ECB together with the national supervisors is comprehensively assessing the balance sheets of the banks which are candidates for direct ECB supervision. I agree with Jaime Caruana, the General Manager of the BIS, who recently said, “The asset quality review is a great opportunity to spur the necessary balance sheet adjustment. This chance must not be missed.” The banking union closes a vulnerable gap faced by EMU in helping to strengthen the financial system. However, the banking union is not sufficient to strengthen the institutional architecture of EMU. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Rather, we need a fundamental reform of the EMU framework. And this is the third challenge that has to be met to make EMU more resilient. Let me elaborate on this point. The implementation of the Maastricht framework was not able to save the euro area from the crisis. One of the underlying reasons for this insufficiency is that the rules were too strongly focused on fiscal policies, while their implementation was too weak. It should be kept in mind that Germany and France were the driving forces behind the Stability and Growth Pact reform about a decade ago which turned the Pact into a toothless tiger. With hindsight, they scored an own goal with their efforts. Another flaw in the framework was the restricted credibility of the no bail-out rule. If the markets had believed in the rule, we would not have experienced such a strong convergence of sovereign bond yields as we saw prior to the crisis. When the EMU framework was established in the early 1990s, the risk of contagion among euro-area member states was clearly underestimated. Financial markets were significantly less developed at that time. The credit default swaps market, for example, did not even exist back then. That may help to explain why fiscal firewalls were not deemed necessary when the EMU framework was established. While the rescue measures that were established later, such as the EFSF and the ESM, managed to contain the fallout somewhat, they weakened the principle of individual responsibility. Fiscal decision making has essentially remained national, while liabilities have been partially mutualised. In other words, the balance between liability and control has become lopsided. This balance, however, is fundamental to the stability of the monetary union. But how do we restore that fundamental balance, and put monetary union on a more solid footing? In principle, there are two options. The first way is to create a genuine fiscal union; the second way would be to confirm the Maastricht framework, which essentially means making the principle of individual responsibility work better. The first option, a genuine fiscal union, would require the member states to surrender their fiscal sovereignty in favour of the European level. In such a setting, the mutualisation of future liabilities would be consistent. Such a giant step towards a fiscal union would require considerable changes to the European treaties and the national constitutions as well. To be honest, however, I do not see the willingness of national governments to let Brussels have a say in fiscal matters, and the results of the recent elections for the European Parliament suggest that the electorates do not support such a shift either. Against this backdrop, this avenue seems blocked, at least for the foreseeable future. This leaves us with the second option: making the principle of individual responsibility work better. In order to do so, the Stability and Growth Pact was tightened and enhanced by an early warning system for macroeconomic imbalances. A fiscal compact was introduced according to which member states committed to incorporate balanced budget rules into their national legislation. Regarding the effectiveness of those changes, I would refer to the English proverb “the proof of the pudding is in the eating”. In other words, it is not clear yet whether the new rules do really bite. It will be crucial that the European Commission applies the stiffer rules strictly and consistently. Unfortunately, fiscal policy rules have become highly complex and, in turn, the scope for interpretation has grown. The assessment procedure gives the Commission greater and more discretionary leeway. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 However, if France for example were allowed, for the third time, to postpone the correction of its excessive deficit, this would severely undermine the credibility of the new Stability and Growth Pact. If I may use another football metaphor, the Commission should stick to its role as referee and not try to move the goalposts mid-game. To make EMU more resilient, a confirmation of the Maastricht framework goes beyond tightening fiscal rules. Making the principle of individual responsibility workable means making governments, banks and investors feel the consequences of their own actions. Hence, a credible no bail-out rule is needed. A credible no bail-out rule, however, would ultimately require that an orderly insolvency regime for governments exists. As long as a sovereign default is impossible owing to the implied risk for the stability of the financial system, investors in sovereign bonds can expect to be bailed out. In order to make such a state insolvency bearable, we need a robust financial system with sufficient loss absorption capacity and one which is not too closely tied to the government. The so-called sovereign-bank nexus is a huge obstacle to permanently overcoming the crisis in the euro area. During the crisis, many banks, notably in the euro-area periphery, raised their exposure to domestic government bonds; in doing so they tied their fate even more closely to that of their national government. This development was assisted by the preferential regulatory treatment of government bonds. It includes the zero risk-weighting of government bonds issued in local currency and the lack of exposure limits. In order to strengthen the banking union and the monetary union, I believe we need to end this preferential treatment of sovereign debt over a reasonable period of time. Sovereign bonds should be adequately risk-weighted, and exposure to individual sovereign debt should be limited, as is already the case for private debt. 3. Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen, The French writer François Fénelon said, “The more you say, the less people remember.” Moreover, I promised to be brief. So let me conclude. According to econometric studies on the history of World Cup football tournaments, the advantage the home team has is statistically significant – no surprises there. Looking ahead to tonight’s match, this is bad news for the Croatian team, since it is playing against the host country of the World Cup. It is further shown that a positive relationship exists between a country’s population and its performance in World Cup tournaments. So these statistics are against Croatia, too. What’s more, Brazil leads the World Cup all-time table, while Croatia is ranked 27th. Brazil is the favourite to win the competition. On the other hand, football is incalculable. You never know how a match is going to end. That’s what makes it so appealing. There are plenty of surprises in the history of World Cup football tournaments. I remember, for example, when Germany was beaten 3–0 by Croatia in the quarter final of the 1998 World Cup in France. So there are reasons to be optimistic. Pope John Paul II said, “Amongst all unimportant subjects, football is by far the most important.” But even if football is basically unimportant, as John Paul II claimed, it is nevertheless enjoyable for the players and it entertains the spectators greatly. In contrast to that, the resolution of the crisis in the euro area offers an enjoyment factor of close to zero and its entertainment value is also limited. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches If European policymakers succeed in overcoming the crisis and making EMU more resilient, it would certainly not trigger the same euphoric celebrations as a World Cup victory. Nevertheless, it would be hailed as an important achievement, not only from a central banker’s perspective, and it would be for the benefit of all. In particular, it would finally allow central banks to shed their role as decision makers of last resort and, thus, to return to their normal business. Moreover, it would help to preserve the independence of central banks, which is a key precondition to maintaining price stability in the long run. Thank you very much for your attention. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Mugur Isărescu: The regional finance and investment for South East Europe Keynote address by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the Euromoney Regional Finance and Investment Conference for South East Europe, Bucharest, 12 June 2014. *      *      * Prime Minister, Ladies and gentlemen, It is an honour for me to be invited to speak in front of such a distinguished audience. I am very glad that, after three years “off”, Euromoney Conferences is re-launching the event in Romania. Time has come for Bucharest to host this important event, held for several years in Dubrovnik. The joy of giving the keynote address at this conference is bigger as I had the opportunity to read the first issues of Euromoney magazine while being a young research fellow at the World Economy Institute in the early ‘70s. For years it was one of my favourite magazines. Back in 1978, I also had the opportunity to visit the editorial offices in London. I could not help but notice that you have chosen a generous theme: “The Regional Finance and Investment for South East Europe” and you have set yourselves to approach themes that I am particularly interested in, like: pro-growth strategies in an age of austerity; what more can policy-makers do?; how will governments incentivise overseas investors?; how can the region increase EU fund absorption rates? I wish you fruitful discussions and I am looking forward to seeing what answers you might find to address the issues highlighted in the panels of this conference. As the focus of the conference is on economic growth and development in Romania and the wider South-East Europe region, allow me to elaborate on this topic. I will approach the subject from the perspective of a central banker. Let me start by saying that sustainable economic growth of both Romania and the region relies mainly on economic policy consistency. The global economic and financial crisis has proved yet again that there is no valid substitute for consistent economic policies. The correction of economic policy errors is, everywhere and always, painful and, while difficult to comprehend by the public at large, it is absolutely necessary. The case of Romania is highly illustrative in this respect. Large macroeconomic imbalances had been steadily accumulating during the boom years, as a result of sizeable foreign capital inflows and credit expansion, the impact of which was augmented by a pro-cyclical stance of fiscal policy, especially in the last two years before the onset of the crisis. As a result, Romania had large twin deficits at the start of the crisis, specifically a sizeable structural fiscal gap (around –8% of GDP in 2008) and a current account deficit in the double-digit area (between 2006 and 2008). After the crisis hit, Romania had no other choice but to undertake the necessary adjustments in order to eliminate these imbalances in an orderly manner. The efforts seem to have already paid off – the year 2013 marked a turnaround in Romania’s economic development: economic growth of 3.5% driven mostly by robust export and industrial output on the supply side; a small current account deficit; historically low inflation; while the fiscal deficit was kept well below 3%. And I have every reason to believe that Romania will see further growth in the years to come. And that, unlike in the pre-crisis period, this time sustainability will be the name of the game, as hopefully we all have learned our lessons from our previous mistakes. As they say, no one really learns but from his own mistakes… 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Talking about sustainable economic growth, one needs to put things into perspective in order to ascertain whether the economy is on the right track. This means that short-term policies must be harmonised with the long-term vision and goals. Euro adoption could serve as such a long-term goal. And Romania has chosen to use it as an anchor. Let me say a few words about this subject. In the post-crisis period, all non-euro area EU countries in Central and Eastern Europe with floating exchange rate regimes (Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Romania), as well as Bulgaria, shifted to a wait-and-see approach as regards euro adoption, even though, in some of them, Maastricht criteria were already fulfilled or within reach. Nobody disputes that in the long term it is in the best interest of our countries to adopt euro, as it heightens the degree of business cycle correlation and market integration. However, the benefits of euro adoption are not unconditional; therefore it is essential to make sure that nominal convergence criteria are achieved on a sustainable basis. Also it is important to attain a certain degree of per capita income convergence before switching to the euro (a large convergence gap may complicate business cycle management in the absence of independent monetary policy). Additionally, it is important to demonstrate the effectiveness of the new institutional setup in preventing and dealing with pending imbalances and that alternative policy instruments exist in order to take over from monetary policy in case corrections are needed. This is why recent years’ experience has substantially altered the approach to euro adoption. Before the crisis, the opinion prevailed that meeting nominal criteria was enough to prove the eligibility for the euro adoption. Some economists even debated the excessive severity of the nominal criteria and the conflict between their fulfilment and real convergence progress (Buitter and Grafe, 2002; Szapary, 2001; Kopits, 1999; Rostowski, 2002). But during and after the crisis, it became obvious that the Maastricht criteria are not enough to ensure successful EA membership. Nominal convergence criteria cannot be sustainably met unless competitiveness, financial stability and solid fiscal equilibrium are ensured. “The bigger picture”, meaning the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure, gained ground and real convergence criteria came to the forefront. The other side of the story has shown us that during the last couple of years, the euro area underwent extensive governance reforms, designed to address the flaws revealed by the crisis. However, their actual effectiveness is still to be tested in practice. We are still in unchartered waters. There have been recent statements referring to the fact that Europe might have not exited the crisis yet. As Jean Monnet used to say: “Europe would be built through crises” and would be “the sum of their solutions”. Consequently, non-member States from Eastern and South-eastern Europe seem closer than ever to complying with the Maastricht criteria, but readiness for successful Euro Area membership needs further work. Labour, product market and other structural reforms are still required in order to observe convergence not only in letter, but also in spirit. Non-member States, on the road towards euro adoption, have to both comply with the Maastricht criteria and to choose the right moment for it. Each and every Member State should put their houses in order as a prerequisite for a successful Euro Area enlargement. Only this way new candidates will be able to obtain the opportunities of a single currency, while being in turn a valuable contributor to the monetary union. Romania has recently reached political consensus, at the highest level, namely the President and the Prime Minister, that the target date for euro adoption will be January 1st, 2019. The rationale for this decision is that such an objective – feasible, yet ambitious – could act as a catalyst for coherent policy action. At this point in time, Romania is fulfilling three out of the four Maastricht criteria, namely the sustainability of the fiscal position, convergence of long-term interest rates and exchange rate stability (although we are not technically in ERM II). Meeting the price stability criterion is 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 probably just a matter of months, until the recent low inflation numbers feed into the 12-month average rate used as a reference. But, we are fully aware that we still have a long and difficult road ahead, as several years of relentless efforts are needed in order to ensure a lasting fulfilment of the Maastricht criteria, to make further progress in the catching-up process in the area of real convergence, as well as to push forward the structural reforms required for enhancing the resilience and flexibility of the domestic economy. Closely linked to the euro adoption approach is the decision on participating in the Banking Union, which is supposed to break the negative feedback loop between sovereigns and banks. Euro adoption automatically implies Banking Union membership and therefore, since the changeover target date has already been set, joining the Banking Union is merely a matter of timing: should it occur on the euro adoption date or as soon as possible? In my opinion, there are strong arguments in favour of rapidly joining the Banking Union. First and foremost, the project itself is still work in progress and it is always advisable to partake from the inside in the construction of a mechanism that we will eventually have to join anyway. Secondly, with the Banking Union in place, the domestic financial system will be affected regardless of whether Romania is a member or not, so it is better to have a say in the decision-making process that generates such effects, since the latter will impact us one way or another. Besides, Banking Union membership is expected to benefit participating countries through the removal of an incentive for deleveraging on the part of foreign banks, more effective supervision by improving access to information and eliminating the possibilities of jurisdictional arbitrage, as well as the creation of a more competitive market by reducing distortions and entry barriers. Given the share of foreign capital in Romania’s banking system, it makes even more sense to support the project. In light of the above, Romania aspires to be part of all three pillars of the Banking Union. It is our view that adhering to this European project will strengthen financial stability, further increase confidence in the national banking sector (through the harmonisation of supervisory practices and deposit guarantee schemes), as well as foster sustainable lending and economic growth (by reducing the fragmentation of the European financial markets). I shall stop here, thanking you for your attention. I wish you a fruitful outcome of the conference, and hope you enjoy your stay in Bucharest!  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Andreas Dombret: Financial regulation as a global challenge Remarks by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at a reception to say goodbye to Mr Jakob Orthacker, Financial Attaché, and to welcome his successor, Ms Julia Becker, London, 11 June 2014. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen Thank you, Ambassador Ammon, for hosting this event here at the German Embassy in London. I am happy to have the opportunity to officially thank the Bundesbank’s departing representative, Mr Jakob Orthacker, and to welcome his successor, Ms Julia Becker. I am particularly happy that Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, is here today. Thank you, Jon, for your remarks. Now let me say a few words on financial regulation and the need for international cooperation. My argument begins with the idea that a global financial system requires global regulation. To push this idea further, I would define the term “global” in at least three dimensions and argue that regulation should be consistent in all of them. First, regulation needs to be consistent across jurisdictions. This is necessary to provide a level playing field and reduce the scope for regulatory arbitrage. Against this backdrop, recent regulatory initiatives in some countries indicate that the “balkanisation” of the regulatory space represents a genuine risk. We have to be aware of that. Second, regulation needs to be consistent across sectors. This is again necessary to prevent regulatory arbitrage. In practical terms this means that we have to deal with the shadow banking system. Consequently, the G20 have moved shadow banking high up on their agenda. Third, regulation needs to be consistent across asset classes. Take the regulatory treatment of government bonds as an example. I cannot see a single good reason why banks should not have to back government bonds in their balance sheets by capital, but I see many reasons why they should – not least the objective of breaking the sovereign-bank nexus. Financial regulation that is consistent along these three dimensions will help to make the financial system a safer place. However, while being a safer place in the aggregate, the financial system is not necessarily a safe place for individual banks. After all, we live in a market economy and creative destruction is a central element. Individual banks must be able to fail like any other enterprise. This must also hold for large banks which are often labelled “too big to fail”. To allow them to fail without destabilising the entire system we need resolution mechanisms. And here again, we have a global dimension. Banks that are deemed too big to fail are globally operating enterprises; resolving them requires a great deal of international cooperation. I think it is obvious that to make the financial system a safer place we have to cooperate in regulation, in supervision, and in the resolution of banks. However, these are not the only challenges we face. Last week, the ECB Governing Council took far-reaching decisions in reaction to the long period of very low interest rates. It lowered the key interest rates for refinancing operations to 0.15% and cut the interest rate on the deposit facility to –0.10%. At the same time, it decided to conduct a series of TARGETed longer-term refinancing operations aimed at improving bank lending to the euro area non-financial private sector. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches While the decision of last Thursday was appropriate given the present economic environment, we should now analyse the effects of these decisions before starting the next round of monetary policy easing. And let me make one thing clear: Monetary policy has played a very important role in fighting the crisis but it cannot solve the euro area’s problems. Another challenge we face concerns the United Kingdom and Germany, in particular. Both our countries are confronted with rising property prices and with the overarching question of whether there is a bubble building up. At least in Germany, we do not see a bubble at this point in time. Price increases are focused on large cities; for the country as a whole prices rose by a moderate 4.5% last year. Nevertheless, further monitoring and in-depth analysis are certainly necessary. And in this regard, the Bank of England certainly leads the way. Although the structures of our property markets differ in many respects, there is still a lot we can learn from each other’s experience. Thus, I highly value the cooperation between the Bank of England and the Bundesbank. In any case, international cooperation always starts at the personal level. This is where our representatives in London come into play. Their task is to build networks, to share information and ideas, to explain the Bundesbank’s positions and to facilitate cooperation. For the past three years Mr Orthacker has filled this position here in London. And judging from the distinguished crowd gathered today, he has done an excellent job. I would like to thank him personally and in the name of the Bundesbank for his service. I would also like to take the opportunity to welcome his successor, Ms Julia Becker. She is an expert from the Bundesbank’s Financial Stability Department and has considerable experience in market infrastructures and related regulatory issues. Some of you have already met her, and I am certain that she will be a worthy successor to Mr Orthacker. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Ravi Menon: The Institute of Banking and Finance at forty Welcome remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore and Chairman of the Institute of Banking and Finance, at the Institute of Banking and Finance 40th Anniversary Dinner, Singapore, 10 June 2014. *      *      * Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance, Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Pioneers of IBF, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, On behalf of the Council and staff of IBF, let me welcome you to IBF’s 40th anniversary dinner. IBF is where it is today because of what previous generations of Council members and staff, industry practitioners and training providers accomplished together. They are the Pioneers of IBF, whose contributions and achievements we are gathered here to celebrate. It is the inspiring vision and tireless efforts of these Pioneers to build competencies in finance that helped create the international financial centre that Singapore has become today. I am delighted that several of them are here with us this evening. IBF was set up in 1974 with the support of the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) and the Association of Banks in Singapore (ABS). Those were early days in Singapore’s development as a financial centre. The birth of IBF helped to fill a critical gap in the training of Singapore’s financial sector workforce. The subsequent growth of IBF has been a story of each generation building on the efforts of previous generations and helping to strengthen the capabilities of Singapore’s finance professionals. Let me begin by thanking the first group of IBF Pioneers: the past Chairmen of IBF. • Mr Michael Wong Pakshong, as IBF’s inaugural Chairman from 1975 to 1977, laid out the vision for IBF – to develop a strong suite of educational programmes to support the growth of Singapore’s banking industry. • Mrs Elizabeth Sam, as IBF Chair from 1977 to 1981, introduced IBF’s first and most widely-recognised diploma programme – the Diploma in Banking and Finance. • Mr Ng Kok Song, who served as IBF Chairman from 1981 to 1982, introduced a new foreign exchange training programme that helped alleviate the shortage of FX dealers in those early years when Singapore was establishing itself as a global treasury hub. • Mr Koh Beng Seng, IBF’s longest serving Chairman – from 1982 to 1997 – oversaw the introduction of many new training programmes beyond banking to cater to the broader range of financial sector activities that took root during those years. • Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, as IBF Chairman from 1997 to 2001, fundamentally repositioned IBF, from being a direct provider of training to becoming a national accreditation and standard-setting body for financial sector training. • Mr Koh Yong Guan, who followed as IBF Chairman from 2001 to 2005, built on this strategic repositioning with the introduction of the now-familiar Financial Industry Competency Standards or FICS. • Mr Heng Swee Keat, IBF Chairman from 2005 to 2011, launched an impressive set of 53 standards under the FICS and secured a range of accredited training providers offering quality training and assessments benchmarked against the FICS. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The Pioneers of IBF comprise not only its past Chairmen but the many captains of industry who served on IBF Councils over the last 40 years. They provided practical industry insights which helped make IBF’s programmes relevant and meaningful. I would like to acknowledge in particular a few recent Council members who have shaped much of the work that culminated in this evening’s presentation. • Mrs Euleen Goh, as the first Chair of the FICS Steering Committee, marshalled an impressive army of industry contributors to put together our first set of FICS standards in 2005. • Mr Wee Ee Cheong, current IBF Vice Chairman and Chairman of the FICS Steering Committee, worked hard to drive the adoption of FICS and led the review of the FICS which will be re-launched later this evening as the IBF Standards. We also salute this evening the hundreds of industry practitioners who stepped forward in ways big and small over the last 40 years to help raise standards and build competencies. • You have served on IBF workgroups, reviewing consultation papers on competency standards or industry examinations or frameworks for continuous development. • You have volunteered as speakers, trainers and mentors, acting as industry ambassadors at IBF’s outreach programmes. You gave your time freely and shared your ideas selflessly. Thank you. We are also indebted to our partners and trainers who have contributed on a pro-bono basis to IBF’s learning resources – working on impossible timelines to deliver high-quality training standards and study guide materials. There is a final group that I want to acknowledge, the unsung heroes of the IBF story – the past and present staff of IBF. • From administering the CMFAS examinations to developing new industry examinations; • from reviewing and accrediting training programmes to certifying individuals under FICS; • the management and staff of IBF have been unrelenting in their commitment to raising industry standards. As we look back at IBF’s 40 years, we can take pride in what it has achieved. • Some 200,000 participants have benefitted to-date from training courses offered or accredited by IBF. • Close to 2,000 practitioners have been certified under the FICS Standards. One of the reasons why IBF has done well is that it has renewed itself periodically, to stay relevant and effective amidst a changing environment but always focused on its core mandate of promoting competency in finance. Today, IBF embarks on the next phase of its journey to raise industry standards. Our new mission is to “empower practitioners with capabilities for a robust Asian financial industry”. To equip our finance professionals for the next phase in Singapore’s development as a financial centre, IBF will focus on two new dimensions. First, we will put together programmes which will not only develop depth in core competencies but also breadth across related functional capabilities. A successful career in finance today requires versatility across different areas, be it to offer comprehensive solutions to customers or manage risks holistically across multiple business lines. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Second, we will build expertise and capabilities to serve and operate not just in Singapore but in a pan-Asian financial market. With the surge of opportunities in Asia, those with the knowledge and skills to operate across regional markets will be in high demand. These are capabilities that we must consciously seek to build amongst our professionals. IBF does not operate in a vacuum but in the larger context of what it takes to develop and grow the financial sector – to create meaningful jobs for Singaporeans, support the needs of the economy, and serve the larger region. It is now my pleasure to welcome our Guest-of-Honour, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance, Tharman Shanmugaratnam, to talk to us about this larger context. It is especially appropriate that DPM Tharman is doing this as he is himself an IBF Pioneer who, as IBF Chairman some 14 years ago, transformed IBF to set competency standards for the industry. DPM Tharman, please. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 George A Provopoulos: “The Chronicle of the great crisis – The Bank of Greece 2008–2013” Speech by Mr George A Provopoulos, Governor of the Bank of Greece, on the publication of “The Chronicle of the great crisis – The Bank of Greece 2008–2013”, Athens, 11 June 2014. *      *      * The Chronicle of the great crisis is the result of a joint effort by Bank of Greece staff. First of all, I would like to thank all those who contributed to the writing of this book. But far beyond the preparation of this text, a joint effort par excellence was required in order to successfully address the crisis itself. The purpose of the book is to record the intense and multifaceted activities of the Bank of Greece in the years from 2008 to 2013. This period will certainly mark a watershed in the history of modern Greece. In times which are critical and characterised by high risks, such as the ones in question, decision and policy making are also critical and characterised by high risk. The Bank of Greece was actively involved in such decision making, sometimes directly and other times indirectly, playing an important role both domestically and internationally, as a member of the Eurosystem. The Chronicle does not purport of course to compete with books of economic history that will be written in the future in order to recount and explain the great crisis of the Greek economy. Besides, the events discussed are too recent to allow an objective historical inquiry. For this reason, the account provided here is only limited to the Bank’s decisions, actions and other public interventions, which reflect our own, institutional, interpretation of what led to the crisis; which crucial decisions had to be made to address it; and what the Bank’s contribution was to the exit from it. The Bank’s role has mainly two aspects: first, its participation in the Eurosystem and in ECB decision-making, with a responsibility for monetary policy implementation in Greece; and second, the supervision of the banking system with a view to safeguarding financial stability. With specific regard to this second aspect – on which a large part of this book is focused – the Bank of Greece had faced enormous challenges during the crisis. In response, on many occasions it had to act rapidly and decisively, under extremely pressing conditions. During the crisis the Bank also sought to strengthen its role as an advisor to society, which at the time was inundated with conflicting information originating both in Greece and abroad, which resulted in confusion and higher uncertainty. Through our reports, speeches and interviews we tried to present the true facts in a simple, easily understood manner; to dispel misconceptions, and inform the public on the available options and their implications. The book presents an extensive discussion of the Bank’s public interventions and positions in the crisis period and describes the actions it took to safeguard financial stability. It provides detailed information on the enhanced banking supervision carried out in this very challenging period; on cash management and liquidity provision to the banking system; on the implementation of resolution and liquidation measures for credit institutions; and on the strategy for restructuring the banking system. In such a brief speech I could not cover the full spectrum of our actions during the crisis. Nevertheless, I would like to discuss three topics: first, the view of the Bank of Greece as to what caused the crisis; second, the Bank’s key positions regarding the policy orientations for exiting the crisis; third, the steps we took for safeguarding financial stability. 1.  What caused the crisis In addressing the crisis, the Bank of Greece first assessed its root causes. Of course these causes were there before the crisis, but came to the forefront with particular intensity after 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 2008. Back in 2001 it was expected that Greece’s inclusion in the core of European economies would act as a catalyst to accelerate its real convergence with the advanced European countries. Unfortunately, these expectations did not materialise. In the years that followed, economic growth relied mainly on consumption rather than on saving and investment, while any attempts to change long-established structures met with strong reactions. Public spending kept increasing, while revenue could not possibly keep pace, leading to large deficits and historically high levels of public debt, despite the unprecedented low interest rates. The political system hesitated to take decisive reform initiatives. The country enjoyed the benefits of the single currency, but failed to show that it respected the obligations arising from participation in the monetary union. The distortions in the growth model the country was following had been repeatedly highlighted by the Bank of Greece. Its warnings however were not heeded. The country continued on its carefree path, borrowing and accumulating debts in order to consume increasingly more goods and services that it did not itself produce. With the onset of the global financial crisis the international environment drastically deteriorated, and countries with large structural imbalances were hit the most severely. As early as in late 2008, the Bank was warning that the crisis, which was about to hit Greece as well, would be deep and of a structural nature, adding that overcoming that crisis would require a long, methodical and painstaking effort, given that imbalances and structural rigidities accumulated over several years had to be urgently addressed. By late 2008, it had become evident that the implementation of a multiannual programme was needed in order to reduce the fiscal deficit, control debt dynamics and carry out extensive structural reforms which would boost the economy’s weak competitiveness. However, the policies adopted were timid, even though markets had started moving towards an overall reassessment of credit risk that did not preclude a Greek default, therefore imposing new, more onerous lending conditions. By early 2010 it was no longer possible to cover the deficits with financing from the markets. In Greece, the international financial crisis was evolving into a sovereign debt crisis. In April 2010 the Greek government submitted to the euro area countries and the IMF a request for financial support, and in May the first Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies was signed. This triggered a process of sharp economic adjustment in order to avoid default and lay the groundwork for rebalancing the economy. This process, currently at an advanced stage, has not been linear or painless. For one, it had not been clear from the outset that the country could indeed achieve an orderly adjustment. This is why an exit from the euro area was often presented as looming or unavoidable. Moreover, the conduct of economic policy during that period was subject to critical swings between the consistent implementation of the adjustment programme and hesitation due to political cost considerations. In such a climate, significant modifications had to be made to the original agreements with our partners, in order to make up for implementation delays or errors in initial forecasts. Fortunately, collapse and exit from the euro area were prevented, thanks to the society’s choice in favour of the country’s future within the euro area, the assistance provided by our partners, and the efforts of successive governments. Thus, today we can look forward to the future with greater confidence, as we can expect that the economy will recover and, under certain conditions, will enter into a new, virtuous circle. The economic and social costs of the adjustment have been and remain heavy. The citizens’ sacrifices have been very painful. However, losses in terms of output, employment and incomes have been the price that had to be paid to prevent a collapse of the economy. Had this collapse not been averted, losses would have been much greater. An exit from the euro area, as I had put in an interview, would have opened the gates of hell. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 2.  Policy orientations to overcome the crisis Against today’s more favourable background for the country, recovery appears to be ante portas. The year 2014 marks a halt to a deep and protracted recession. Of course, the economy’s adjustment has not been completed. But as the first, difficult cycle seems to be coming to a positive end, it would be helpful to evaluate actions and omissions and, most importantly, draw lessons for the future. The Bank’s positions concerning the exit from the crisis have been expressed based on a number of policy orientations, reflected in its publications and described in detail in the Chronicle. These policy orientations can be summarised as follows:  First, Greece should make every effort to remain in the euro area and steer clear of default, which would have incalculable economic and social consequences.  Second, the adjustment programme and the agreements with our partners ensure the financing of the Greek economy. Without them, default would have been inevitable. This is why they must be implemented consistently. Moreover, to a very large extent the programme’s terms relate to changes that should have been implemented long ago.  Third, in order to return to growth, securing its European perspective, the country should eliminate its fiscal imbalances, improve its competitiveness and enhance the export orientation of its economy, modernise the state, restore competitive conditions in markets and reduce the burden of public debt. Greece also needs a new, outward-oriented growth model.  Fourth, fiscal adjustment should rely primarily on a rationalisation of expenditure. Revenue must be increased by reducing tax evasion and broadening the tax base to make possible the necessary lowering of tax rates and the tax burden in the future.  Fifth, the historical challenge that the country is facing necessitates the greatest possible alignment of political and social forces, an understanding at the national level and the widest possible convergence of views.  Finally, the adjustment programmes are a necessary but not sufficient condition for exiting the crisis. A radical reorientation of the economy towards a new model requires a comprehensive National Plan for Growth, which will have far-reaching goals and will be implemented consistently. Adhering to these policy orientations, the Bank of Greece has performed its institutional functions, informed the citizens and advised the government. 3.  Safeguarding financial stability In addition, however, to its advisory role in economic policy making, the Bank of Greece also had decisive powers and responsibilities for shaping a strategy for the banking sector, constantly geared to safeguarding financial stability. Although the crisis in Greece started in the public sector, contagion to the banking system was inevitable. The banking system was hit by the successive downgrades of the Greek government’s credit rating that led to corresponding downgrades of the banks’ credit ratings. This fact, on the one hand decreased the value of collateral available to banks for borrowing from the Eurosystem, and on the other hand made their access to the interbank market particularly hard and expensive, gradually leading to their exclusion. With the debt restructuring in 2012 the value of the bonds held by Greek credit institutions was severely impaired. Thus their capital position was eroded or even turned negative. At the same time, the recession was leading to a continuous increase in non-performing loans, while the surrounding uncertainty was encouraging deposit withdrawals. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches To safeguard financial stability, the Bank of Greece intervened by taking several targeted steps. I shall only briefly refer to the most important among them. First, the Bank of Greece ensured the uninterrupted supply of liquidity to the banking system, including by emergency assistance to the extent required. The provision of emergency liquidity assistance was reviewed every two weeks and the ECB Governing Council could put a stop to it for a variety of reasons (lack of collateral, low capital adequacy ratios of the banks, incomplete implementation of the programme, etc.). We therefore had to thoroughly prepare our positions and persistently intervene to prevent any negative developments. Second, to avoid a further shaking of the confidence of depositors we constantly had to supply the banking network with banknotes, so as to prevent cash shortages at bank branches or ATMs. In Chapter 8 of the book we release for the first time data on the increased demand for cash and the Bank’s cash management during the crisis, which I believe you will find very interesting. Third, we had to map out a strategy for the recapitalisation, restoration of soundness and restructuring of the banking system. The point of departure for this strategy was the first diagnostic assessment of Greek banks conducted with the help of BlackRock in 2011, and the viability study that followed in 2012. The Bank of Greece engaged foreign agencies to assist it in these efforts, having as a primary objective to consolidate international confidence in the objectivity and impartiality of the assessment of banks’ capital needs. The four credit institutions that were assessed to be viable were recapitalised through a combination of private and public funds. Non-sustainable banks that failed to raise private funds were resolved without any depositor suffering the slightest loss. Overall, there have been twelve bank resolutions, carried out according to the provisions of a new legal framework established in 2011, to the formulation of which the Bank of Greece had crucially contributed. The restructuring of the banking system continued with the absorption of subsidiaries and/or branches of foreign banks by large Greek banks. This way, we have reached 2014 having four large banks, plus a few smaller ones, instead of the approximately 20 banks that existed at the onset of the crisis. In 2013 we asked BlackRock to conduct a new diagnostic assessment. Based on the results of this new exercise, the Bank of Greece updated the banks’ capital needs. The credibility of the exercise and the markets’ confidence are evidenced by the successful capital increases recently carried out by the four core banks in a span of only two months, attracting the interest of foreign investors. In fact two of the core banks managed to not only cover their capital needs, as assessed by the stress test, but to also raise the funds needed to repurchase their preference shares. The contribution of the Bank of Greece in the fields of safeguarding financial stability and restructuring the banking sector will of course be judged by results. Thanks to the action taken by the Bank and the support provided by the Eurosystem through some critically important decisions, banks have continued to operate smoothly, even in periods of widespread uncertainty. This prevented an open banking crisis – which would also have had a direct impact on the country’s future within (or outside) the euro area. At the same time, the banking system, despite the heavy losses it has suffered, has managed to effectively deal with its problems and has been restructured on solid foundations through the guidance provided by the Bank of Greece as supervisory authority. To sum up, The Chronicle of the great crisis tells the story of the country’s efforts – at times successful, at times not – setbacks, risks, achievements and delays that marked these turbulent and eventful times between 2008 and 2013. It is my hope that this narrative will be of use to the historians of the future who will focus on this period. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 I would like to close by recalling that during these last few years the Bank of Greece had to cope with historically unprecedented conditions that required swift decision-making and difficult and delicate handling. The Bank responded to these heavy challenges outstretching its capacities, thanks to the hard work, ethos and dedication of its staff. It is to you therefore – members of the family of the Bank of Greece, who have successfully shouldered a heavy load – that I would like to say a big “thank you” and dedicate this book. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Benoît Cœuré: Rethinking economics after the crisis Introductory remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, during the panel discussion at the Third Conference of the ECB Macro-prudential Research Network, Frankfurt am Main, 24 June 2014. *      *      * I wish to thank Jean-Édouard Colliard and Sebastian Schmidt for their contributions to these remarks. I am solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. Ladies and gentlemen, In the short run central banks need quick answers to specific questions, but whether they can be obtained depends largely on research progress made long before. To use a metaphor, central banks are sometimes asked to fix the system, but must prepare their toolbox years in advance. In these short remarks I will discuss why, in my view, economics sometimes failed to give us the necessary tools to address policy challenges during the recent crisis, and underline some paradigmatic changes, or rather extensions to what already exists, which would be welcome in order to build a stronger link between economic policy and economic thinking. In the end, I believe we can overcome the different perspectives by working together. Economic thinking and central banks: some frictions Policy-makers and academics live in very different worlds and face different constraints. While ideas born in academia were instrumental in establishing the key tenets of modern monetary policy, they sometimes proved less useful in dealing with some challenges we faced during the crisis. To (mis-)quote John Maynard Keynes, it is then more difficult for central bankers to distil “their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few years back”. Let me start these remarks by mentioning a few frictions that we should try to overcome for economic research to have even more impact on policy: Different temporalities Robert Solow famously observed in 1967 that economists are “determined little thinkers”. They progress step by step by studying the smaller problems, and gradually get closer to answering the bigger questions. This temporality is well adapted to academia because searching for the truth is a very long-run objective. Policy-makers however do not have the luxury of a long time horizon, and would get much help from more big thinking in academia. Unfortunately, these different temporalities have an impact on economic thinking. The typical methodology of economic theory is first to consider a frictionless benchmark, corresponding for instance to a long-run steady state equilibrium, and then enrich it with frictions. While this is understandable from a methodological point of view, this approach can easily imply a neglect of the short and medium-term dynamics, drastic adjustments and complexities that are important for central banks. Another unfortunate outcome is that the typical economics curriculum tends to emphasise the frictionless benchmark more than the realistic variants. Shifting the academic focus to a world with frictions would have a welcome impact on teaching, allowing central banks to hire from a pool of young economists better equipped with methods and tools to address policy challenges. Different objectives The world of policy-makers is not one where it is enough to reject a null hypothesis, but where an actual decision needs to be taken, often on the basis of partial information. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Economics is used as an input to form disciplined and educated judgements. While it is our task to make the best possible use of economic knowledge, deeper collaboration could be achieved if this constraint were internalised by academics. Academic research develops according its own internal logic and research questions, which may not always overlap with social priorities. The choice of questions addressed sometimes depends on their intellectual appeal more than on policy relevance. The publication “game” can even generate short-term herding and fads. The validation of an economic model is typically a backward-looking exercise: is the model able to replicate past observations? In the world of policy-makers, one has to think seriously about what happens if the data-generating process changes. Forecasting such changes is also important, as policy actions often have an impact with a lag. Issues like robustness, non-linearities and parameter instability are key concerns for central banks and have only been taken seriously in academic research relatively recently. The recent crisis is of course the perfect example of a situation in which more robustness would have been necessary. In crisis conditions many standard results no longer apply, established asset pricing relationships break down, and the transmission mechanism of monetary policy becomes problematic. Let me mention a few elements that in my view have become particularly important, and relate them to economic thinking. Answering new policy questions – some examples Insufficient data Crises are times when new questions are being asked, and when policy-makers have to “open the hood of the car” and understand mechanisms that they would normally not look into, because they are assumed to be well functioning. This typically requires data that are more granular than those needed in normal times. While steering macro policies in normal times typically requires little more than monitoring aggregate prices and quantities, acting in a crisis requires drawing the map of a complex network of interdependencies, and making it available for simulation. Without such data being prepared in advance, policy-makers are bound to rely on anecdotal evidence provided by those very actors which will potentially benefit from their measures. The development of studies bases on Target2 data of intraday payments, which I see as a positive by-product of the MaRs network, is typical of this. Financial instability and the macroeconomy We have to address urgent questions in the still rather new field of financial stability and macro-prudential supervision. Central banks have to rely on the development of new conceptual frameworks, models and tools that allow us to assess the effectiveness and transmission channels of alternative policy instruments (such as loan-to-value ratios, bank capital requirements, leverage caps, liquidity ratios etc.) as well as their interactions with the broader economy. This requires, for instance, integrating widespread financial instability into aggregate models, accounting for the fundamental role of bank defaults, the design of bankruptcy rules, fire sales and elevated discontinuities that are typical of financial (in)stability. Macro stress-tests, for instance, require integrating complex second-round effects of bank deleveraging after a shock. In doing so, we have to be aware of potential contagion risks across EU countries and feedback effects that can amplify financial instability. Policy-making in real time also has to rely on a diversity of forecasting tools and successful early warning indicators that allow us to assess the current level of systemic instability. The MaRs team has worked hard on the development and evaluation of such tools as well as the utilisation of data sources that can be used for these tasks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  This approach goes beyond understanding macro-prudential policies better. Another important example is analysing the impact of unconventional monetary policies. In this regard, the experience of central banks around the world with various non-standard measures offers a unique opportunity to improve our understanding of the effectiveness of alternative tools. Structural changes? We are also facing important questions about ongoing changes in the structural features underlying our economies. To start with a topical example, we are witnessing a persistent decline in equilibrium real interest rates. Our understanding of this development is still limited. Of course, there is no shortage of opinions, and some commentators, starting with Lawrence Summers, have even proclaimed the emergence of a “new normal” referring to Alvin Hansen’s 1939 concept of “secular stagnation” with interest rates staying permanently at lower levels and economic activity remaining subdued. There are many such examples. For instance, our imperfect understanding of the current slope of the Phillips curve and the trends in productivity is one of the reasons why the ECB has been reluctant to complement its forward guidance with numerical triggers. I do not share this pessimism but I think it is of great importance to understand to what extent this development is driven by long-term forces, such as demographic changes or lower potential growth, and to what extent it is driven by medium-term forces, such as changes in risk aversion and the perceptions of macroeconomic risks in the wake of the recent crisis. Frictions and rationality Institutional details and frictions, both on the side of market participants and regulatory institutions, have an impact which is difficult to detect in normal periods. Interbank markets, for instance, used to be seen by academics as a somewhat dull topic before the crisis, so that little was known about their functioning. Both in Europe and in the United States, they have been at the centre of recent policy debates, generating a welcome crop of new research, to which MaRs has been contributing. The dominant “rational expectations” modelling paradigm in economic research postulates strong assumptions about human decision-making, implying, for instance, that economic agents are always able to assign sensible probabilities to alternative outcomes. Clearly, this characterisation of human decision-making stands in stark contrast to our own recent experience. We need to understand how panics and bubbles can emerge from psychological biases. The Nobel prize co-awarded to Robert Shiller last year will certainly encourage more research in this direction. While much progress has been made on studying notions such as Knightian uncertainty, sentiment, confidence or sunspots, more work is probably needed before they can be part of our standard modelling toolbox. A challenge is of course to come up with tested and robust behavioural theories. Another important departure from rationality that is of key practical concern is how simple behavioural rules adopted by market participants in normal times can lead to entirely different outcomes or even to market meltdowns in crisis periods. Agent-based models are a promising way to look at these problems, but they need to be developed in close cooperation with practitioners and policy-makers to take the proper behavioural rules as inputs. On both issues, what policy-makers need above all is more work integrating these approaches into richer frameworks where the impact of policy tools can be analysed. A lot of progress has of course already been made on many of these topics, in no small part due to the MaRs efforts. The crisis acted as a wake-up call and spurred a lot of interesting research along the lines I have briefly sketched. But a lot of work is still ahead. Even before the crisis many papers had discussed many of the mechanisms that played a role, but they did not form a consistent body of knowledge that could be used outside academia. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Let me conclude with some thoughts about the new paradigms we would like to see emerging. Making economics more relevant for policy. Towards new paradigms? From a policy perspective I think it is clear that we need more realistic frictions in our toolbox. Many of the frictions I have mentioned have been studied already, but a key requirement from a policy perspective is that they should not be studied independently, as is often done, but integrated into a general framework. We need to be able to think about behavioural issues, financial frictions and macroeconomics inside a common set-up. Central banks also need economists trained to think along all of these different dimensions and able to tackle the substantial degree of complexity posed by these problems, which should be part of the curriculum. In line with policy-makers’ concerns for robustness, it is essential that several paradigms and approaches can be developed in parallel. The recent economic crisis was also in large part a crisis in economic thinking, paralysing policy institutions when they needed to act. With a more pluralistic approach, it is more likely that new conceptual tools can be found when the standard ones are not helpful. Of course a balance must be found between plurality, which brings robustness, and proliferation, i.e. too many approaches, which would prevent comparability. The very nature of a crisis invariably means that it is understudied before it unravels. It is not surprising that the period of the “great moderation” did not generate a lot of studies on crises. One way to anticipate potential problems and important topics would be at least to understand crises of the past, working with economic historians. At a minimum, let us hope that a lot of economists will continue working on the latest crisis after it is over, instead of going back to “business as usual”. Because of the frictions I mentioned at the beginning, it may be necessary for central banks to stimulate research on topics and approaches relevant to them. The MaRs network has been very successful at promoting some of the new approaches and tools that we need, in particular by building an aggregate framework incorporating financial instability. We would now find it desirable that this approach takes root in academic circles, and can permeate the development of a new paradigm, influencing research and teaching. In other words, we invite other researchers, both in academia and in policy institutions outside the ESCB, to follow up on the progress already made to establish closer links between current policy challenges and economic thinking. I thank you for your attention. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Fabio Panetta: On the special role of macroprudential policy in the euro area Remarks by Mr Fabio Panetta, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Netherlands Bank (De Nederlandsche Bank), Amsterdam, 10 June 2014. *      *      * Introduction I would like to thank Klaas Knot and De Nederlandsche Bank (DNB) for inviting me to this seminar. It is a pleasure to be here, and to carry on our discussions of the challenges associated with the implementation of macroprudential policy (MAP). Policy-makers around the world have been engaged in recent years in a wide-ranging debate on the potential role of the new, as yet broadly untested, MAP regime and its connection with two other regimes that share similar features but have a much longer history, namely microprudential policy (MIP) and monetary policy (MP). The fact that MAP is or will soon be operational in many advanced economies does not diminish the importance of continuing this debate, especially in the euro area, which is in many ways a natural laboratory to study the challenges posed by MAP. First, euro-area economies rely heavily on bank credit to finance the real economy. Second, their banking markets have become increasingly concentrated in recent years, and might become more so in the future as a consequence of market pressures and banking union. Third, the euro area is subject to a single MP regime, but its stance cannot take into account the heterogeneity among member states and its transmission mechanism has been weakened by financial fragmentation. Finally, major changes are taking place on the institutional side for both MIP and MAP, with an increased centralisation of functions within the ECB, but also a notable retention of responsibilities at the national level. I will argue that this state of affairs has two main implications. The first one is that MAP is likely to be particularly important and powerful in the euro area. The second one is that its interaction with MIP and MP raises issues – opportunities as well as difficulties – that are specific to the euro area and in many ways more delicate than those faced by policy-makers elsewhere. In particular, an open dialogue between micro and macroprudential regulators is absolutely essential in this respect, especially today: our handling of the interplay between MAP and MIP is setting a precedent and shaping public expectations on how the two policies will work in the future, so any opacity on what we are doing, or why we are doing it, could be extremely damaging. In the following paragraphs I will first recall three key factors that make the euro area’s case special: high reliance on banks (Section 2); heterogeneity and fragmentation (Section 3); and concentration of the banking system (Section 4). I will then comment on “what to do next” (Section 5) and discuss some of the practical challenges surrounding the implementation of MAP (Section 6). The thread running through the arguments, to which I will come back in my concluding remarks, is that MAP can certainly play a prominent role in the euro area, both structurally and in today’s situation, and that special care must be taken in operationalising it to exploit the synergies with MIP and MP. 1. High reliance on banks One key common denominator of the euro-area economies is that they rely heavily on bank finance. Financial markets and non-bank intermediaries are less developed than in the US or the UK, and typically do not fully compensate for shifts in the supply of bank credit. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches The MAP toolbox is generally thought to operate mainly through the banking sector; this is certainly the case for most of the instruments that we are beginning to explore following the introduction of the Basel III and CRD-IV-CRR regulation.1 Hence, the regime could be both more powerful and more important here than in market-based economies. If a variation in MAP capital buffers had a broadly similar impact on the supply of bank credit in the US and in the EA, I would expect its impact on total credit to be stronger in the EA, where non-bank credit is both smaller and relatively less elastic. The linkage between capital buffers and aggregate credit gaps is also likely to be stronger in bank-centric economies. Other things being equal, this will tend to make the risks and potential gains from using countercyclical capital (or liquidity) buffers greater in the EA than elsewhere. The structure of the financial system is endogenous (it reacts to changing regulation), so MAP policies focusing on banks may ultimately affect markets or the shadow banking sector.2 In the medium term, however, the structure of financial markets in the EA can arguably be taken as given, so that high reliance on banks implies a more powerful transmission of MAP. 2. Heterogeneity and fragmentation The second distinctive factor of the euro area has to do with the heterogeneity among member states. The business cycles of national economies are not synchronous; real and financial markets are not completely integrated, despite significant progress since 1999. The fragmentation of European financial markets has a structural dimension: many European banks operate mostly in retail markets, which are by nature local markets. Furthermore, cross-border bank penetration has always been relatively low in Europe.3 This has placed severe strains on the MP transmission mechanism. With macroeconomic outlooks that (in general) differ widely among member countries, and a monetary transmission mechanism that (as of today) works in a strongly asymmetric fashion – and is least effective precisely where it is most needed, namely in the periphery – the value of introducing policy tools with a national focus is considerable. In this environment, country-specific MAP regimes can be used not only to enhance financial stability but also to prevent financial and possibly real imbalances stemming from the “one size doesn’t fit any” problem that may at times be associated with MP. This point is intuitive, but it can also be formalised, showing that MAP rules can reduce macroeconomic volatility and improve aggregate welfare.4 We have plenty of evidence, both before and after the crisis, of discrepancies in real and financial cycles among euro-area countries. As an example, let us consider bank lending to firms and households during the last decade (Figure 1). Germany, France, Italy and Spain all started off in 2000 with ratios of corporate loans to GDP in a relatively narrow range between 35 and 45 per cent (panel A). Over the following ten years, however, the ratio declined in Germany, remained constant in France, increased in Italy, and literally ballooned in Spain. This diversity also appeared in household credit (panel B) and house prices (panel C).                                                  1  Countercyclical capital buffers and risk weights are obvious examples of bank-focused MAP instruments. On the market side, one could think instead of restrictions on specific transactions (e.g. short selling). 2  Panetta (2013b). 3  From 2007 on, foreign banks accounted for 9% on average of the total number of active banks in France, Germany, Italy, Spain and held only 6.5% of total bank assets. By contrast, in the United Kingdom foreign banks accounted for 57% of the total headcount and held 14% of total bank assets. For the US, the figures are 28% and 23% (Claessens and Van Horen, 2013). Banks’ foreign credit claims in euro-area countries declined significantly as a consequence of the financial crisis (see Bologna and Caccavaio, 2014). 4  Angelini, Neri and Panetta (2014) examine the gains from coordinating MP and MAP in a closed economy. Brzoza-Brzezina et al. (2013) extend the analysis to the case of two countries facing asymmetric shocks but subject to the same MP, and find that country-specific LTVs and capital buffers have significant stabilising effects.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Evidence suggests that a set of country- and/or sector-specific MAP measures could have been used in the run-up to the crisis to limit the emergence of imbalances. In fact, the crisis emphasised that policy-makers should be concerned with the whole distribution of future economic outcomes.5 Some argue that MP could take an active stance in cases where inflation is on target but financial imbalances generate large upside or downside risks around its expected path.6 In any case it is clear that, in dealing with situations of the kind just illustrated, targeted MAP tools are a powerful complement – possibly an alternative – to a “lean against the wind” MP stance. To the extent that credit booms, or excessive concentration of exposures within specific sectors in specific countries, stem from externalities among banks, MAP clearly has the potential to usefully complement a pure MIP regime.7 Many commentators have indeed pointed to strategic complementarities – a specific form of externality by which the pay-offs associated with a bank’s decision are positively affected by the number of banks that behave in the same way – as one of the key drivers behind the financial exuberance of the early 2000s.8 Given its focus on the solvency of individual institutions, MIP did not historically, and probably could not in general, respond to these types of behaviour. Instead, MAP could have discouraged, for instance, excessive mortgage lending through higher LTVs on real-estate loans, or a disproportionate reliance on wholesale funding through an NSFR-type instrument.9 Crucially, these would have operated across the board, regardless of whether banks appeared individually resilient or not. 3. Concentration The banking systems of the euro area have relatively high, and rising, levels of concentration.10 In the medium term further impetus in this direction could stem from market pressures and from Banking Union. So far the debate on macroprudential policy has ignored the question of how the structure of the banking system itself might affect an MAP regime. Yet there are at least three reasons why structure – in particular high concentration – should matter. First, the literature on the bank lending channel11 and the bank capital channel12 suggests that large banks with highly liquid and diversified assets are less sensitive to MP impulses (they adjust their credit supply more gradually to changes in the MP stance). A high level of concentration, with credit markets dominated by a few large players, would thus make it harder for MP to affect banking credit cycles: if the credit multiplier associated with monetary                                                  5  Visco (2009). 6  As Stein (2014) notes, this activist approach is justified even if the monetary authority does not have an explicit financial stability objective. The point of tackling the underlying financial imbalance is to reduce the variance of inflation and unemployment around their target values. 7  Brunnermeier et al. (2009). 8  Acharya and Yorulmazer (2013), which builds on Rajan (1994), strategic complementarities cause herding in banks’ investment strategies: banks choose to take on correlated exposures because, if they do, negative shocks are more likely to cause systemic crises where institution-specific (e.g. reputational) losses are negligible and public bail-outs very likely. One could think of similar complementarities on the liability side of the balance sheet.  9  See Catte, Pagano and Visco (2010) on the role of MAP in the US, i.e. whether adopting it would have prevented the bubble; see also Neri (2012). 10  Between 2005 and 2011, the market share of the three largest banks in the European Union increased from roughly 46% to over 60%; in the US, it went from 20% to 30%, while in Japan it remained stable at about 40% (Bijlsma and Zwart, 2013). 11  Kashyap and Stein (2000). 12  Van den Heuvel (2001); Gambacorta and Mistrulli (2004). 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches policy is low, any attempt to control credit aggregates through MP interventions would require large swings in interest rates, which in turn could cause significant distortions in relative prices outside the financial sector. While the effectiveness of MAP tools is still largely untested, a euro-area-wide MAP framework might well fill an important gap in this respect. Indeed, big, liquid, diversified banks may respond more to MAP impulses, as we know that right up until the onset of the crisis the capital ratios of large banks were very close to the regulatory minima. If this regularity were to be confirmed in the future despite regulatory changes, then we could conclude that large banks, with their thin capital buffers, are likely to be more sensitive to a countercyclical capital buffer (CCB) tightening. A second, related point is that the interaction between MP and MAP ought to be weaker and thus less problematic when the market is more concentrated. One important finding of the literature on the interaction between MP and MAP is that there can be significant overlaps between them.13 However, insofar as concentration weakens the financial stability spillover of MP by making banks’ lending decisions less dependent on the monetary policy stance, it also widens the scope for independent macroprudential decision-making.14 This would be good news for the euro area, where the policy framework should place national MAP authorities in a good position to internalise conflicts between MAP and MP. Finally, the concentration of the industry is also an important determinant of the extent of any overlaps, hence potential tensions, between MAP and MIP. To see why concentration matters in this context, think of two polar cases. In a one-bank economy, the overlap between MIP and MAP is perfect, and coordination is crucial. If there is no coordination, in a recession the MIP authority raises its requirement, the MAP authority reduces its own, and they end up neutralising one another. In an economy with many (N) small banks, on the other hand, the overlap must be less significant. As long as the banks’ levels of capitalisation differ, the MAP authority can lower the requirement on all banks while the MIP authority can pursue its objective of preventing idiosyncratic bank failures by raising capital requirements for the k banks it identifies as fragile. In net terms, capital requirements will be effectively reduced only for N-k banks. This means that MAP is again diluted by MIP, but the dilution is targeted to the banks that need higher ratios in relation to their risk. Furthermore, the combined intervention stimulates a reallocation of credit from fragile to sound banks, which is of course a desirable outcome.15 MIP and MAP are clearly complementary from the operational standpoint. The synergy works in two ways: MAP analysis should inform and help focus the activity of micro supervisors; at the same time, micro supervisors will have a key role to play in implementing most macro policy interventions, because these are largely based on the use of micro tools to pursue macro objectives.16 However, the two policies have different aims, and the example above suggests that the tension between them may be more severe in concentrated banking systems. Compared with other systems, EA economies are in many ways closer to the polar one-bank case. This means that it is crucial to work out an explicit ranking of the policy objectives. As a consequence, clearly defining the processes that regulate the interaction between MIP and MAP authorities will be particularly important for the EA. To my mind it is clear that the                                                  13  Angelini, Nicoletti-Altimari and Visco (2013); Angelini, Neri, Panetta (2014); Collard et al. (2013). 14  Of course, there are other channels through which MP can affect financial stability, such as via risk taking (e.g. Borio and Zhu, 2012).  15  Heterogeneity among banks is crucial to this argument: if the N small banks all hold identical portfolios and capital buffers, then tension between MAP and MIP arises here exactly as in the one-bank world. This is another argument for preventing the sort of herd behaviour mentioned in Section 3, incentivising instead the diversification of business models and investment strategies between banks. 16  Bank of England (2011). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 overarching MAP objective of reducing systemic risk logically precedes the MIP objective of preventing idiosyncratic bank failures, for three complementary reasons. First, no individual bank can be deemed sound where significant systemic risks loom large: as we learned in 2008–9, even liquid and well-capitalised banks can be quickly cornered if funding markets seize up or asset prices plummet owing to fire sales. Second, idiosyncratic bank failures are a matter of concern almost exclusively for systemic spillovers: a bank’s failure may or may not constitute a serious problem, depending on whether its counterparties can withstand its demise. Third, experience shows that big, well-diversified banks are largely sheltered from idiosyncratic shocks and can only become insolvent because of a systemic shock. On these premises, my view is that MIP should work to fine-tune regulatory requirements for individual institutions subject to the provision of adequate aggregate financial stability by MAP. The governance structure we set up in the euro area might strike external observers as overcomplicated. Yet its design is conceptually appealing, because it puts us in a good position to insure coordination between MIP and MAP at both European and national level. What is crucial is that the ECB retains both MIP responsibilities (through the Single Supervisory Mechanism) and, in coordination with the European Systemic Risk Board, direct MAP powers to adjust the policy stance of individual national authorities (through CRR/CRD IV). The Governing Council should thus be able to internalise any tensions between MIP and MAP and establish a well-defined hierarchy between them. 4. Caveats: getting MAP to work There are, of course, risks and uncertainties attached to the implementation of MAP in the euro area. A first challenge – and one that is clearly not confined to the euro area only – is that financial cycles, like most economic phenomena, are notoriously difficult to identify ex ante. Assessing in real time the causes behind any divergence among countries or markets, and establishing to what extent they reflect fundamentals, is not easy. One should guard against the temptation to look at a handful of indicators in isolation. MAP should ideally be grounded in the analysis of a broad set of risk indicators and rely on a joined up, holistic view of how these are related to economic fundamentals, domestically and abroad. Structural economic models can certainly help, but they are plainly not rich enough to capture all the dimensions of the problem. Hence, MAP policy-making is largely judgmental, and will remain so for some time to come. To operationalise MAP it is also crucial to identify how far banks (that is, leveraged financial intermediaries) are involved in any hypothetical build-up of risks. The amount of systemic risk generated by a bubble depends on a number of factors, including who is financing it and whether the funding comes in the form of equity or debt. Typically, it is the direct participation of banks in a bubbly market that can turn a local problem into a systemic event.17 Real-estate markets are an interesting example of this problem, so allow me to return briefly to the credit and house price data I used earlier. Preliminary statistical evidence suggests that in several EU countries bank lending predicts house prices (Table 1). This is consistent with credit being an important determinant of the demand for housing. An inverse causation, with higher prices driving more real-estate financing by banks, is potentially more problematic because it may signal that asset prices are distorting banks’ choices: prices might be growing for exogenous and possibly non-fundamental reasons (a “bubble” or a wave of optimism), and banks might be piling in to reap capital gains on the housing stock. In this case the probability of a sharp correction in prices is higher. Such a correction is also more likely to translate into a banking crisis unless macroprudential measures are appropriately tightened                                                  17  Aoke and Nikolov (2012); Reinhart and Rogoff (2008). 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches beforehand. Interestingly, the only country for which house prices predict credit among those listed in Table 1 is Spain.18 Even when the diagnosis is reasonably clear (as was apparently the case for the Spanish mortgage market in the early 2000s), political economy may get in the way of MAP: in practice, it is difficult to “take the punch bowl away”. Furthermore, there is a risk that national authorities may design and manage national MAP regimes in a way which, although rational from a domestic perspective, could have undesired consequences. For example, national authorities may relax constraints on lending in order to stimulate the expansion of the domestic banking sector, with potential adverse spillovers for financial stability in other markets. The controls at the ESRB and SSM level mitigate the risk of these negative spillovers, but other risks are more subtle and harder to address. When faced with an increase in a specific sectoral risk, relating for instance to real-estate loans, a national MAP authority could force banks to hold more capital by a) raising the overall capital requirement, b) creating an ad hoc buffer on real-estate exposures (although presently this is not allowed under the CRD-IV/CRR), or c) increasing the risk weights. These seemingly identical measures actually differ in important ways. One of them is the degree to which regulators wish to be transparent about what their concerns are: the nature of the vulnerability may not be fully disclosed in case a). Another is the impact on market perceptions: compared with their foreign peers, domestic banks would look relatively better capitalised in cases a) and b), while they would be perceived as relatively undercapitalised in c). The euro-area configuration, with the ECB-SSM in a position to top up national measures, goes in the direction of assuaging political economy concerns of this kind. The punch bowl may be taken away by someone other than the host, namely a supranational authority. Furthermore, the fact that all individual initiatives must pass the collective examination of the ESRB and/or the Governing Council limits the scope for strategic choices by individual countries. MAP is certainly going to be “an adventure more than a job”, and it will entail a lot of adaptation and learning by doing. Here practice must necessarily come before theory. But since MAP can play a crucial role in resolving current economic difficulties, and the euro area has a sound institutional framework in place to handle it, our practice should begin in earnest, and sooner rather than later. 5. What could MAP do today, and how? These reflections suggest that MAP could make a considerable difference in the euro area. It is likely to be a powerful instrument; it reintroduces a degree of flexibility that could compensate for the lack of national monetary policy frameworks; and it can relieve monetary policy of some of its burden. The question is how to relate this structural discourse to our current impasse. As we know, the euro area is not in good shape: inflation is too low, growth is weak, MP is stretched and affected by financial segmentation, banks’ balance sheets are still strained, credit is scarce. Credit growth is weak across the area, although the underlying causes might differ across countries, and the need to stimulate credit supply accordingly ranks high on policy-makers’ agenda.19 Thus, the dilemma faced by MAP today is how to improve the financing conditions without further undermining banks’ resilience.                                                  18  An alternative explanation for this predictive relation is that rising house prices relax households’ borrowing constraints, allowing them to take on more debt. The two hypotheses cannot be disentangled by looking at plain correlations. Miles and Pillonca (2008) suggest that expectations of capital gains played a significant role in driving housing credit in Spain, Sweden, Belgium and the UK before the crisis. 19  Draghi (2014) clarifies that the ultimate objective of the comprehensive assessment is to address capital constraints on credit supply. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 How should this dilemma be resolved? The set of recent policy initiatives taken and discussed within the ESRB suggests that decision-makers have reached a consensus. In the Netherlands the central bank has announced the introduction of a systemic risk buffer for banks starting in January 2016, and similar initiatives have been taken in Belgium, Croatia and Estonia.20 The core of the consensus thus appears to be (a) that the key MAP instruments in these circumstances are bank capital ratios and (b) that a conservative policy stance is called for. In short, all we need is “more bank capital”. This consensus has emerged without an explicit debate on the underlying policy trade-offs, and it has implicitly reduced the broad question of “what MAP should do” to a narrow debate on “whether capital requirements should go up or down”. This state of affairs is dangerous and potentially harmful, regardless of one’s conclusions on the pros and cons of raising capital requirements. This for three reasons. First, we are not paying enough attention to the relation between MAP and MIP. I argued earlier (i) that the interplay between the two is delicate, (ii) that coordination is important, particularly in the euro area, and (iii) that MAP should take priority over MIP when their objectives appear to clash. From this point of view, our conduct seems an example of how not to run MAP. Interactions and coordination have indeed been largely absent from the policy discussion. For example, given the great heterogeneity in banks’ conditions, one could ask whether resilience could be improved by a set of selective MIP interventions on weak institutions, rather than a non-discriminatory increase in MAP capital requirements. This option, however, is not being discussed. We are glossing over the issue of coordination between MAP and MIP. The absence of discussion is bad per se, and it also carries a subtler but equally negative implication: the observed alignment between MAP and MIP authorities (both of which push for banks to hold more capital) could be interpreted as a sign that we are simply placing MIP objectives above MAP. As I remarked above, I consider this approach to be deeply problematic. The second pitfall is that we seem to have accepted that bank capital ratios are practically the only weapon in the MAP toolbox. A behavioural economist would view this focus on capital as an example of ambiguity aversion. That is, we might be acting mainly through capital ratios for the same reason stock market investors over-buy domestic stocks – simply because we know them better.21 Like a home bias in investment, such a “capital bias” can obviously be suboptimal: we could gain by greater “diversification” of our intervention “portfolio”. Furthermore, if we determine that tighter capital requirements are necessary but believe they have a negative spillover effect on credit supply, we should combine the tightening with initiatives to mitigate pro-cyclicality. A useful analogy can be drawn with MP, where interventions aimed at controlling the exchange rate can be sterilized in order not to affect the domestic money supply. In our case, we should be looking for ways to sterilize the impact of stiffer requirements on aggregate credit and economic activity. Admittedly, this is not easy, but it is possible. For example, it could be done by incentivising banks to build up their capital ratios through cost rather than credit cuts (I will shortly provide an example of this, based on our recent experience at the Bank of Italy). It could also be done by facilitating firms’ recourse to non-bank intermediaries (such as insurance companies) or by stimulating bond and stock issuance, in particular by SMEs.22                                                  20  Slovenia is moving in the opposite direction, and at the end of June will introduce a minimum loan-to-deposit ratio, in order to slow banks’ deleveraging. 21  Following the ambiguity aversion analogy, the bias may stem because we are able to characterise, in probabilistic terms, the implications of a shift in bank capital requirements, which have a long history of regulation, while we lack this ability for other, new or relatively untested MAP policy instruments (see e.g. Barberis and Thaler, 2003). 22  The Italian insurance supervisor (IVASS, which is under the control of the Bank of Italy) has now broadened the possibility for insurance companies to buy corporate bonds. The Italian government is introducing tax 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches The third problem is that the consensus does not seem to rest on a clear, shared understanding of the cause of the credit crunch. It should, because there is no ready-made, cookbook-style answer to the question of what MAP should do in a recession with weak credit (or in any other situation for that matter), as the policy measures to mitigate the crunch will differ with the causes. We should be wary of recipes that simply suggest more capital because “risk is high”, or less capital because “credit is weak”, without further analysis of the fundamental factors that drive the data. For example, if the credit crunch is caused by high credit risk, then higher capital requirements would certainly be the right choice. But if instead it depends on high funding costs for banks regardless of their individual situation (say, the poor condition of the domestic sovereign), raising capital charges might work (well-capitalised banks also obtain funds at lower rates) but it would clearly be second-best (central banks have a range of alternative tools that affect banks’ funding more directly). Finally, consider a crunch caused by a problem of coordination among banks. When an economy with a concentrated banking system is at a turning point, large lenders certainly have a notion that the speed of the recovery depends on their lending strategies, and they might well realise that lending more, or on softer terms, is the optimal strategy because it would stimulate growth and generate higher returns. Even in that case, however, it could well be that nobody is willing to bear the risk of expanding their balance sheet unless everybody else does likewise. The reason is that without coordination the recovery will not start and the lender who took the solitary initiative will pay all the costs of running a large balance sheet in a still recessionary environment: a credit crunch could emerge as a suboptimal Nash equilibrium. In this case, MAP policy could facilitate coordination among lenders to bring the crunch to an end and make the banking sector sounder.23 These stories are all possible and credible. Any policy prescription should be based on a discussion of which of them we believe to be most plausible. It seems to me that so far this discussion – like those on MAP-MIP interactions and MAP tools mentioned above – has been largely bypassed. The current conjuncture obviously puts pressure on policy makers to act decisively and narrows the room for wide-ranging discussion of governance and general principles. The MAP mechanism is now operating in conditions that are very different, and probably more complex, than those that will prevail in the future: in the pre-crisis period banks did not build up sufficient macroprudential capital buffers, greatly complicating the policy dilemma. After all, increasing prudential capital requirements might well be the right policy choice given the uncertain prospects of our economies. My main contention is that, even if that is so, we cannot afford to restrict ourselves to this strategy, or stick to it in a way that the public may see as a-critical. The decisions we take today set an important precedent for how MAP will work and how it will be expected to work in the future. Accordingly, I submit that being transparent on the logic behind MAP initiatives and making sure that that logic is consistent with our agreed principles, is at least as important as getting the details of any specific intervention right. The costs of setting a bad precedent or weakening the credibility of MAP, and particularly of its countercyclical nature, are hardly quantifiable, but I suspect that they would be very high indeed. The only way to contain them is to make sure that our decisions – whatever they are – derive from first principles, rest on sound economic analysis, and represent the outcome of a transparent, open dialogue among the authorities.                                                                                                                                                       benefits for IPOs and new equity issuance, as well as non-pecuniary incentives to stimulate issuance of bonds and equities by non-financial companies. 23  A similar story is formalised by Bebchuk and Goldstein (2011). Note that in this case MAP can have a role to play ex post, after the burst of a credit bubble, for exactly the same reason why it has one ex ante, in the build-up phase: it corrects externalities (a strategic complementarity) that could otherwise bring about suboptimal equilibria. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 6. From theory to practice Speculating on the interactions between MP, MAP and MIP in abstract is one thing. Bridging the gap between theory and practice, and setting up mechanisms that run reasonably smoothly, is another. Like many other central banks in the euro area (and beyond), the Bank of Italy has a micro (MIP) supervisory function that coexists with its macro (MP) function.24 This coexistence requires two elements. The first one is a protocol that regulates the bottom-up flow of information and allows the Board to form a consistent view of the state of affairs and of the related risks. The second one is a mechanism that defines the top-down transmission of decisions, assigning clear responsibilities to all the sub-structures involved in implementing any policy interventions agreed by the Board. Seen through a financial stability-MAP lens, the information flow within the Bank of Italy can be divided into three phases. First, risks are examined separately by the areas with the relevant expertise. Micro risks relating to banks’ balance sheets are examined by the supervisory directorates; risks relating to money markets are monitored by the markets and payment systems directorate; macro conditions of any other kind are looked at by the economics and statistics directorate. This information is shared and debated within the Financial Stability Coordination Committee. Meetings are ordinarily held twice a year, but can be called at any time by the committee members – the heads of the key directorates – or by its chair – a deputy governor. The third and last phase involves a discussion with the Board on the key conclusions, which includes a critical assessment of the evidence, a ranking of the risks and, if necessary, a list of suggestions for potential policy actions. A supervisory initiative launched by the Bank of Italy in 2012 provides an example of the workings of this mechanism. In that case, a prolonged fall in non-performing loan coverage ratios (a micro signal) was deemed to be a potential threat for market confidence, particularly in a recessionary scenario (a macro issue). The Bank therefore launched a targeted but broad on-site review of positions with low coverage ratios to ensure that accounting practices were correct.25 In order to avoid pro-cyclical effects, in parallel with this wave of inspections the Bank of Italy asked banks to increase internally-generated resources by cutting costs, selling non-strategic assets, adopting sustainable dividend policies, and revising the criteria for the remuneration of directors and executives. These actions, the results of which have been published, have improved banks’ practices and standards; they have helped to reverse the declining trend in coverage ratios, increase transparency and assuage investors’ concerns. Thus, they relied on micro tools but were macro in spirit. These processes will have to be adapted in the light of the radical institutional changes being introduced both at the national level (establishing a new MAP authority) and at the international level (MIP and MAP coordination and burden-sharing between national authorities and ESRB, EBA, SSM). Often, the devil is in the detail, and admittedly many details need to be sorted out for this architecture to work well. Therefore, it would be sensible to divide our time between speculation on the conceptual challenges posed by the interaction between MP, MAP and MIP and a less exciting but equally crucial effort to create a sound and effective governance structure. 7. Conclusions Bold policy initiatives are rarely preceded by long periods of careful reflection. On the contrary, they are often taken in response to dramatic and unforeseen changes in the                                                  24  The law that introduced capital requirements and assigned the Bank of Italy supervisory powers dates back to 1926 (see https://www.bancaditalia.it/bancaditalia/storia/1936/il_dopoguerra ).  25  It was judged necessary to preserve a satisfactory level of provisioning in order to maintain investor confidence and low funding costs, particularly given the market tensions stemming from Italy’s fiscal imbalances. (Panetta, 2013a). 
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches economic environment and (or hence) often at times when little is known about what the future holds in store. The situation we find ourselves in today is no exception to this rule. The financial turmoil created a strong rationale to introduce MAP, but our knowledge of the potential of this new tool is less than perfect. It will take a while to acquire that knowledge, to understand how MAP interacts with MP and MIP, and to explore ways to get the best out of all three. Operating the system in the meantime will surely be challenging. The spirit of my remarks today is that, besides being inevitable, this challenge is very much worth meeting. MAP can deliver great benefits to the euro area in terms of macroeconomic and financial stability. Furthermore, the area has an institutional framework that favours coordination and places us in a good position to observe and exploit the complementarities between this and other, more traditional policy frameworks. We knew from the start that learning by doing would be central to MAP. Given these two preconditions, we should start doing, and learning, as soon as possible. References Angelini, P., Neri, S., and Panetta, F., 2014, “The Interaction between Countercyclical Capital Requirements and Monetary Policy”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming. Angelini, P., Nicoletti-Altimari, S., and Visco, I., 2013, “Macroprudential, Microprudential and Monetary Policies: Conflicts, Complementarities and Trade-offs”, in Dombret, A., Lucius, O. (eds.), Stability of the Financial System – Illusion or Feasible Concept?, Elgar Edwards Publishing. Aoke, K., and Nikolov, K., 2012, “Bubbles , Banks and Financial Stability”, ECB Working Paper, 1495, November. Banca d’Italia, 2014, Financial Stability Report, No.7, May. Bank of England, 2011, “Instruments of Macroprudential Policy”, Discussion Paper, December. Barberis N., and Thaler R., 2003, A survey of behavioural finance, in Constantinides, Harris and Stulz eds. Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Elsevier. Bebchuk L.A., and Goldstein, I., 2011, “Self-Fulfilling Market Freezes”, The Review of Financial Studies, 24(11), 3519–3555. Bijlsma J.M., and Zwart G.T.J, 2013, “The Changing Landscape of Financial Markets in Europe, the United States and Japan”, Bruegel Working Paper, 2013/02, March. Bologna, P., and Caccavaio, M., 2014, “Euro Area (Cross-border?) Banking: Before and After the Global Financial Crisis”, manuscript. Brzoza-Brzezina, M., Kolasa, M., and Makarski, K., 2013, “Macroprudential Policy Instruments and Economic Imbalances in the Euro Area”, ECB Working Paper, 1589, September. Brunnermeier M.K., Crockett A., Goodhart C.A., Persaud A., and Shin H.S., 2009, “The Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation”, Geneva Report on the World Economy, 11, July. Caruana J., 2011, “Monetary Policy in a World with Macroprudential Policy”, speech delivered at the SAARCFINANCE Governors’ Symposium, Kerala, June. Catte, P., Cova, P., Pagano, P., and Visco, I., 2010, “The Role of Macroeconomic Policies in the Global Crisis”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 69, July. Claessens, S., and Van Horen, N., 2013, “Foreign Banks: Trends and Impact”, Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 46(1), 295–326. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 Collard, F., Dellas, H., Diba, B. and Loisel, O., 2012, “Optimal Monetary and Prudential Policies”, Banque de France, Document de Travail, 413, December. Draghi, M., 2014, “Monetary Policy in a Period of Prolonged Inflation”, speech delivered at the ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, May. Gambacorta, L., and Mistrulli, P.E., 2004, “Does Bank Capital Affect Lending Behavior?”, Journal of Financial Intermediation, 13(4), 436–457. Haldane, A.G., 2013, “Macroprudential Policies – When and How to Use Them”, paper presented at the International Monetary Fund conference on Rethinking macro policy II: first steps and early lessons, Washington DC, April. Kashyap, A.K, and Stein, J.C, 2000, “What Do a Million Observations on Banks Say about the Transmission of Monetary Policy?”, The American Economic Review, 90(3), 407–428. Ministero dell’Economia e delle Finanze, 2014, Chiarimenti in tema di Aiuto alla Crescita Economica (ACE), Circolare 12/E, 23 maggio. Miles, D., and Pillonca, V., 2008, “Financial Innovation and European Housing and Mortgage Markets”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 24/1, 2008, 145–175. Neri, S., 2012, “Financial Intermediation and the Real Economy: Implications for Monetary and Macroprudential Policies”, in Gerlach, S., Gnan, E., and Ulbrich, J. (eds), The ESRB at 1, SUERF Studies: 2012/4. Panetta F., 2013, “Banks, Finance, Growth”, remarks delivered at the Associazione per lo Sviluppo degli Studi di Banca e Borsa, March. Panetta F., 2013b, “Macroprudential Tools: Where Do We Stand?”, speech delivered at the Banque Centrale du Luxembourg, May. Reinhart, C., and Rogoff, K., 2008, This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, Princeton University Press. Stein, J.C., 2014, “Incorporating Financial Stability Considerations into a Monetary Policy Framework”, remarks delivered at the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington DC, March 21. Van den Heuvel, S. J., 2001, “The Bank Capital Channel of Monetary Policy”, manuscript. Visco I., 2009, “The Financial Crisis and Economists’ Forecasts”, commencement speech to the students of the Faculty of Economics, La Sapienza University, Rome, March. 
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches    CountryF-StatisticProb. Significance levelCausality (2)2007 LTV ratioBanking crisisReal-estate crisisBelgium5.0710.006***C→P80France4.9280.006***C→P91xItaly4.6380.016**C→P65Netherlands2.8660.099*C→P101xxSpain4.0300.027**P→C73xxUK4.5830.009***C→PxxGermany70(2) C→P = credit causes house prices; P→C= house prices cause credit.(1) The null hypothesis is no Granger causality. Lending for house purchase is measured as domestic credit to households for house purchase as a share of GDP.Table 1. Test of Granger causality between lending for house purchase and housing prices          in selected EU countries (1)(2003Q2-2013Q3, annual growth rates)Not significant 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 13 Figure 1: Heterogeneity across Europe  (A) Bank loans to firms in selected euro-area countries (per cent of GDP) (B) Domestic bank lending to the household sector (per cent of GDP)   Source: ECB and Eurostat  (C) House prices in selected European countries  Source: Bank of Italy, Financial Stability Report.   102030405060708090GermanySpainFranceItaly'12'11'10'09'08'07'06'05'04'03'02'01'008012016020024080100120140160180200220240FranceUnited KingdomSpainItalyEuro areaNetherlandsGermanyIreland
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Charles I Plosser: Systematic monetary policy and communication Speech by Mr Charles I Plosser, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at the Economic Club of New York, New York City, 24 June 2014. *      *      * The view expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. Highlights • President Plosser gives his views on the economy and the FOMC’s most recent policy decisions. He also discusses the benefits of rule-like, systematic behavior in the design and conduct of monetary policy and how this behavior combined with greater transparency leads to more effective communication. • President Plosser explains how a detailed monetary policy report could promote the FOMC to conduct policy in a more systematic manner, which he believes will lead to better decisions and better economic outcomes over the longer run. When policymakers deviate, it would require that they explain why. • President Plosser uses five widely recognized simple rules to explore their implications for the future path of policy and highlights the real uncertainties that policymakers face making policy. Introduction Thank you, Roger Ferguson, for that kind introduction and congratulations on your term as chairman of this august organization. You have continued to deliver the great programs and speakers that so many have come to expect from the club. As many of you know, this is the centennial year for the Federal Reserve. In the spirit of such an anniversary, my hat goes off to The Economic Club of New York, which has been around for 107 years. What a great and storied history you have, and it is an honor to be here. I should note that Congress created our decentralized central bank 100 years ago. That decentralized structure is one of our great strengths, but it requires that I begin with the usual disclaimer that the views I express are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). In my remarks this morning, I want to discuss the benefits of rule-like, systematic behavior in the design and conduct of monetary policy. Such behavior, combined with greater transparency, leads to communication that is more effective. This, in turn, helps the public understand the FOMC’s strategies, individual policy decisions, and the likely path of policy. I will go one step further and illustrate how the FOMC might take a step toward a more systematic policy framework by producing a detailed monetary policy report, similar to those issued by many central banks around the world. One aspect of such a report could highlight the policy paths implied by a few Taylor-like or robust rules and use them as benchmarks to set and communicate policy in a more systematic, rule-like way. I will begin with a brief overview of my thoughts about the economy and the FOMC’s most recent policy decisions before I discuss the role that systematic policy can play in the communication of policy. The economy and the recent policy decision First, the economy. My overall view of the economy is fairly optimistic. After a first quarter buffeted by winter storms, I believe we are poised to grow at a rate somewhat above trend 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  for the remainder of this year and next before reverting back to trend, which I see as about 2.4 percent. Steady employment growth and healthier household balance sheets will support consumption activity. The current data suggest economic strength is fairly broad based, as evidenced by recent indicators and the optimism expressed by firms in both the manufacturing and service sectors. As for inflation, recent readings have moved a bit higher, mitigating somewhat the concerns that low inflation will persist or decline further. We have ample monetary accommodation in the economy to ensure that we will be able to achieve our 2 percent target over time. It is important, however, that we continue to reinforce our commitment to that goal so that inflation expectations remain well anchored near our target. At the meeting last week, the FOMC released its latest Summary of Economic Projections (SEP). The outlook going forward was largely unchanged. While real GDP growth for 2014 was marked down, which reflected the disappointing first quarter, the outlook for the second half of the year and the projections for 2015 and 2016 were unchanged. Unemployment projections were reduced slightly, and the inflation forecast remained stable. My own submission for economic growth was generally in line with my colleagues. But my forecast for unemployment was a bit lower in the near term. Specifically, I think the unemployment rate may reach 5.8 percent by the end of this year and 5.6 percent by the end of 2015. My view of inflation is that it will stabilize at about 2 percent in 2015. Some market participants and commentators have focused on the so-called dot charts and the movement of the implied median funds rate for 2014–16. I would remind everyone that the dots are not a forecast of what policymakers think the Committee will actually do, but they are a reflection of the policymakers’ views of appropriate policy. Some have noted that the median path steepened ever so slightly. This should not come as a particular surprise as it likely just reveals greater confidence that the economy is improving. The rebound after the bad winter seems to be progressing, the outlook for unemployment is a bit better, and the inflation rate appears to be firming. The changes in the dots thus simply tell us something about individual policymakers reaction to the change in economic conditions. The FOMC statement notes that the Committee will adjust future funds rate decisions based on the progress toward our objectives. So, it is entirely reasonable that the expected path of “appropriate policy” should adjust as we close in on those objectives. Indeed, it would be surprising if they did not behave in such a manner. I believe that we are closing in on our goals – perhaps faster than some people might think. So, while I supported the recent policy statement, I have growing concerns that we may have to adjust our communications in the not-too-distant future. Specifically, I believe the forward guidance in the statement may be too passive, given underlying economic conditions. The benefits of systematic monetary policy Let me now turn to the importance of conducting monetary policy in a systematic manner. By systematic policy, I mean conducting policy in a rule-like manner as opposed to relying on discretion. Decisions are always made period by period, but in a rules-based approach, the decisions are guided by the rules. Discretion is the opposite of rules-based decisionmaking. Discretionary decisions are made without being constrained by past promises or previous forward-looking statements. The monetary policy debate over whether rule-like behavior is preferable to pure discretion dates back at least to Henry Simons in 1936.1 More recently, in their Nobel Prize-winning                                                 1 Henry C. Simons, “Rules Versus Authorities in Monetary Policy”, Journal of Political Economy, 44:1 (February 1936).  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  work, Finn Kydland and Ed Prescott demonstrated that a credible commitment by policymakers to behave in a systematic rule-like manner leads to better outcomes than discretion.2 Since then, numerous papers using a variety of models have investigated the benefits of rule-like behavior in monetary policy and found that there are indeed significant benefits. Policies characterized by commitment have been shown to lead to more economic stability. In fact, the mainstream theoretical models that we use for monetary and macroeconomic analysis are built on the notion that monetary policy is conducted in a rule-like manner. The benefits of a rule-like approach arise, in part, because consumers and businesses are forward looking. When policymakers credibly commit to a rule-like approach to setting policy, they can alter expectations in ways that make policy more effective and less uncertain. The appropriate way to make policy systematic, or rule-like, is to base policy decisions on the state of the economy. That is, policymakers should describe the reaction function that determines how the current and future policy rate will be set depending on economic conditions. Policymakers are, of course, no more certain about future course of the economy than anyone else is; therefore, they cannot realistically commit to particular future values of the policy rate. Nonetheless, describing a reaction function or rule that explains how the policy rate will be determined in the future as a function of economic conditions can be highly informative. Unfortunately, the science of monetary policy has not progressed to the point where we can specify the optimal rule for setting monetary policy. Given our current state of knowledge, judgment is still required in setting policy. One reason is that optimal rules, that is, those that maximize economic welfare, are highly dependent on the particular model from which they are derived, and there is no broad-based consensus for the right model. Another factor is that the optimal rule for one model can produce very bad outcomes in another model. A third reason is that optimal rules can often be quite complex, thus making them difficult to implement and to communicate to the public. In other words, they may not be very transparent. However, these limitations to implementing optimal policy rules should not deter us from efforts to adopt a more systematic, rule-like approach to the conduct of policy. Indeed, there has been a great deal of progress made in identifying simple, robust rules that appear to perform well in a variety of models and environments. The most well-known rule is attributable to John Taylor.3 The Taylor rule is a reaction function that indicates how to set the policy rate as a function of deviations of inflation from the inflation target and some measure of economic slack. The attractiveness of Taylor-like rules goes beyond their intuitive appeal or the fact that they seem to describe the actual behavior of monetary policy reasonably well. The reality is that Taylor-like rules yield very good results in a variety of theoretical models. While this is surprising to some, it is of enormous practical importance. Given our uncertainty about the true model of the economy, knowing that systematic policy in the form of a Taylor-like rule delivers good outcomes in a variety of models means that these simple, robust rules can provide useful guidance for policy. Moreover, rule-like policies also play an important role in central bank communication.                                                 2 Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott, “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans”, Journal of Political Economy, 85 (June 1977), pp. 473–91.  3 John B. Taylor, “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice”, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, North-Holland, 39, 1993, pp. 195–214.  
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Communication The fundamental reason that communication is so important is that monetary policy is more appropriately viewed as the path of the policy rate, not simply the current rate. This is evident today as the markets seem highly attentive to signals regarding the future path of the funds rate not simply its current setting. Because systematic policy is easily communicated to the public, it also greatly improves the transparency and predictability of monetary policy, which reduces policy surprises. Businesses and consumers are more informed about the course of monetary policy because they understand how policymakers are likely to react to changing economic circumstances even if they are not certain what those economic conditions might be. Equally important in my view is that greater clarity about the policymakers’ reaction function strengthens accountability. Thus, systematic policy, communicated transparently, strengthens accountability and serves to preserve the central bank’s independence. In this regard, Taylor-like rules have many of these desirable features. They are systematic, based on a limited number of variables, perform well in a variety of models, and can therefore provide important guidance for policy decisions. If our policy is guided by state-contingent rules, then by reporting our assessment about the evolution or forecast of key economic variables, the public will get a better understanding and appreciation of the likely path of policy. Indeed, that is likely to be the best information we can provide regarding the future path of policy. Rules as benchmarks: a step forward Given model uncertainty and data measurement problems, there are, of course, limitations to the use of a simple rule. A robust rule is intended to work well on average, but central banks look at many variables in determining policy. Inevitably, there will be times when economic developments fall outside the scope of our models and warrant unusual monetary policy action. Events such as 9/11, the Asian financial crisis, the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and the 1987 stock market crash may require departures from a simple rule. However, in such unusual circumstances, policymakers will be expected to explain the departures from the rule. With a rule as a baseline, departures can be quantified and inform us how excessively tight or easy policy might be relative to normal. If the events are temporary, policymakers will have to explain how and when policy is likely to return to normal. Thus, a simple rule provides a valuable benchmark for assessing and communicating the appropriate stance of policy. The operational question is how might we go about the effort to implement a more rules-based policy? One strategy could be to indicate the likely behavior of interest rates based on a few Taylor-like rules that have been consistent with the conduct of monetary policy in the past or ones that are considered robust across various models. Doing so would require agreement on a particular model in order to produce the resulting rule-based behavior. For the Fed, the economic model developed by the Board’s staff seems like a reasonable place to start. Such an exercise could also be enhanced, I believe, by using some of the dynamic stochastic general equilibrium, or DSGE, models that have been developed within the Federal Reserve System. As a start, the results of this type of exercise could be published in the FOMC’s current biannual monetary policy report to Congress. Perhaps we might consider releasing these reports on a quarterly basis in keeping with other central banks. The Committee could then indicate whether and why it anticipates policy to be somewhat more restrained or more accommodative relative to the projections given by the various rules. The monetary policy report could also include various views that may differ from the baseline summaries. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  A major benefit of this exercise would be to illustrate the various dimensions of uncertainty that policymakers face. Financial markets often prefer certainty about the future path of monetary policy, but that is unrealistic and not necessarily desirable. For example, this exercise would indicate the extent of model uncertainty, forecast uncertainty, and the variations implied by different rules. Many central banks use fan charts and other devices to highlight such bands of uncertainty about the forecast, and the Fed should do the same. Overall, this exercise would provide a better sense of the likely direction of policy and the variables most related systematically to that policy. It would also lead the FOMC to discuss policy in the context of rules and a systematic approach to decision-making, which I believe will lead to better decisions and better economic outcomes over the longer run. Moreover, it would require policymakers to explain why they choose to deviate from the benchmarks and the guidelines they provide. An example As I discussed, communication is an important aspect of monetary policy. I have long been an advocate of the Fed producing a periodic monetary policy report similar to other central banks. It is simply too difficult to convey monetary policy design and strategy within the confines of the brief statements issued at the conclusion of each FOMC meeting. Therefore, what I am about to suggest should not be viewed in isolation but as one part of such a periodic report to the public. So, let me illustrate how we might begin to incorporate a more systematic and transparent approach to rule-like decision-making. I view this as one step in a journey, not as the end result. My example uses five simple rules that have been discussed in the literature and describes their implications for the projected path of the funds rate from now through 2015. Since these rules are contingent on economic conditions, I will use the midpoint of the forecasts derived from the most recent SEP and apply an Okun’s law relationship to convert projections of unemployment into projections of economic slack. I should immediately note that this is not a completely coherent exercise as each participant’s projections were based on his or her own view of optimal policy and, as you are well aware, those views differ. Put differently, the midpoint of the projections arises from an amalgam of different models and thus represents no one’s forecast or model. Thus, the results are likely to be more diverse than otherwise expected. So my example is purely illustrative yet easily replicable. However, given the relevance of the SEP, I thought the exercise would be more interesting than if I used an off-the-shelf economic model. The rules I have chosen are these: first, the original Taylor 1993 rule; second, a variant of Taylor’s original rule, sometimes called the Taylor 1999 rule, which places greater emphasis on the output gap; third, a version of the Taylor 1999 rule that allows for considerable interest-rate smoothing and is called the inertial Taylor 1999 rule; fourth, a performance- or outcome-based rule developed by staff at the Philadelphia Fed that is simply an estimated rule that best mimics previous FOMC actions; and fifth, a first-difference rule that is based on academic work of Athanasios Orphanides and is designed to take into account the imprecision and uncertainties of our measurements of the level of the output gap or slack and the underlying or steady state real rate of interest.4  I have plotted the outcome of this exercise in Figure 1. So what can we take away from this picture? First, all the rules suggest that liftoff of the funds rate from the zero bound should occur next quarter. This is considerably sooner than many seem to be expecting.                                                 4 See the Appendix for the precise mathematical formulations of each of these rules and the relevant references.  
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Second, we can also see that although the rules point to policy being tighter, they do present somewhat different profiles of the future path of interest rates. The Taylor 93 and Taylor 99 rules have a steeper path over the next several quarters than the other rules. The primary reason for this is that both of these rules are playing catchup as they would have had liftoff occur earlier. After catchup, they increase more slowly. This dispersion in the pace of tightening also reflects model uncertainty. But ignoring or dismissing the rules does not avoid the problem such uncertainty poses. Robust rules, such as the first-difference rule, tend to have better outcomes on average across models. Third, we see that three of the policy paths are not that different from each other. Taylor 93, Taylor 99, and the performance based rules tend to converge to between 2.5 and 3.0 percent by mid-2015 and remain close thereafter. My own assessment of appropriate policy is similar to that described by the first-difference rule. However, my point is not to decide which path is correct, but to illustrate how such benchmarks can be useful for communications. For example, the exercise might suggest that policy choices that fall outside the bounds of these rules should be viewed with some caution. That does not mean they would be wrong but they would require careful and substantial discussion and justification. Even for policy choices that might fall within the bounds, the exercise can provide meaning, quantitative and qualitative, to phrases such as rates are expected to be “lower than normal”. Another way of highlighting the uncertainty surrounding the future path of policy is to consider different paths for the economy. Consider Figure 2. Here I employ the first difference rule but consider the implications of a stronger and a weaker path for the economy. To illustrate the range of policy paths that could ensue, I use three different forecasts, the midpoint forecast from the SEP, as in the previous chart, as well as two hypothetical forecasts. The first takes a combination of the lowest inflation and highest unemployment forecasts (a weak forecast), and the second does just the opposite by combining the highest inflation and lowest unemployment forecasts (a strong forecast). Of course, neither represents a particular forecast or model; they combine various elements of different forecasts. Thus, the exercise represents a fairly extreme construction of forecast uncertainty. In any event, we observe a wide range for the predicted funds rate paths as in the first experiment. The weakest forecast anticipates a funds rate of nearly 1 percent by the end of 2015, while the strongest forecast envisions a funds rate of about 4.7 percent in part because both inflation and unemployment “overshoot” their long-run and sustainable values and corrections must follow. Note, however, that even the weakest economic view coupled with the first-difference rule has the funds rate rising above the zero lower bound next quarter. This picture is analogous, but not in a precise way, to a fan chart. I have indicated throughout my talk the imprecision of our knowledge about the economy. My understanding is no more precise than the understanding of colleagues or private-sector economists. These two exercises highlight the model and forecast uncertainty policymakers face. Rather than trying to target particular future values of the policy rate, a monetary policy report under a rules-based approach could convey the uncertainty and still assure that decisions will be driven by the state of the economy. These two exercises indicate a need to explain more fully why policy is deviating from what is suggested by these rules. No doubt, there is a variety of views on this issue, but I think the policy process itself and our communication of policy would benefit greatly from producing a detailed monetary policy report with some of the features I have discussed today.    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7       
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Appendix Taylor 1993  Taylor, John B. “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice”, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December 1993), pp. 195–214.  (http://web.stanford.edu/~johntayl/Papers/Discretion.PDF) Taylor 1999  Taylor, John B. “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules”, in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1999, pp. 319–341.  (http://www.nber.org/chapters/c7419.pdf) First difference from Orphanides (2003)  Orphanides, Athanasios. “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule”, Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (July 2003), pp. 983–1022.  (http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2003/200336/200336pap.pdf) Carlstrom and Fuerst Inertial Taylor Rule (2008)  Carlstrom, Charles T. and Timothy S. Fuerst, “Inertial Taylor Rules: The Benefit of Signaling Future Policy”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 90(3, Part 2) (May/June 2008), pp. 193–203.  (https://research.stlouisfed.org/publications/review/08/05/part2/Carlstrom.pdf) Philadelphia Fed estimated outcome-based rule This rule is estimated over the period of 1Q1988 through 4Q2007 using Greenbook forecasts.  is the four-quarter average of core PCE.   Where  is a dummy variable with the values   (Equation form on page 38 http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC20080130bluebook20080124.pdf)  Estimation done by FRBP using Greenbook forecasts from 1Q1988 through 4Q2007. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 William C Dudley: Update on economic and fiscal conditions in Puerto Rico Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the Association of Certified Public Accountants of Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico, 24 June 2014. *      *      * Good afternoon. I thank you for the opportunity to address your association. It is always a pleasure to speak with the different communities that make up the Second Federal Reserve District and it is especially gratifying to be here in Puerto Rico. As with other parts of our District, the New York Fed is dedicated to the people of Puerto Rico and to their future growth and prosperity. Our commitment is reflected in our ongoing work with our many partners in Puerto Rico. Over the past several years we have held three forums (cosponsored with the local Small Business Administration office, the Puerto Rico Small Business Development and Technology Center and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation), which provided technical assistance to help small businesses access capital, procure government contracts, and export their products and services. We also continue to promote financial literacy through our ongoing partnership with the Puerto Rico Bankers Association, and we have cosponsored the Financial Awareness Video Festival working with students at local colleges to produce short videos highlighting aspects of financial literacy. Let me just pause for a moment to say congratulations to this year’s winner: Pontificia de Ponce. In addition to this work, our commitment is reflected in our research on issues of concern to the Island. Our economists monitor and analyze local economic conditions. A complement to our internal research is the outreach that I and other senior bank staff undertake to meet with our stakeholders – the leaders in the business community, members of professional organizations like yourselves, academics, students, elected officials and leaders of nonprofits – to hear firsthand about the issues and problems facing the people in our district. What we learn during these engagements also helps to shape our understanding of the issues facing the Puerto Rico economy and inform our efforts to support it. Earlier on this trip I met with leading business owners from many different sectors of the economy, elected officials and several agency heads. And from what I have learned so far, there are many important initiatives underway to effect change and to address what are clearly large and complex issues. On my last visit to the Island in 2011, I saw examples of expansion and growth. This gave me confidence that Puerto Rico has the capability to be an economic success story. However, my discussions with a range of stakeholders confirmed to me that conditions were not what we want them to be – in particular, growth and expansion were not happening either fast enough or broadly enough. At the urging of several business and community leaders, I commissioned a team at the New York Fed to analyze the challenges facing the Puerto Rico economy and to put forth recommendations on how to capitalize on the Island’s strengths and restore growth. Informed by consultations with local, national and international experts and stakeholders on the Island, we released that report in 2012.1 We presented five recommendations: (1) reduce barriers to labor force participation and job creation; (2) reform the energy industry, particularly, improve the efficiency of the electric                                                  1  Report on the Competitiveness of Puerto Rico’s Economy, Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 2012. Available in English at http://www.newyorkfed.org/regional/puertorico/index.html and in Spanish at http://www.newyorkfed.org/regional/puertorico/spanish.html. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches utility’s operations; (3) lower the costs of doing business; (4) foster partnerships between industry and higher education; and (5) promote independent policy evaluation. These recommendations were not presented as simple quick fixes, but rather as important steps to help improve the Island’s competitiveness over time. Since that report was issued, positive steps toward reform have been made in some areas. The recent bill reforming the energy sector and related efforts to expand the use of alternative energy sources should over time help to reduce the Island’s high costs of electricity. Additionally, the Commonwealth’s economic development strategy is seeking to capitalize on the strong pharmaceutical presence on the Island, to promote knowledge-based services and, importantly, to improve the general business environment on the Island. More recently, though, serious fiscal challenges have surfaced that are closely interrelated with the Island’s ongoing weak economic performance. Persistent deficits in the Commonwealth’s fiscal accounts as well as mounting deficits in the operation of the several major public corporations have substantially raised the Island’s overall level of public debt and led to serious concerns about whether the Island’s fiscal position is sustainable. In light of the fiscal pressures Puerto Rico now faces, the New York Fed is undertaking an update to our earlier report. In this new report, we plan to focus on Puerto Rico’s fiscal health. We will examine the factors leading to the sizeable buildup of public debt on the Island and the key variables that will determine its future trend. In some ways, the data on Puerto Rico’s public debt clearly define the fiscal problems the Island faces. But meeting with a variety of stakeholders, as I have on this visit, will help to inform our analysis and will provide us with concrete evidence of how these issues are playing out across the Puerto Rico economy. The clear challenge going forward will be for the Commonwealth government to continue to make progress on its efforts to raise its economic growth rate while at the same time to take credible steps to constrain the buildup of debt. The demanding choices Puerto Rico makes today will affect its long-run economic prospects and the future livelihood of its residents. Now I would like to review recent developments in the Puerto Rico economy and then outline for consideration and discussion several steps to help put the Island on a path toward fiscal health. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. Economic conditions in Puerto Rico Let me turn to economic conditions in Puerto Rico. As you are well aware, the news has not been good. Puerto Rico’s economy has been in a slump for nearly a decade. After declining for five straight years, real (inflation-adjusted) gross national product (GNP) rose 0.9 percent in fiscal year 2012 and only 0.3 percent in 2013, rates considerably below the respective U.S. mainland growth rates. A monthly index produced by the Government Development Bank for Puerto Rico paints a similar picture of an economy that has stabilized but at a depressed level. We are finally beginning to see some signs of improvement in economic activity on the Island, though there is little evidence to suggest that the strong recovery that we seek has yet taken hold. Puerto Rico’s labor market remains weak. Overall payroll employment fell by about 10 percent between 2006 and 2010 and has leveled off since then. Employment in the private sector has been increasing modestly, with some notable pockets of relatively brisk job creation in leisure and hospitality, professional and business services and private education and health services – employment in each of these sectors now far exceeds its prerecession levels. Cutbacks in government employment, however, have largely offset the private-sector gains realized over the past few years. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Low labor force participation rates and high unemployment rates remain perhaps the biggest challenges to the Puerto Rico economy. Our earlier report cited low labor force participation among younger and less educated workers as one important factor limiting the Island’s competitiveness. Since that report, overall labor force participation has continued to decline. The unemployment rate on the Island has consistently exceeded the rate on the mainland by several percentage points. Although the rate has fallen by more than a full percentage point year to date, the gap with the mainland remains wide. Moreover, poor labor market opportunities for many workers have contributed to a significant increase in the rate of out-migration of Puerto Rico’s residents, accelerating the Island’s population decline. The prolonged period of weak economic growth has compounded Puerto Rico’s fiscal problems: Puerto Rico’s public sector debt has been on an upward trend for a decade. The stagnation of the economy and persistent fiscal deficits underlie this debt buildup. The level of outstanding debt as a percentage of the Island’s annual GNP, a ratio used by many fiscal analysts, rose from about 60 percent in 2000 to more than 100 percent in 2013. Debt ratios in this range can inhibit economic growth in that they generally lead to higher financing costs, which in turn, can lead to constraints on access to further financing. The recent downgrading of Puerto Rico’s public debt to non-investment grade was a clear signal that the current fiscal situation poses serious risks to the Island’s economic future. Steps toward fiscal sustainability Next, I will discuss the buildup of Puerto Rico’s public debt and then provide some thoughts on ways to improve the Island’s fiscal health. To open this discussion, it is worth noting some key features of Puerto Rico’s fiscal institutional environment. The Commonwealth has a close relationship with the U.S. government which, in many ways, is analogous to that of a mainland state. Puerto Rico shares a common market and a common currency with the U.S. mainland leading to strong economic interdependencies. Federal aid is a major source of revenue for the Commonwealth and Puerto Rican residents participate in large U.S. social insurance programs such as Social Security and Medicare. In addition, Puerto Rican debt trades as a municipal security in the U.S. capital markets, and much of the interest earned on this debt is exempt from local, state and federal income taxes, regardless of where in the U.S. the investor lives. And like all but one state, Vermont, Puerto Rico has a self-imposed requirement to balance its budget. In many ways, however, the Commonwealth operates more independently than other jurisdictions on the mainland. Residents of Puerto Rico, unlike those of the states, do not pay U.S. personal income taxes unless they are employed by the U.S. government. The many large public corporations on the Commonwealth’s balance sheet also distinguish it from many states, although some states – New York is an example – also house a number of public corporations and authorities. Finally, a notable difference from other mainland jurisdictions is that Puerto Rico’s balanced budget requirement, while found in the constitution and relatively stringent in form, appears not to have been effective in constraining the growth of the Commonwealth’s debt. The debt buildup reflects, in part, some of these unique features of Puerto Rico’s fiscal institutions, policies and practices. In particular, the public sector in Puerto Rico comprises not only the Commonwealth government but also the municipal governments and a number of public corporations. Prominent among these public corporations are the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority (PREPA), the Puerto Rico Highway and Transportation Authority (PRHTA), and the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority (PRASA). The public corporations are especially important both for the role they have played in issuing debt as well as the scale of the public services they provide to the Island’s population. Currently, they account for almost 40 percent of the Island’s total debt and have been responsible for much of the debt buildup – of the roughly 43 percentage point increase in the debt-to-GNP ratio between 2000 and 2013, the public corporations accounted for almost 85 percent of that increase. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Several measures put the Island’s weak fiscal condition into perspective. Total public debt in Puerto Rico is quite high – roughly 100 percent of GNP. This is far higher than in any U.S. mainland state; among the states, the highest ratio is New York at 29 percent.2 However, since most Puerto Ricans do not pay federal income taxes, the large federal debt burden could arguably be considered not to be a burden to Puerto Rico, in contrast to the mainland states. Ranking the states and Puerto Rico with the federal debt burden added for the mainland states, but excluded for Puerto Rico, pushes Puerto Rico down to 14th in the rankings. However, even with this adjustment Puerto Rico still has a high debt burden. In addition to the growing stock of publicly issued debt, Puerto Rico faces large future contingent liabilities via unfunded pension system liabilities. While the Commonwealth has a variety of options for managing these liabilities, they are nonetheless obligations that are relevant in assessing the Commonwealth’s overall balance sheet. It seems likely that any country in a similar debt situation to Puerto Rico would have faced difficulty in continuing to raise money in the bond market and would have faced questions about the sustainability of its debt level. Debt sustainability is generally defined as a condition where government debt is at a reasonable level – one with acceptable risks to market confidence and long-term economic growth – and is not on a path to increase indefinitely relative to some measure of national income. Stabilizing Puerto Rico’s debt as a share of the Island’s income and then reducing its debt to more sustainable levels should be a key goal of the Island’s fiscal and economic policy. While the precise path toward lower debt burden is uncertain, the trend is largely determined by the interaction of three factors: the government’s fiscal policy, the growth rate of the economy and the interest rate on the public debt. Regarding the buildup of new public debt, the Commonwealth government has stated its intention that the general fund budget will be balanced in fiscal year 2015. This intention, together with the stance of not using deficit financing to support public corporations, should greatly limit the issuance of new debt. The measures put in place during this year have already had some success in cutting the projected budget gap for the current fiscal year. But what other steps can be taken to move the Island toward fiscal health? Let me start by saying that Puerto Rico is not alone in facing fiscal problems like these. Governments frequently find that public sector management becomes especially challenging when their economies are undergoing major transitions of the sort that have been taking place in Puerto Rico in the last decade. In the mainland U.S., cities like New York, Washington and Philadelphia experienced major fiscal stresses as they adjusted to the transition from manufacturing to service-based economies. Those cities faced market pressures not unlike those facing the Commonwealth today, and when their leadership tackled the issues head-on, the cities emerged stronger. The problems that these cities faced required the government and the private sector to work together to find solutions. In all cases that required important changes and sacrifices. This was most effective when the necessary adjustments were shared broadly rather than concentrated on a single group. In the spirit of assisting the Commonwealth in this endeavor, I want to preview how these issues appear to me, and to suggest some steps for improving fiscal outcomes on the Island. I present these ideas in order to solicit your input, based on your deeper understanding of the situation. I present them not as quick fixes – as there are no quick fixes to these fiscal situations – but as changes to financial practices that over the next several years can help to restore fiscal health to the Island. The first step would be for the Commonwealth government to reinvigorate its efforts to raise economic growth. While Puerto Rico has a number of features that make it a potentially                                                  2  The debt figures reported for the U.S. mainland states refer to debt held by the public and exclude debt held by government agencies. Most Puerto Rico debt is held by the public. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 strong economy, economic growth on the Island has been weak for almost a decade. To restore growth and raise living standards, it is critically important for policymakers to expand efforts to marshal the Island’s considerable strengths – a bilingual and well-educated adult population, an open economy occupying a central position in the Caribbean, a wide experience as a host to multinational corporations, and close ties to the U.S. mainland economy. While the challenges to restoring growth are clearly complex, I want to highlight some key areas where policies to support efficiency and growth might be strengthened. First, barriers to job creation and active participation in the labor market should be reduced. The current structure of labor market incentives could be examined to ensure that firms do not face significant hurdles in creating jobs and workers are not discouraged from entering the labor force. Second, policymakers should continue their efforts to create a more dynamic business environment, including the elimination of unnecessary costs of setting up and operating a business, particularly with respect to energy costs. Third, economic development efforts should consider a more proactive approach to utilizing the Island’s educated workforce and well-established higher education system. One possibility is to look for ways to expand the support for the formation of partnerships between higher education and industry, which have proven to be effective ways for regions to promote innovation, entrepreneurship and economic growth. Puerto Rico has many of the ingredients in place to harness the benefits of these industry-education partnerships and policymakers should begin to look for promising opportunities for mutually beneficial collaboration. A second step is to comprehensively reform the Commonwealth’s tax system, which is heavily dependent on income taxes and tends to levy high rates on narrow bases. When rates are high, it increases incentives for activities to be shielded from taxes, perhaps by moving activity to the informal sector, or perhaps by halting the activity altogether. Either way, collecting the necessary revenue requires rates to be even higher on activities that remain in the base, reinforcing the problem. Typically, comprehensive reform is necessary to break the cycle by simultaneously broadening the tax base and reducing rates across a range of taxes. Such a reform would likely produce a significant bonus in terms of faster economic growth, particularly in the formal sector. A third step would be to improve the Commonwealth’s financial reporting. Puerto Rico’s unique status means that it is one of few jurisdictions whose finances are not regularly surveyed by a public agency. The U.S. Census Bureau reports annually on mainland state finances and the International Monetary Fund generally reports on the finances of nations. These surveys provide significant transparency into the finances of those entities, which is invaluable for policymakers and citizens wishing to understand, monitor and exert control and discipline over the fiscal policies of their governments. They may also serve the purpose of increasing investor understanding of how the Commonwealth’s finances compare to other governments. New York City’s experience in the 1970s shows the value of better financial reporting. Prior to the City’s fiscal crisis in 1975 through 1977, New York had relatively poor financial reporting practices. As part of its recovery from that crisis, and a condition of accessing credit, the City’s reporting improved dramatically and has since won several awards. Along with those improvements, the City’s access to credit markets steadily improved. Economic research indicates that more transparent budgets are associated with lower public sector funding costs. A fourth step would be to look for ways to strengthen the performance of public corporations. A major difference between Puerto Rico’s balance sheet and those of the states is the presence of large, heavily indebted, corporate-like entities that continue to lose money and increase borrowing. For any financial reform agenda to be successful, it must confront this issue head on. Key elements of a successful reform strategy might include strengthening the public corporations’ financial standing and controlling the future flow of liabilities. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Puerto Rico could also seek out the opportunity to benefit from outside management expertise, including the wide experiences of U.S. mainland states. An independent regulator for utilities is the norm throughout mainland states. By leveraging the expertise and reputation of existing independent regulatory agencies, Puerto Rico may improve the efficiency of its public corporations while reassuring investors. As a fifth step, the Commonwealth could benefit from adopting fiscal institutions more like mainland states. Balanced budget rules are far from perfect, but by following the states’ model – splitting the budget into an operating piece that must be balanced and a capital piece that can be financed with debt – Puerto Rico could better align financing methods with its spending priorities. A sixth step is for the Commonwealth to implement a framework to help ensure that budget targets are met. A key aspect of such a framework would require that the authorities implement multi-year budgeting, in which revenue and expenditure plans are articulated over a three to five year horizon. Such a framework should also incorporate a review of the central government’s macroeconomic and fiscal forecasts by a non-partisan independent entity, the views and analysis of which could be published in coordination with the Commonwealth’s proposed budget for any given fiscal year. New York City, for instance, uses this type of framework. The steps should be viewed as potential ways to improve Puerto Rico’s finances over time and I present them to you for consideration and discussion. The decisions are obviously up to you. Other countries, U.S. mainland states and municipalities facing similar fiscal issues have been able to overcome them. I believe the Island can develop a strategy that will enable a return to fiscal health. Thank you for your kind attention and I will now be happy to take some questions.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Vítor Constâncio: The ECB and macro-prudential policy – from research to implementation Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Third Conference of the Macro-prudential Research Network, Frankfurt am Main, 23 June 2014. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a great pleasure to open the Third Conference of the Macro-prudential Research Network (MaRs). MaRs was established by the General Council of the European Central Bank (ECB) in the spring of 2010 with the objective of developing core conceptual frameworks, models and/or tools that would provide research support in order to improve macro-prudential supervision in the European Union (EU). This was a very significant collective undertaking of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB), i.e. all EU central banks, in order to broaden our analytical foundations in this area. Nobody would have expected when we launched MaRs that the ECB would soon become a banking supervisor with distinct macro-prudential policy competencies.  Now, that the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) starts in only a few months, we are glad that we started this investment so much in advance. Moreover, macro-prudential policy is again very much on the agenda. Take the historically low interest rates and range of unconventional monetary policies around the world in order to support modest recoveries and too low rates of inflation. This is an environment where investors search for yield and financial imbalances can build up. And, in fact, the ECB’s and the IMF’s financial stability analyses confirm that specific asset segments, among which real estate, point to some overheating in several countries. The issue then arises as to whether macro-prudential policy needs to react. In fact, in the last quarter, and considering only the euro area, four countries – Belgium, The Netherlands, Slovenia and Estonia – have activated macro-prudential policy tools (all capital-related measures), in line with the EU regulatory framework. This new policy area is getting traction and robust analysis is needed to allow for timely and adequate interventions. In my remarks today, I want to first start from the concept of systemic risk and discuss the way our understanding of systemic risk shapes the objectives of macro-prudential policy. Most importantly, I will argue that the build-up of systemic risk over the financial cycle is an endogenous outcome – a man-made construct – and the job of macro-prudential policy is to try to smoothen this cycle as much as possible. Beyond increasing the resilience of the system, I will argue that macro-prudential policy should be ambitious in leaning against imbalances and if so, it has to be prepared to be bold and intrusive. Decisions on the timing, design and calibration of interventions need to be underpinned by robust analysis. While monetary policy should not be employed to smoothen the credit cycle, under the principle of “one objective, one tool”, the macro-prudential policy function should rest under the responsibility of central banks given synergies and the interactions between the two policy functions. This reflects the macro-prudential policy framework adopted for the ECB/SSM. The nature of systemic risk and the objectives of macro-prudential policy Macro-prudential policies aim to maintain the stability of the financial system as a whole through containing systemic risks. Systemic risks can be defined as risks that, if materialised, have the potential to make financial instability become so widespread that the functioning of the financial system is impaired to an extent that growth and welfare suffer materially (ECB 2009). ECB staff, combining available literature and practical experiences, has developed a conceptual framework that relies on three mechanisms that can lead to systemic financial instability: risk coming from large aggregate shocks, contagion risk, and 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  the risk from the unravelling of widespread financial imbalances that have built up endogenously over time.1 Contagion occurs when the failure of one institution “infects” other hitherto “healthy” institutions. Prominent recent examples of the materialisation of contagion risk include the drying up of interbank funding following the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Large aggregate shocks have always been an important source of widespread financial instability through history. Gorton (1988) documented how negative economic news were the best leading indicators of the likelihood of banking panics in 19th century USA. The third, and, in my view, most important source of systemic risk is the risk of the unravelling of financial imbalances. These imbalances may build up gradually, mostly endogenously, and can then unravel abruptly. They form part of the inherent pro-cyclicality of the financial system.2 It is crucial to recognise that the financial cycle has an important endogenous component which arises because banks take too much solvency and liquidity risk. The aim of macro-prudential policy should be to temper the financial cycle rather than to merely enhance the resilience of the financial sector ahead of crises. It seems unacceptable that macro-prudential authorities would passively watch the development of a bubble in housing prices and other asset prices, comforted by the idea that the banking sector is prepared to weather the storm and that the central bank would deal with the painful aftermath. The crisis showed that the amount of risk endogenously generated by a financial cycle spinning “out-of-control” dwarfs the “mopping up” ability of fiscal and monetary policy due to fiscal capacity limits and the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. In matters of financial instability, prevention is always better than cure. Taming the financial cycle The challenge of taming the financial cycle is, no doubt, formidable. The nature of systemic instability is not fully understood, and by the same token, analytical tools for risk detection, risk assessment and to support policy responses are being developed. This is why the progress of researchers in MaRs and elsewhere has been very welcome. Despite all the difficulties, the new field of macro finance has already identified a number of important financial amplification channels. “Collateral amplification” has been an important way to think about procyclicality ever since the seminal work of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997).3 This mechanism operates because easier credit would by itself increase the value of collateral, thereby further encouraging the supply of credit. During the boom, firms and households borrow too much because they ignore the fact that their collective leverage decisions make the economy more vulnerable to                                                 1 See de Bandt, O., P. Hartmann and J.L. Peydró (2009), Systemic risk: An update, in A. Berger et al. (eds.), Oxford Handbook of Banking, Oxford University Press, and the special features on “The concept of systemic risk” and “Analytical models and tools for the identification and assessment of systemic risks” in the December 2009 and June 2010 ECB Financial Stability Review, respectively. 2 Borio, C., 2009. “Implementing the Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation and Supervision”, Banque de France Financial Stability Review, Vol. 13; Shin, H.S. 2011, “Macroprudential policies beyond Basel III”, in Macroprudential regulation and policy, BIS papers 60. 3 Kiyotaki, N. and Moore, J. (1997), “Credit Cycles”, Journal of Political Economy.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  negative shocks (Lorenzoni (2008),4 Bianchi and Mendoza (2010),5 Korinek and Jeanne (2010).6 In Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014)7 the same “collateral amplification” mechanism is taken a step further and shown to generate endogenous leverage and volatility cycles. Long booms boost bank capital ratios to such an extent that credit availability stops being a constraint on economic activity. This endogenously leads to a Great Moderation in output and asset price volatility which encourages banks to lever up further. Then the system becomes highly vulnerable to shocks in what is now widely known as the “stability paradox”. MaRs has made significant contributions to the modelling of boom-bust cycles. Boissay, Collard and Smets (2012),8 for example, tackle the idea that long booms endogenously sow the seeds of crises. In their framework, a long boom leads to excessive liquidity in the banking system, a reduction in interest rates and the entry of bad banks. Eventually, the boom unravels because banks lose trust in one another and the interbank market freezes up. This model captures two important aspects highlighted by the empirical evidence of Schularick and Taylor (2012):9 crises tend to follow long booms and periods of low interest rates. The results are also consistent with the findings of Hahm, Shin and Shin (2013)10 and the MaRs paper by Bonfim and Kim (2013).11 Both show that financial crises are associated with a build-up of liquidity risk. The three papers we will see in the first session of the conference (Clerc et. al. (2013),12 Nguyen (2013)13 and Benes, Kumhof and Laxton (2013)14 contribute to a literature that motivates financial imbalances and excessive risk-taking from over-optimism or from the implicit safety net guarantees for banks. In these models, too, the build-up of imbalances activates the kinds of adverse feedbacks between the financial sector and the real economy that we know can cause deep and prolonged downturns in activity. These studies are welcome first steps on the road towards a new framework for the analysis of macro-prudential policy. They integrate boom-bust cycles in state of the art macro-models and thus may support the introduction of macro-prudential tools or regulatory measures as a pre-emptive policy in the context of credit and asset price booms.                                                 4 Lorenzoni, G. (2008), “Inefficient Credit Booms”, Review of Economic Studies.  5 Bianchi, J. and Mendoza, E. (2010), “Overborrowing, Financial Crises and ‘Macro-prudential’ Taxes”, NBER WP 16091.  6 Korinek, A. and Jeanne, O. (2010), “Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian Taxation Approach”, NBER WP 16377.  7 Brunnermeier, M. and Sannikov, Y. (2014), “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector”, American Economic Review. 8 Boissay, F., Collard, F. and Smets, F. (2013), “Booms and Banking Crises”, mimeo.  9 Schularick, M. and Taylor, A. (2012), “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870–2008”, American Economic Review.  10 Hahm, J.H., Shin, H.S., and K. Shin, 2013, “Non-Core Bank Liabilities and Financial Vulnerability”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking. Shin, H.S., 2010 “Risk and Liquidity”, Clarendon Lecture in Finance, Oxford University Press.  11 Bonfim, D. and M. Kim, “Liquidity Risk in Banking: is there herding?”, mimeo, Banco de Portugal, 2013. 12 Clerc, L., Derviz, A., Mendicino, C., Moyen, S., Nikolov, K., Suarez, J., Stracca, L. and Vardoulakis, A. (2013), “Assessing Capital Regulation in Macroeconomic Model with Three Layers of Defaults”, mimeo.  13 Nguyen, T. (2013), “Bank Capital Requirements: A Quantitative Analysis”, mimeo.  14 Benes, J., Kumhof, M. and Laxton, D. (2013), “Examples of Macro-prudential Policy Experiments in MAPMOD” IMF Working Paper.  
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Earlier and decisive action seems to be paramount in this respect, necessitating reliable early warning tools. The beneficial impact of higher credit depends on the extent to which credit booms contribute to a permanent financial deepening.15 It is therefore encouraging that we have new “early warning” models and considerable work on the topic (Alessi and Detken (2013),16 Alessi et. al. (2014)17 and Gregory et. al. (2014)18 presented here at the MaRs conference. These analytical tools exploit multiple and novel data sources, variables and models in order to generate accurate crisis predictions. Many of these tools are already in use in regular macro-prudential surveillance work at the ECB. Let me summarise. Systemic risk is a largely endogenous phenomenon due to the inherent procyclicality of the financial system. Preventing instability from occurring is better than dealing with its consequences and therefore leaning against the financial cycle should be the key objective of macro-prudential policies. Of course, this implicitly assumes that we have effective and efficient tools at our disposal. I will now turn to the issue of effectiveness.  What instruments should we use to lean against imbalances? Understanding transmission channels of macro-prudential policies In advanced economies, actual experience on the use of macro-prudential policies is relatively limited, with the exception of the administrative interventions that were usual in many European countries in the 60s to the 80s, like limits to credit or minimum down payments for consumer credit. These instruments played a containment role on the credit cycle but these were times of less sophisticated financial systems. Nowadays, the transmission channels of stylised macro-prudential instruments are far more complex which makes their calibration especially hard. Policy makers will inevitably have to start with some trial-and-error approaches, that will help identifying and addressing the main operational issues. Having said that, I would also underline that MaRs and relevant research in the macro-prudential policy area have shed light on the transmission channels of financial instability as well as of selected policy and regulatory instruments. But enhancing our understanding with more analytical work is very much needed to support the choice and implementation of policy instruments. Macro-prudential policies may address financial imbalances building up in specific sectors, by using targeted instruments. This could facilitate the analysis of transmission mechanisms. At the same time, though, the variety of possible combinations of macro-prudential instruments also makes the implementation of macro-prudential policy a complex endeavour, which has to take into account interactions, leakages and waterbed effects. Going forward, analytical frameworks also need to take these elements into account. Macro-prudential policy: Implementation issues and effectiveness It is worthwhile to group macro-prudential policies into two categories according to the way they operate. A simple distinction can be made between measures that act through cost-price incentives, like capital requirements, and those that depend on quantitative limits, like large exposures or LTV/DTIs limits. Capital based instruments act to restrain the boom as long as banks’ overall cost of funds is sensitive to the structure of its liabilities. We know                                                 15 Since countries with more credit booms also experienced more crises (on average), there seems to be a trade-off between macroeconomic performance and stability (Rancière, Tornell, and Westermann, 2008).  16 Alessi, L. and Detken, C. (2014), “Identifying Excessive Credit Growth and Leverage”, mimeo.  17 Alessi et. al. (2014), “Comparing Different Early Warning Systems: Results from a Horse Race Competition Among Members of the MaRs Network”, mimeo.  18 Gregory, D., Kapadia, K., Nyman, R., Smith, R. and Tuckett, D. (2014) “News and Narratives in Financial Systems: Exploiting Big Data for Systemic Risk Assessment”, mimeo.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  that as long as cost of equity is not too high and not too insensitive to the riskiness of equity itself, this condition will not hold. Higher capital requirements will increase banks’ resilience but may add little to the cost of loans. In an environment of exuberant expectations of house price appreciation, such measures may therefore do little to restrain excessive credit demand. Quantitative limits such as the LTV/DTI ratio are cruder and therefore more likely to work as long as there are many borrowers who will be affected by them. I will discuss these two types of measures in turn. Capital-based instruments In the Basel III framework, the CCB is the main counter-cyclical tool. It is designed to increase banks’ resilience by making them set aside capital in good times and draw it down in bad times. If a release of the buffer in the downturn fosters bank lending in recessions, the CCB will also have a countercyclical effect. Of course the CCB can also lean against the financial cycle in the upswing phase. However, I see two limitations of the CCB. First, given the relatively long lags in its implementation and impact, the CCB might not have a timely influence on the financial cycle. The CCB should be activated relatively early in the cycle to give it time to display its effects. This increases the possibility of false alarms, which in turn will most likely lead to setting it at relatively low levels to mitigate the effect of a potential false alarm. In such a scenario though, the CCB runs the risk of being ineffective. Second, such a tool could also be subject to so-called “waterbed effects” or “leakages”. Macro-prudential policies are no exception to the usual search for regulatory arbitrage. Affected financial intermediaries may have incentives to circumvent regulation by moving activities outside the regulatory perimeter. By pushing financial intermediation towards the “shadow banking” sector, this could make the policy less effective (if no less desirable) as Bengui and Bianchi (2014)19 will show at the conference tomorrow. Another possibility concerns the leakages towards branches of foreign institutions from countries which do not use reciprocation. There is convincing evidence of such leakages in the work of Aiyar, Calomiris and Wieladek (2013)20 which draws on recent UK experience. For example, for certain risks, e.g. by buoyant credit markets, the CCB can be set above 2.5%. In this case the recognition of the higher buffer rate by other designated authorities is voluntary. This lack of reciprocity might generate substitution effects towards branches of foreign banks thus mitigating the intent of the buffer itself. Therefore, in order to make an effective use of the CCB, international cooperation will be very important. In the Euro Area, the SSM framework helps internalizing some issues. For example, the ECB can take action in the case of reciprocation if needed. Such leakages may explain why, in practice, macro-prudential policies, at times, seem to have had mixed results, that vary widely across countries. Most of the evidence on the effectiveness of those policies comes from experiences in emerging market economies. Borio and Shim (2007),21 for example, argue that these measures have, in some cases, slowed down credit expansion temporarily and restrained imprudent practices. It seems therefore possible, under certain conditions, to control financial developments in order to avoid the boom-and-bust cycle.                                                 19 Bengui, J. and Bianchi, J. (2014), “Macro-prudential Capital Controls and the Shadow Economy”, mimeo.  20 Aiyar, S., Calomiris, C. and Wieladek, T. (2013), “Does Macro-Pru Leak? Evidence from a UK Policy Experiment”, NBER Working Papers 17822.  21 Borio, C. and I. Shim: “What can (macro-)prudential policy do to support monetary policy?”, BIS Working Papers No 242, 2007.  
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  LTV/DTI instruments The main weakness of capital instruments, such as the CCB or sectoral capital requirements is that they have their impact on the evolution of the cycle mainly through their effect on the cost/price of credit. In an exuberant financial market, this may not be enough to offset the prospects of gain that seem readily available when every asset price is going up. Instruments with quantitative limits like the LTV/DTIs can be more effective in dealing with housing booms because they restrict borrowing in a more direct way. Of course these instruments are not perfect. Ono et. al. (2013)22 (which will be presented here later today) presents a cautionary tale in this respect based on the Japanese experience. The paper shows that LTV ratios in small business lending voluntarily declined during booms even in the absence of regulation, casting doubt on whether an LTV ratio cap will really bind and help to restrain the boom. Kuttner and Shim (2013)23 also argue that LTV ratios are relatively less effective at dampening housing price volatility compared to DTI limits. An interesting MaRs paper (Gelain, Lansing and Mendicino (2013)24 which was presented at last year’s MaRs conference) may provide a convincing explanation for these empirical findings. The paper finds that a generalised borrowing limit that includes elements of both LTV and DTI is the best way to restrain housing booms. LTV limits may be ineffective during periods of rapid house price appreciation because leveraged borrowers experience large increases in wealth and the down-payment constraint becomes less important. Tightening LTV limits further may then have a rather limited impact on house prices and leverage. DTI limits, in contrast, tighten by definition whenever housing values expand faster than incomes.25 They begin to bind for an increasing number of borrowers helping to exert a counter-cyclical influence. The simulation results in Gelain et. al. (2013) show that the strong counter-cyclical properties of the DTI cap helps to moderate the financial cycle. My take on this evidence is that LTVs/DTIs need to be used aggressively and it may be necessary to use several instruments at the same time. Two telling practical examples are Singapore and China. Singapore has been a pioneer in the use of macro-prudential policies to moderate financial stability risks arising from the housing market. Since 2009, a series of measures targeting housing has been implemented, with a tightening of the LTV ratio for individual borrowers from 90% in 2009 to 40% in 2013. The cumulative impact of these measures has been slow, and residential property prices stabilised only recently. In China, the introduction of an 80% LTV ceiling in 2001 did not have much of a bite until it was complemented with 50% DTI limits in 2005–06. But even then, the combination of the two measures was credited with reducing mortgage credit growth by only 2 percentage points of GDP over 2004–08. This is a sobering fact when one notes that LTV/DTIs seem so far the most effective type of macro-prudential instruments. To summarise, macro-prudential policy has to be pre-emptive, deployed timely and in a bold fashion. We may doubt that capital instruments, such as the CCB with a maximum of 2.5 percentage points, can be sufficiently effective to achieve more than merely building up the resilience of banks. Quantitative instruments such as the LTV/DTI ratio limit can work better but even these instruments may need to be used boldly in order to have a significant dampening impact on housing booms.                                                 22 Ono, T, Uchida, H, Udell, G. and Uesugi, I. (2013), “Lending Pro-cyclicality and Macro-prudential Policy: Evidence from Japanese LTV Ratios”, mimeo.  23 Kuttner, K. and Shim, I., 2013. “Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilize Housing Markets? Evidence from a Panel of 57 Economies”, NBER WP 19723.  24 Gelain, P. Lansing, K. and Mendicino, C. (2013), “House prices, credit growth and excess volatility: implications for monetary and macro-prudential policy”, International Journal of Central Banking.  25 Equally, the limit endogenously loosens whenever housing prices decline relative to incomes. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  Macro-prudential tools in the EU are governed by two legal texts: the CRR and CRD IV. The appropriate analytical underpinning needs to be gathered for the adequate design and calibration of tools at the disposal of macro-prudential authorities. At the same time, the range of tools might need to be expanded. The Countercyclical Capital Buffer (Art. 130, 135–140), Systemic Risk Buffer (Art. 133–134) and Capital surcharge on systemically important institutions (Art. 131) fall under the CRD IV. The CRR includes (under Art. 458): minimum Capital Requirements, Large Exposure limits, the Capital Conservation Buffer, Sectoral Risk Weights (in the residential and commercial property sectors) and Intra-financial Sector Exposures whereby higher risk weights can be set vis-à-vis financial sector exposures. Furthermore, it includes the Liquidity Requirements (LCR and NSFR) and requirements on Public Disclosure aimed at enhancing market discipline and mitigating informational asymmetries. While the range of tools might appear quite broad, it would gain in being enlarged with some instruments less dependent on cost/incentives and more on quantitative limits, like for instance large exposures limits by sector and not just by clients. Other possible toolkit extensions to consider are the LTVs or DTIs ratios or the loans to deposit ratio. A final consideration relates to the fact that the cyclical behaviour of the parts of the financial sector which fall outside of the scope of regulation and supervision, need to be influenced by other policies, possibly by monetary policy. To a large extent, this is because the macro-prudential tools assigned to EU authorities (and the ECB) concern primarily, of not exclusively, the banking sector. For a central bank with macro-prudential responsibilities, the link between macro-prudential and monetary policies is therefore of particular relevance. It is this point that I will turn to next. Interactions with monetary policy The fact that the financial crisis led to large disruptions in the economy is a strong reason to make the financial cycle a subject of stabilisation policies.26 Monetary policy has traditionally been defined in terms of the business cycle. The financial cycle, while not disconnected from the business cycle, has larger amplitude and is at least twice as long as the business cycle. Its dynamics are driven more directly by credit and property price developments. As part of its monetary policy strategy, the ECB already assigns a prominent role to financial developments, by taking into account the medium-term effects of booming credit and asset markets for the assessment of risks to price stability. Nonetheless, standard monetary policy may not be the most appropriate tool to address all the underlying forces driving the financial cycle. This view is supported by the findings of a number of MaRs studies (see for example Angelini, Neri and Panetta (2012),27 Beau, Clerc and Mojon (2012)28 and Lambertini, Mendicino and Punzi (2013).29  First, it is not clear what would be the appropriate magnitude of changes in the policy rate to curb excessive developments in asset prices and credit. While monetary policy                                                 26 See, for example, Borio, C., “The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt?”, Working Paper Series, No 395, Bank for International Settlements, 2012; Aikman, D., Haldane, A. and Nelson, B., “Curbing the credit cycle”, Economic Journal, forthcoming; and Claessens, S., Kose, M.A. and Terrones, M.E., “Financial Cycles: What? How? When?”, IMF Working Papers, No 11/76, International Monetary Fund, 2011.  27 Angelini, P., Neri, S. and Panetta, F. (2012), “Monetary and Macro-prudential Policies” ECB Working Paper 1449.  28 Cahn, C., Beau, D., Clerc, L. and Mojon, B. (2012), “Macro-prudential policy and the conduct of monetary policy”, Proceedings of the Central Bank of Chile 2012 Annual Conference.  29 Mendicino, C., Lambertini, L. and Punzi, M. (2012), “Leaning against boom and bust cycles in credit and housing prices: monetary and macro-prudential policies”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control.  
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  could be a powerful instrument in a boom that is driven by increasing leverage30 the financial cycle differs from the business cycle in its amplitude, which could at times require much larger shifts in the policy rate than would be warranted by the outlook for inflation.31  Second, financial cycles across euro area countries are still heterogeneous, while monetary policy is the same across the board. The ECB’s monetary policy is responsible for ensuring medium-term price stability in the euro area as whole. Tailoring monetary policy decisions to specific sectoral or regional differences in credit or asset price developments might have inappropriate side effects in other areas. These considerations suggest that two different objectives warrant the use of two different sets of instruments, in the spirit of Tinbergen. The objective of monetary policy remains the safeguarding of medium-term price stability. As I have mentioned earlier, the main task of macro-prudential policy is to address risks to financial stability and to ultimately curb the financial cycle, so that the risk of financial crises occurring is reduced and real economic effects of financial crises are dampened. This separation is also consistent with the “principle of effective market classification”, according to which policies should be linked to those objectives on which they have the strongest impact.32  Whether the two different policy functions give rise to friction depends on the degree of complementarity of the respective policy objectives. Most of the time, there is no trade-off between price stability and financial stability. Price stability contributes to financial stability by eliminating inflation-related distortions in financial markets. At the same time, financial stability facilitates the central bank’s task of maintaining price stability by contributing to a stable monetary transmission mechanism – a precondition for a central bank to be able to discharge its task – and by avoiding that risks to price stability emanate from financial instability. Therefore, in those cases, the respective objectives of macro-prudential policy and monetary policy are mutually reinforcing. However in certain situations, the two policies may have different directions, one restricting while the other is expanding, without this implying that they are in conflict but rather that they are being complementary. That is precisely what happened during the time of the so-called “great moderation” and in the present moment. Right now, the low nominal growth requires low interest rates and this creates the possibility of activating the “the risk-taking channel”33 and search for yield and restrictive macro-prudential measures become necessary. In general, the two policy areas interact, and their effects on each other have to be considered. Macro-prudential policy influences credit conditions, and thereby also feeds back into the overall economy and, hence, the outlook for price stability. Monetary policy can, in the pursuit of price stability, affect systemic risk via a number of transmission channels. The interaction effects of monetary policy and macro-prudential policy suggest that coordination between the two policy functions is beneficial. The need for coordination and the fact that both monetary policy and macro-prudential policy take a macroeconomic perspective provide a strong motivation for integrating the two policy functions within one                                                 30 See, for example, Adrian, T. and Shin, H.-S., “The Changing Nature of Financial Intermediation and the Financial Crisis of 2007–09”, Staff Reports, No 439, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March 2010.  31 See, for example, Bean, C., Paustian, M., Penalver, A. and Taylor, T., “Monetary Policy after the Fall”, Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2011.  32 See also Mundell (1962) who discussed this question in the context of monetary and fiscal policy.  33 The risk-taking channel suggests that monetary policy affects risk premia via lenders’ or investors’ willingness to take risk, e.g. via sticky return targets or an inherent counter-cyclicality of investor risk aversion. See Borio, C. and Zhu, H., “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: a missing link in the transmission mechanism?”, BIS Working Papers, No. 268, December 2008; and the references therein.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  institution, the central bank, an entity with broad knowledge of markets, financial stability and the independence to take bold decisions when needed. It has therefore been decided that the Governing Council will have a prominent role to play in matters related to macro-prudential policy. Regular joint meetings will be held with the Supervisory Board of the SSM to assess the relevant financial stability situation in the euro area and in each of its member countries. Following the assessment of risks and vulnerabilities to financial system stability and possible remedial action, discussions may conclude on the need for the activation of a specific macro-prudential tool. Robust analysis is needed to contradict possible inaction bias on the timing of intervention as well as on the design and implementation features of such tools. The Governing Council also needs to be alert to leakages and issues of coordination of macro-prudential actions where measures are addressed to a specific country. Detailed procedures for the activation of macro-prudential policy tools have also been spelled out, along challenging timelines, in line with the SSM regulation, whereby the ultimate responsibility lies with the Governing Council. Conclusion Impressive progress has been made in understanding transmission mechanisms of macro-prudential policy instruments but this is the beginning of a long journey, as we prepare the analytical toolkit for this new policy area. I am encouraged by the wide range of empirical and theoretical modelling approaches of financial instability which are being presented here at the MaRs conference. For the decisions we have to take in the near term, we will have to rely more on incompletely tested theories and sometimes precarious econometric evidence. This means that we have to accept uncertainty and cautious experimentation when we decide what is necessary to stabilise the financial system. As I mentioned recently: “Macro-prudential policy faces a major test going forward: will there be determination and boldness to try to smooth the financial cycle, or will the authorities just take refuge in building buffers and strengthening financial institutions?”34 This would imply that significant reliance on monetary policy would remain to address a posteriori the regrettable results of the boom/bust feature of the financial system. Only time will tell, but the answer to that question will depend, in my view, whether the central banks will be given or not a predominant role in macro-prudential policy decision-making. Let me conclude. Many policies in history have been developed through trial and error. It is rare that a perfect theory or academic paradigm is established before at the time when a new policy needs to be used for the first time. But it is important that once the policy community has realised that a new policy is indispensable and starts “field experiments”, the analytical foundations are developed in parallel. And, I would argue that we, in the ECB and the European System of Central Banks, have made a major and timely step through MaRs. I hope that the presentation of the final MaRs report after my speech and the papers in the conference programme today and tomorrow will testify this. Other authorities, like the BIS or the IMF as well as a part of the academic community have taken similar steps. Many of the people involved are represented here at the concluding MaRs conference. But this is only a start. As I tried to illustrate, policy-makers need well-established foundations for their actions. They also know that in order to be effective, these actions will have to be bold. Many years of experience across countries and a variety of instruments need to be                                                 34 “Making macro-prudential policy work”, speech by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB,  at the high-level seminar organised by De Nederlandsche Bank, 10 June 2014.  
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches  acquired. The macro-prudential policy area needs to become part of the regular economics curriculum. Seminal papers which can be referred to when such policies are addressed need to be written. Furthermore, a large body of research, from which university teachers distil the main principles, institutional features, policy instruments and transmission mechanisms needs to be built. This would enable equipping students with the basic, policy-relevant knowledge. In the macro-prudential field we are still very far from this ideal situation. More experience in the application of macro-prudential tools and in the use of new frameworks for the assessment of macro-prudential regulatory instruments needs to be acquired. More research work along the lines of MaRs and related initiatives needs to be pursued. We invite all researchers from outside the ESCB, whether at other policy authorities or academia, to join forces with us and pursue this goal. I am now at your disposal for questions, if you wish. Thank you for attention.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Patrick Honohan: The impact of the boom and bust on the capital of households in Ireland Response by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the presentation by M Thomas Piketty, at the Think-tank for Action on Social Change (TASC) Conference “The Challenge of Economic Inequality to Recovery and Wellbeing”, Dublin, 20 June 2014. *      *      * Introduction For me, a long-time admirer of Thomas Piketty’s work and a first-day-of-issue purchaser of Capital in the 21st Century (Piketty, 2014) there is much to enjoy and admire in this work, focusing as it does, not only on the distribution of income at a point in time, but in particular on the evolution of wealth or capital holdings over time, a topic neglected to a surprising degree in most analysis of economic statistics. I especially like the historical sweep including the well-detailed comparison and contrast of the late 19th Century “gilded age” with the more recent “age of financialisation”. (We didn’t have much of a “gilded age” in Ireland, but we did have “financialisation” with a vengeance cf. O Riain, 2014). I also was intrigued by the documentation of the destruction of wealth – and of wealth concentration – by war and depression in mid-20th century. (Resonances also here to Ireland’s current experience). I appreciate the matter-of-fact concern with inequality – especially wealth inequality: I differ from those commentators who do not see the obvious policy relevance of these matters. And I like the handling of the contrasting roles of inheritance and accretion through investment earnings versus “earned income” in generating wealth inequalities. Finally, as someone who studied macroeconomic dynamics in graduate school, I was very struck by the neglected relevance of the r – g dynamic (i.e. the dominance and concentration wealth will grow in the economy if the average rate of return on capital continues to exceed the rate of growth of economic activity) for interpreting and predicting trends in the concentration of wealth. I have to disappoint anyone expecting a “however” at this stage, because (while such an ambitious book will continue to prompt many debates and questions) for me it is a tour de force. Although much of the commentary around Piketty’s book has centred on his forward-looking analysis of the prospects for the size distribution of worldwide wealth in the decades ahead, other parts have greater immediate resonance for us here in Ireland. I am thinking specifically about the way in which many of the long data series in Capital show a pronounced decline in the mid-20th Century. Related to two world wars and the Great Depression which separated them, as well, perhaps, as to the rise of the “Welfare State”, these collapses occurred both in terms of the aggregate wealth-to-income ratio and to the concentration of wealth at the top end of the distribution. If Capital convinces of anything, it surely establishes that looking at major historical transitions through the lens of data on wealth is very instructive. We also have had disruptive events in Ireland in the past decade somewhat comparable to the mid-century capital and wealth collapses in Europe documented by Piketty. As well as tipping the economy into a deep recession, triggering a surge in unemployment and emigration and crippling the public finances, our crisis has been associated with large losses in household capital and increases in indebtedness causing distress. These latter aspects have been the focus of a lot of work at 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  the Central Bank in the past few years as we have used the limited powers at our disposal and sought to provide advice to Government to map the best available route to recovery. Data on the distributional impact of recent economic developments in Ireland Capital in the 21st Century shows the value of comprehensive data to understand trends in capital and debt. So, seen through such a data lens, how does the recent boom-and-bust experience of Ireland compare? Do we have the data? Well, for aggregate household wealth and indebtedness we do have many of the most important elements (Cf. Cussen and Phelan, 2010, 2011, Cussen, O’Leary and Smith, 2012),1 and I will speak about those aggregate numbers in a few minutes. But for how that wealth and indebtedness is distributed, much less is known. To be sure, systematic collection of income inequality and poverty data in Ireland has been well established since the 1980s and is carried forward notably in the CSO’s SILC survey. The share of the top few percent of the income distribution has also been tracked over a long period of time in Ireland, and that data (Nolan, 2007) is part of the World Top incomes database employed by Piketty. Using this and other sources there has been extensive work to understand the impact of the boom and bust on income distribution (cf. McGinnity et al. 2013) on the distribution of labour market effects of the bust (ibid.), on the distribution of economic stress and material deprivation (Maître, Russell and Whelan, 2014) and on mortgage distress (McCarthy and McQuinn, 2011). The question of mortgage distress has indeed been the subject of a large body of data-intensive analysis at the Central Bank, much of it published (cf. Kennedy and McIndoe, 2012). The literature also has emphasised the role of the state in influencing the distributional impact on disposable income through tax and social welfare policy (Callan et al., 2013; Maître and Watson, 2013).2  So we do know a lot about changes in living standards, loan servicing and economic stress resulting from the crisis. But the somewhat different dimension which Piketty has emphasised relates to assets and liabilities as distinct from income and expenditure – to stocks as distinct from flows: here we do have aggregate data, but little on its distribution. We would like to have, as indeed Piketty includes in his book for many other countries and over a long time period, the size distribution of household wealth. In addition it would be valuable for the purposes of Government policy to know about the distribution of the different elements of household wealth as between different income deciles, age categories, social class, educational attainment, occupational category or economic sector. But for Ireland, apart from the early work at the ESRI (Nolan, 1991; Honohan and Nolan, 1993), no really systematic nationally representative survey of the distribution of wealth has been published. There are, of course, various partial analyses, for example the wealth data from the TILDA survey of older people recently analysed by O’Sullivan and Layte (2011) and O’Sullivan, Nolan, Barrett and Dooley (2014), and the small 2012 Central Bank household survey focused on indebtedness (McCarthy, 2014; McCarthy and McQuinn, 2014). Happily, we will soon know more about the distribution of assets and liabilities of households, with the data cleaning phase now nearing completion from the Household Finance and                                                 1 Cussen and Phelan (2011) also discuss trends in the aggregate assets and liabilities of other sectors: Government and financial and non-financial corporations. 2 The latest data suggesting a broadly proportional impact of policy changes on all income groups, though with a somewhat higher adverse impact for top and bottom deciles, when the period 2009–14 is taken together. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Consumption Survey (HFCS), which was conducted for Ireland for the first time in 2013 by the Central Bank and the CSO.3 This means that, when it comes to discussion of wealth distribution, we will not have the luxury of data-free speculation for much longer. So let me hasten to indulge myself! How did the main components of wealth change in Ireland in the boom and bust? The financial crisis had a dramatic effect on net worth of households in Ireland…as had the prior boom. As shown in the figure, measured aggregate household net worth peaked in Ireland in mid-2007 at €719 billion, up almost €300 billion from five years before. Just five years later, in mid-2012, it had fallen back to its mid-2002 level. From that trough there has since been a small net increase again.4 (I will not touch on the assets and liabilities of the corporate sector, an area which is greatly complicated by the large presence of multinational corporations; I think that omission does not much distort what I have to say.)                                                  3 Like most such exercises, this survey may not throw light on the very top end of the wealth distribution. 4 A few points should be noted about this data. About two-fifths of the household financial assets represent insurance and pension fund assets held for the benefit of households, a further two-fifths represent currency and deposits. Quoted and non-quoted equities account for most of the remainder. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Figure: Main components of household and Government net worth, 2002, 07, 12 and 13  (€ bn. Source for Household: Cussen and Phelan, 2010 and updated by those authors; for Government: net financial assets from Central Bank Quarterly Financial Accounts.) Households saved throughout this decade, and this tended to increase net worth. But the up-and-down swing in measured net worth was primarily related to changes in the price of land and housing.5  The value of housing assets grew much more quickly than household net worth between 2002 and 2007; this was accompanied by a rapid increase in aggregate household debt. Indeed, by 2007 aggregate household debt represented the third highest ratio to disposable income among 24 European countries for which data is available (Cussen, O’Leary and Smith, 2012). The increase in household debt 2002–7 was about the same as the increase in aggregate household financial assets. But of course this would not be true of individual households: distribution matters. When the price of property fell back, the debt remained. The two factors which have transformed what might seem a rather benign valuation blip into a crippling debt crisis are, of course (i) the distribution issue, namely the fact that different households were affected in dramatically different ways, depending mainly on whether they had borrowed to buy over-priced property and (ii) the fact that the Government’s net debt position has also deteriorated by about €150 bn since 2007: a third of it attributable to the bail-out of bank creditors6 and the rest resulting from the borrowing undertaken, especially from official sources, in the course of smoothing the transition to restoring budgetary balance.7                                                  5 The role of valuation changes is shown in Cussen and Phelan (2010, 2011). Aggregate equity withdrawal from mortgage lending in the boom years amounted to about €8 billion (Lydon and O’Leary, 2013). 6 Though not of bank shareholders, who lost essentially all of their investment; subordinated debt holders of the banks also lost heavily. Between them, these investors, mostly foreign, absorbed about half of the banking losses. 7 The latter need became evident after the automatic fiscal stabilisers (e.g. unemployment payments and reductions in tax revenue) kicked-in when the global and domestic economic crises coincided to erode employment and income levels. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  If everyone’s assets and liabilities had been affected in the same way, then the return of net assets to their 2002 level might have seemed relatively painless. But the modest net change in aggregate household net worth between 2002 and 2012 should not mask an increase in aggregate indebtedness of over €100 bn. Not everyone borrowed. But for most of those who did at the height of the price bubble, the devastating effect on their net worth of the subsequent price fall is the most significant wealth outcome of the crisis. It has sent net worth into negative territory for many, especially before taking account of future earning potential (sometimes known as “human capital” in wealth analyses). Current and future earnings have also been damaged by unemployment.8 Migration flows are also a factor. The whole size distribution of net wealth moved to the left: pushing those at the bottom into very negative positions. While I cannot prove it, I think we may take it (based on what evidence we have) that there has also been a widening of inequality within the wealth distribution (using conventional measures of inequality) since the beginning of the millennium. Furthermore, the churn within the distribution has been substantial. Clearly many people who had become rich lost all of their gains. Other rich people were relatively unaffected. But the sizable group which incurred heavy debts to acquire property close to the top of the market have seen their net worth (even if modest to begin with) wiped out entirely. It’s not just a question of analysing the relative impact of the bust on those who were rich before the boom versus those who were poor before the boom. Also striking is, for instance, the fact that the loss of net worth was concentrated mainly on those who borrowed in mid-century.9 This group was in turn concentrated in the age group 30–45, as is confirmed, for example, by the data of Duffy and O’Hanlon (2013). While, as Piketty’s account well illustrates, many factors alter the net worth of different households over time – poor investment decisions; adverse shocks of one sort or another – this large movement strongly affecting a sizable fraction of society in a short period of time represents a huge shift in the distribution of household worth, as well as an overall widening of wealth inequality. It constantly provokes the question: “what more, if anything, can or should Government policy do about this to alleviate the resulting stress?” What can or should Government do? In my experience, this question is inclined to elicit a wide range of responses displaying a wide range of fundamentally different approaches to questions of ownership and debt. There are, on the one hand, what may be called “contract fundamentalists” who disregard the extreme nature of the crisis that has occurred. On the one hand there are those who attach little importance to conventional principles of ownership and private property. In practice – and this is part of the underlying mid-20th Century story shown by Piketty for Europe – sudden and major debt crises on this scale around the world have often been accompanied by a surge of inflation and currency depreciation. Such surges have had the effect of lowering the real burden of indebtedness and passing some of the real losses to the holders of monetary assets. Unanticipated inflation is a crude mechanism of redistribution, though, and typically results in output costs in subsequent years as monetary authorities struggle to bring it back under control. In any event, it is not an option for Ireland.                                                 8 The burden of some of this debt has been partly mitigated by the low-for-long interest rate policy of the ECB – its policy rate has averaged well below 1 per cent for the past 5 years – which has brought the servicing costs of tracker mortgages well below where they were when the loans were contracted. 9 Another category often mentioned are retired persons whose wealth was concentrated as was traditional on long-standing holdings of bank equity. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Because it too reached the limit of its debt capacity (for the reasons mentioned above), the Government has little room left for policies involving net additional spending, so in practice it is limited to broadly cost-neutral adjustments to tax and spending. Along with this limited capacity, there has been little appetite for a transfer from taxpayers to those indebted households who can still afford to service their debts. Personal insolvency legislation has, however, been modernised and streamlined, offering viable options for over-indebted borrowers. Ideally, though, lenders should be, and increasingly are, negotiating more favourable arrangements than bankruptcy that restore borrowers to a sustainable position, while husbanding (as is their responsibility) the capital of the bank and avoiding unwarranted losses from concessions to borrowers that can afford to pay – concessions that would largely fall on the banking system’s largest shareholder, the State. I need hardly recall that walking this tightrope has been a very slow process. Some home-owners have seen their income situation deteriorate to the point where they can no longer afford to service the mortgage debt. Fortunately, the number of involuntary owner-occupier repossessions has so far remained low: given the sharp fall in property prices between 2007 and 2012, it can make sense for lenders to avoid repossession even for a homeowner who can no longer fully service the original debt. Banks have been pressured by the Central Bank, within the limitations of prudential regulation and their constitutional property rights, to accelerate the conclusion of sustainable loan modification solutions where the existing contracts are no longer viable. Gradually – too gradually – we are seeing progress on this front. Banks are obliged to comply with the Central Bank’s code of conduct on mortgage arrears in arriving at sustainable solutions in a fair and transparent way. This remains a focus of our close attention at the Central Bank. Indeed, we have examined many options in the attempt to accelerate the process of achieving a return to sustainability. Could a one-size-fits-all debt modification scheme be devised to deliver wholesale loan modifications speedily for unaffordable debt? Despite our best efforts at the Central Bank, we have had to conclude that no blanket scheme can be devised that would be both viable and effective in current circumstances. No workable schemes have been devised that do a good job at hitting the target of those who really need assistance; and blanket schemes would be extremely costly for the State (over and above the large injections which it has already made into the banks). Unfortunately, then, this work has not displayed a way forward. To the extent that the lenders do not provide adequate workouts for unaffordable debt, it falls on the personal insolvency legislation to deal with this problem. The recent great liberalisation of this legislation was badly needed and it provides a benchmark context against which lenders must negotiate workouts. Is it enough? Clearly things are working slowly and too many creditors still adopt a “Victorian” approach to debt modification where the borrower cannot pay. On the other hand those debtors who can pay are beginning to realise that the State is not likely to impose on the rest of society the costs of investments gone wrong for those who can afford to take the losses. The question of how best to deal with the overhang of household debt generated by the crisis has been extremely fraught. It involves political as well as technical decisions and judgment. The role of the Central Bank relates solely to the technical and here I hope we have provided advice that has helped maximise the overall room (in terms of aggregate economic resources available) for national political choices. We have contemplated many alternative approaches: While few people can be fully satisfied with the outcome to date, there do not seem to be any better paths. Discussions about the distribution of household assets and liabilities has rightly focused on those with little or no net wealth, and also on middle-income householders who borrowed more than they can afford to acquire over-priced property. Still, there are also important questions about the wider economic impact of changes in wealth higher up the scale. Many Irish families of moderate wealth also saw their capital shrink dramatically in the crisis as 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  property investments made in the boom, and inherited bank equity investments, lost value. Given the traditional importance of family funds in underpinning start-up finance of small firms, will this loss of wealth have an adverse effect on investment by small firms now and in the coming years? Are alternative financing mechanisms, including those being put in place by Government, going to be enough to fill this gap? Concluding remarks Before closing, I need to emphasise that today’s discussion of assets and liabilities, prompted by Thomas Piketty’s work, should not allow us to neglect the other ways in which the crisis has had a severe effect – for example, through loss of employment or reduction of social benefits, to mention just the financial costs – on many households too far down the income scale to have accumulated any significant net assets. Indeed, some of the affected persons have emigrated and no longer show up in the national statistics. As for the future, how important Piketty’s r – g dynamic will be in coming years in Ireland is hard to know. Certainly for r the return on bank deposits will remain low for the period ahead, and some of the bounce-back value of Irish property and business assets will accrue to the foreign buyers so much in evidence. The context for g of this will, of course, be the growth recovery in the European Union and the euro area, underpinning employment and income growth in Ireland itself. References Callan, Tim, Claire Keane, Michael Savage and John R. Walsh. 2013. “Distributional Impact of Tax, Welfare and Public Service Pay Policies: Budget 2014 and Budgets 2009–2014.” ESRI Quarterly Economic Commentary, Winter. Calvert, Emma, Brian Nolan, Tony Fahey, Deirdre Healy, Aogan Mulcahy, Bertrand Maître, Michelle Norris, Ian O’Donnell, Nessa Winston, and Christopher T. Whelan. 2011. Growing Inequalities and their Impacts in Ireland GINI Country Report for Ireland. Cussen, Mary and Gillian Phelan. 2010. “Irish Households: Assessing the Impact of the Economic Crisis.” Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin, 2010/4. Cussen, Mary and Gillian Phelan. 2011. “The Rise and Fall of Sectoral Net Wealth in Ireland.” Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin 2011/3. Cussen, Mary, Brídín O’Leary and Donal Smith. 2012. “The Impact of the Financial Turbulence on Households: A Cross Country Comparison.” Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin 2012/2. Duffy, David and Niall O’Hanlon. 2013. “Negative Equity in the Irish Housing Market: Estimates Using Loan Level Data.” ESRI Working Paper 463. Gerlach-Kristen, Petra. 2013. “Younger and older households in the crisis.” ESRI Quarterly Economic Commentary¸ Spring. Honohan, Patrick and Brian Nolan. 1993. The Financial Assets of Households in Ireland ESRI General Research Series Paper No. 162. Kelly, Robert, Yvonne McCarthy and Kieran McQuinn. 2012. “Impairment and Negative Equity in the Irish Mortgage Market.” Journal of Housing Economics 21, 256–68. Kennedy, Gerard and Tara McIndoe-Calder. 2012. “The Irish Mortgage Market: Stylised Facts, Negative Equity and Arrears.” Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin 2012/1. Lydon, Reamonn and Brídín O’Leary. 2013. “Housing Equity Withdrawal Trends in Ireland”, Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin 2013/1. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Maître, Bertrand, Helen Russell and Christopher T. Whelan. 2014. “Economic stress and the great recession in Ireland: polarization, individualization or ‘middle class squeeze’?” University College Dublin Geary WP2014/07, April, 2014. McCarthy, Yvonne. 2014. “Dis-entangling the mortgage arrears crisis: The role of the labour market, income volatility and housing equity.” Central Bank of Ireland Technical Paper 2/RT/14. McCarthy, Yvonne and Kieran McQuinn. 2014. “Deleveraging in a highly indebted property market: Who does it and are there implications for household consumption?” Central Bank of Ireland Technical Paper 5/RT/14 McCarthy, Yvonne and Kieran McQuinn. 2011. “How Are Irish Households Coping with their Mortgage Repayments? Information from the Survey on Income and Living Conditions.” Economic and Social Review 42(1). McGinnity, Frances, Helen Russell, Dorothy Watson, Gillian Kingston and Elish Kelly. 2014. “Winners and Losers? The Equality Impact of the Great Recession.” Dublin: The Equality Agency and the Economic and Social Research Institute. McGuinness, Anne. 2011. “The Distribution of Property-level Mortgage Arrears.” Central Bank of Ireland Economic Letter 2011/6. Nolan, Brian. 1991. The Wealth of Irish Households: What Can We Learn from Survey Data? Dublin: Combat Poverty Agency. Nolan, Brian. 2007. “Long Term Trends in Top Income Shares in Ireland.” in A.B. Atkinson, and T. Piketty, eds. Top Incomes over the Twentieth Century. A Contrast Between Continental European and English-Speaking Countries. Oxford University Press, chapter 12. Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press. Ó Riain, Seán. 2012. “The Crisis of Financialisation in Ireland.” Economic and Social Review. 43(4). The Rise and Fall of Ireland’s CO’Sullivan, Vincent and Richard Layte. 2014. “Income and Asset Levels of Older People.” in Alan Barrett, George Savva, Virpi Timonen and Rose Anne Kenny, eds., Fifty Plus in Ireland 2011: First results from the Irish Longitudinal Study on Ageing (TILDA). Dublin: Trinity College. O’Sullivan, Vincent, Brian Nolan, Alan Barrett and Cara Dooley 2014. “Income and Wealth in the Irish Longitudinal Study on Ageing.” Economic and Social Review. Watson, Dorothy and Bertrand Maître. 2013. Social Transfers and Poverty Alleviation in Ireland: An Analysis of the Survey on Income and Living Conditions 2004 – 2011. Social Inclusion Report No.4. Dublin: Department of Social Protection.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Thomas Jordan: Swiss National Bank’s assessment of the economic situation Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the media news conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 19 June 2014. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen Welcome to the Swiss National Bank’s six-monthly news conference. As usual, I will begin by explaining the monetary policy decision and outlining our assessment of the economic situation. Afterwards, Jean-Pierre Danthine will present our latest Financial Stability Report, before Fritz Zurbrügg comments on current developments in the financial markets. Following our introductory remarks, we will be pleased to answer any questions you might have. Monetary policy decision I will begin with the monetary policy decision. The SNB is maintaining its minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro. The target range for the three-month Libor will remain unchanged at 0.0–0.25%. The Swiss franc is still high. We will therefore continue to enforce the minimum exchange rate with the utmost determination. If necessary, we are prepared to buy foreign currency in unlimited quantities for this purpose. With interest rates close to zero, the minimum exchange rate is the right tool to avoid an undesirable tightening of monetary conditions. This applies especially if the upward pressure on the Swiss franc were to intensify once again. And, if required, we are also willing to take further measures. Our new conditional inflation forecast shows that inflationary pressure has receded once more in the medium term. The inflation forecast for the coming quarters is slightly higher than in March. This is because the departure point for the forecast has moved upwards, as inflation was somewhat higher in May than expected. However, from mid-2015 onwards, inflation will be lower than forecast in the previous quarter. The reason for this is that the global economic outlook has deteriorated slightly. Another factor is the unexpectedly weak inflation in the euro area. At 0.1%, the inflation forecast for the current year is 0.1 percentage points higher than in March. For 2015 and 2016, the new forecast – of 0.3% for 2015 and 0.9% for 2016 – is 0.1 percentage points lower, in each case, than at the previous monetary policy assessment. It is important to bear in mind that our forecast is conditional. It is based on the assumption that the three-month Libor remains at 0.0% over the next three years and the Swiss franc weakens over the forecast horizon. In our forecast, therefore, we assume that the SNB will pursue a very expansionary monetary policy. Even under such assumptions, there are still no signs of any inflation risks for Switzerland in the foreseeable future. Global economic outlook The SNB’s inflation forecast is embedded in a global economic scenario. I would therefore now like to give you our assessment of the global economy. The global recovery remains hesitant overall. Last quarter registered weaker growth than we had anticipated at our March monetary policy assessment. World trade also declined, after having exhibited strong growth in the last few months of 2013, which had raised hopes of a sustained economic recovery. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  In the US, GDP declined in the first quarter. However, we consider this to be a transitory phenomenon which can be largely put down to an exceptional cold snap experienced this winter. Growth in the euro area was weak and varied greatly from one country to another. While economic activity continued to pick up in Germany, renewed stagnation in France and Italy gave rise to disappointment. We continue to expect the global economy to firm in the coming quarters. However, the global economic recovery will remain very subdued by historical standards. Compared to the last monetary policy assessment, we now anticipate somewhat slower growth, in both advanced and emerging economies. It is entirely possible, however, that global economic growth will be weaker than we have assumed. The euro area continues to face significant challenges. These include the consolidation of public sector finances as well as the implementation of institutional reforms and reforms to promote growth. In addition, various emerging economies are suffering from structural problems. Should the current geopolitical conflicts worsen, this would also hold back activity in the international economy. Since the major currency areas are in different phases of the monetary policy cycle, there is also a danger of greater volatility in the financial and foreign exchange markets. All this generates a high level of uncertainty with regard to future developments in the global economy. Swiss economic outlook I will now look at economic developments in Switzerland. As expected, growth in Switzerland picked up somewhat in the first quarter, after having been relatively weak in the previous quarter. The rebound was mainly attributable to the upturn in business activity in manufacturing and the banking sector. On the demand side, exports of goods – which had still been declining in the previous quarter – and construction investment were the main growth drivers. Nevertheless, the capacity of the Swiss economy is still not fully utilised overall. Technical capacity utilisation in manufacturing remains considerably below its long-term average. Although employment was up in the first quarter, the unemployment rate remained unchanged. We expect the moderate recovery to continue in the coming quarters. For 2014, we anticipate that the growth rate will remain at around 2.0%. As we continue to see gradual improvement in the international environment, export demand is likely to rise. Over time, this should encourage corporate investment and stimulate demand for labour. The level of residential construction orders remains high. On the whole, however, we expect a considerable slowdown in the growth momentum of residential construction investment. In addition to global risks, the Swiss economy also faces uncertainty at home. In the past few weeks, the SNB’s delegates for regional economic relations asked companies to assess the impact of the popular initiative on curbing mass immigration on their business activity. The results suggest a tangible level of uncertainty about economic conditions. Most companies have not taken any specific measures, however. Monetary and financial conditions I will now turn to monetary and financial conditions. After about two years of negative inflation, consumer price inflation has been practically zero for some months now. This very restrained development is also reflected in inflation expectations. The majority of market participants expect inflation to remain unchanged in the short term. Over a longer horizon of more than two years, the relevant surveys show that the expected rate of inflation is approximately 1.0%. These results are consistent with our assessment of the inflation outlook. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Geopolitical risks and mixed economic data in the major economies led to stronger demand for secure investments. This was reflected in falling yields on long-term government bonds. My colleague, Fritz Zurbrügg, will talk to you about developments in the financial markets in more detail. Mortgage rates also declined again, thereby further bolstering demand for mortgage loans. However, the slowdown of momentum in mortgage lending, which has been observed for some time now, continued. This is a step in the right direction. Nevertheless, imbalances remain. It is therefore still too early for an all-clear. Given the high level of liquidity, money market rates remained at a low level. Even prior to the introduction of negative interest rates by the European Central Bank (ECB), Swiss franc Libor futures slipped well into negative territory. We are closely monitoring the impact of the recent interest rate reductions in the euro area on Switzerland. Should there be a need for action, the SNB will take the necessary measures. The export-weighted real external value of the Swiss franc remains well above its long-term average. Since the introduction of the minimum exchange rate, it has changed only slightly. Thus, the Swiss franc is still high. The slight inflation differential during the past quarters meant that the real adjustment of the Swiss franc against the euro has come to a virtual standstill. In this environment, the minimum exchange rate remains essential for guaranteeing appropriate monetary conditions. SNB monetary policy To conclude, I would like to mention a number of challenges which the SNB will be facing in the near future. Overall, the environment remains extremely challenging for both the Swiss economy and our monetary policy. With its high level of international integration, Switzerland is strongly affected by global developments, especially those in neighbouring countries. The ECB’s measures to support economic development in the euro area are also likely to have a favourable impact on the Swiss economy in the medium term. Nevertheless, given the low interest rates in Europe and the rest of the world as well as the strong Swiss franc, the SNB’s monetary policy environment will remain highly complex. We will continue to take all action necessary to fulfil our mandate of ensuring price stability, while taking due account of economic developments. The financial crisis has shown that balanced economic developments require more than just price stability; financial stability is also of key importance. The SNB’s annual Financial Stability Report is a contribution towards this. In the report, we draw attention to developments which might present a risk for financial stability. In this respect, we are still concerned about imbalances on the mortgage and real estate markets. The financial crisis showed what serious effects the problems in the financial sector can have on the overall economy. It is precisely in the current environment of globally low interest rates that the danger of imbalances on the financial markets is particularly high. With our report, we would like to urge participants in these markets to exercise caution. In addition, recent developments in the area of legal risks demonstrate once again the importance of strongly capitalised Swiss banks. My colleague, Jean-Pierre Danthine, will now present the most important conclusions from our Financial Stability Report. Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. It is now my pleasure to give the floor to Jean-Pierre Danthine. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Hiroshi Nakaso: The conquest of Japanese deflation – interim report Remarks by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Athens Symposium “Banking Union, Monetary Policy and Economic Growth’’, Athens, 19 June 2014. *      *      * Introduction It is my great pleasure to be able to take part in these discussions with such distinguished panelist. I hope you will forgive my presumption in borrowing the title of my remarks today from Nobel laureate Thomas Sargent’s influential book, ‘‘The Conquest of American Inflation’’.1 I would like to talk about the most important challenge facing the Bank of Japan at the moment, which is how to conquer deflation in Japan. However, before doing so, let me spend some time considering how we came to be struggling with this mild but persistent deflation. I.  Deflationary equilibrium Japan’s CPI began to dip into negative territory in 1998, and remained there on the whole for the next 15 years. This deflation has two distinctive features. One is its long duration, which clearly sets it apart from the usual business cycle frequency. The other is its mildness. For most of the time, deflation has remained at less than minus 1 percent on a year-on-year basis, except for very short spells such as the period just after the Lehman crisis. Given the length of this deflation, some economists naturally argue that this is not a temporary disequilibrium phenomenon, but an indication that the equilibrium itself has shifted so that deflation prevails (Chart 1).2 I am inclined to believe that this is the case, and that the equilibrium shift was triggered by the two huge shocks that hit Japan simultaneously in 1997: the banking turmoil and the Asian currency crises. The combination of two such shocks would be a severe challenge to any monetary authority trying to protect its economy from the threat of serious deflationary pressures. The banking turmoil was a particularly severe blow in that the ability of the credit intermediary function of the banking sector to support economic recovery was seriously impaired, and this in turn exacerbated the deflationary threat. Worse still, there was very little room to cut the interest rate: the policy rate was already as low as ½ percent prior to these shocks hitting Japan. Given the magnitude of these negative shocks, the question arises as to why deflation was so mild in Japan. There may be several determining factors3 but I believe that a decline in potential growth played an important role. Even before we began to struggle with deflation, potential growth in Japan had started to show a secular decline due to both an ageing and a falling trend in population, as well as a slowdown in capital formation. Thus, potential growth is estimated to have dropped to current levels of as low as ½ percent from about 4 percent in the early 1990s (Chart 2). This is not good news in itself, but it does help prevent the negative output gap from widening.                                                  1  Sargent, T. J. (1999): The Conquest of American Inflation, Princeton University Press, Princeton. 2  Benhabib, J., S. Schmitt-Grohe and M. Uribe (2001): ‘‘The Perils of Taylor Rules,’’ Journal of Economic Theory, 2001, 96 (1-2), pp. 40–69; Bullard, J. (2010): ‘‘Seven Faces of ‘The Peril’,’’ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, September/October, pp.339–352. 3  Another important hypothesis is that inflation has become less responsive to the output gap. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches II.  Lessons learned What lessons can we learn from this experience? To avoid falling into deflationary equilibrium, especially in the face of huge negative shocks, I think that it is important for the authorities to adhere to the following three principles. First, we definitely need to avoid a financial crisis. In 1997, we lacked a solid safety net such as a deposit insurance system and a bank resolution mechanism that could effectively deal with a systemic disruption. We failed to stop a large-scale banking crisis because these institutional frameworks were not in place. It was only in the wake of this painful experience that we set up a robust system for the prevention and management of financial crises. Second, we need to keep a close eye on external events. In 1997, we underestimated the vulnerabilities of Asian economies and it took some time for us to realize the depth, magnitude and interconnected aspects of the Asian currency crisis. Third, anchoring inflation expectations is critical for monetary authorities. We must not become complacent about seemingly stable long-run inflation expectations. This is because inflation expectations are inherently difficult to measure accurately and are susceptible to downward shifts once low inflation is observed for a certain period of time (i.e. inflation expectations are formulated in an adaptive manner). We should be careful not to confuse the benefits of falling prices with necessary relative price adjustments. We need to maintain our credentials as deflation fighters as much as inflation fighters by showing clear and unequivocal commitment to overcoming deflation; should these credentials be lost, experience suggests that they are extremely difficult to regain. Furthermore, it is crucial that we show a ‘‘whatever-it-takes’’ stance to prevent inflation expectations from falling in the face of negative shocks. This is one of the motivations underlying the Bank of Japan’s quantitative and qualitative monetary easing. Moreover, as we have repeatedly stated, we will not hesitate to make any necessary adjustments to our monetary policy if downward risks to inflation materialize. Some observers have argued that Europe faces a significant risk of deflation, or at least low inflation. In my view, however, as exemplified by recent decisive action, the ECB has already made considerable progress in the three areas I have mentioned. III.  Getting out from deflationary equilibrium The story so far has been about prevention, but, today, I also would like to talk about how far we have progressed in breaking free of the deflation trap (Chart 3). Inflation has risen steadily in Japan. Excluding food and energy, the April figure for CPI inflation is 2.3 percent, or around 0.8 percent if we subtract the effects of the hike in the consumption tax rate. Admittedly, this is still only halfway to achieving the target of stable 2 percent, but the situation has changed dramatically from when we started the quantitative and qualitative monetary easing about a year ago. As I have emphasized elsewhere,4 we need to provide a sufficient escape velocity to the economy in order to break free of deflationary equilibrium. To achieve this escape velocity, we need to employ all the policy measures in our arsenal. As for monetary policy, the Bank of Japan introduced its decisive quantitative and qualitative monetary easing measures, which comprise a strong commitment to price stability and the powerful suppression of the entire yield curve. As for fiscal policy, the government simultaneously launched an expansionary policy, partly through a supplementary budget, while taking due account of                                                  4  Nakaso, H. (2014): ‘‘What the Lost Decades Left for the Future,’’ Keynote speech at the 2014 International Conference held by the International Association of Deposit Insurers, Asia-Pacific Regional Committee, April 23, 2014.   http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2014/ko140423a.htm 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 long-term fiscal sustainability. In trying to escape from deflationary equilibrium, I believe that the monetary and fiscal policies that used to be conducted independently under an inflationary equilibrium, need to be pursued using a different approach. The joint statement issued by the Bank and the government in January last year may have been playing an important role as a coordination device to enable the collective conduct of monetary and fiscal policies. This joint statement is an important foundation of Abenomics. Close cooperation between monetary and fiscal authorities can be observed not only in Japan, but also in other areas where unconventional monetary policy has been deployed.5 For instance, when the Bank of England introduced its Asset Purchase Facility, a letter from the Chancellor made it clear that the British government would provide an indemnity to cover any losses arising from the Facility. However, this close cooperation does not necessarily imply the loss of central bank independence for the following two reasons. First, a clear mandate of inflation targeting guarantees active monetary policy down the road. The zero lower bound on the nominal interest rate ties the hands of central bankers when it comes to deflation. As for inflation, central bankers can and should adjust policy rates flexibly if inflation is likely to stay above the stated target. Second, governments well understand the importance of fiscal prudence. In the recent G20 communiqué, the respective governments made a firm commitment to maintaining fiscal sustainability. As the second arrow of Abenomics, the Japanese government has already made an important step forward in this respect by raising the consumption tax rate in April this year. Presumably because of this commitment to fiscal sustainability, survey figures for long-run inflation forecasts in advanced economies have not increased to levels much above targeted inflation rates, although these figures are subject to considerable uncertainty, as I mentioned before. These forecasts for Japan have not yet reached even 2 percent, although they do seem to be on a steady rising trend. IV.  Importance of raising potential growth Since I have talked about the first and the second arrows of Abenomics, let me touch upon the third arrow before concluding my presentation. As I mentioned, the decline in potential growth in Japan has limited the range of the negative output gap. Together with demand recovery, lower potential growth seems to be contributing to the recent rise in inflation through the tighter capacity constraint. In fact, the latest output gap is estimated to be largely balanced (Chart 4). We often hear anecdotes of capacity constraint, especially those related to labor shortages, partly because the current economic recovery is driven primarily by the non-manufacturing sector, which is inherently more labor intensive and thus absorbs more workforce than otherwise. Under these circumstances, raising potential growth is of vital importance. What we envisage by achieving price stability is the sound development of the national economy.6 In other words, stable inflation should be attained with robust growth, accompanied by healthy job creation and reasonable wage hikes. Low potential growth does not bode well for this scenario, even if, ceteris paribus, it contributes to raising inflation through the capacity constraint.                                                  5  Kohn, D. L. (2009): ‘‘Interactions between Monetary and Fiscal Policy in the Current Situation,’’ Speech at the Conference on Monetary-Fiscal Policy Interactions, Expectations, and Dynamics in the Current Economic Crisis, Princeton University, May 23, 2009.  6  The Bank of Japan Act states ‘‘Currency and monetary control by the Bank of Japan shall be aimed at achieving price stability, thereby contributing to the sound development of the national economy.’’ (Article 2) 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches This argues more imminently in favor of supply-side policies such as the third arrow of Abenomics. Ambitious labor market reforms, decisive deregulation and strong governance reforms are all supposed to raise potential growth effectively through increasing both labor and capital inputs, as well as by improving total factor productivity. They are indeed what the Japanese government intends to deliver, and I think it has made steady progress in this respect, including its revised growth strategy that will be announced by the end of this month. In the meantime, the success of our monetary policy in achieving the 2 percent price stability target would help the transition from deflationary equilibrium, where disinvesting and saving used to be considered virtues, to inflation equilibrium, where the revival of animal spirits generates fixed business investment that in turn contributes to elevating potential growth. Concluding remarks Perhaps we are getting a bit too far ahead of ourselves here. For us, the immediate challenge still remains how to deliver stable 2 percent inflation, and discussion of the situation after that may be premature at this stage. After all, there is no point counting our chickens before they are hatched. That is why I put ‘‘interim report’’ in the title of my presentation today, hoping that I can report to you ‘‘mission complete’’ someday, hopefully in the not too distant future. Thank you.   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5     
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Fritz Zurbrügg: Current developments in the financial markets Introductory remarks by Mr Fritz Zurbrügg, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the media news conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 19 June 2014. *      *      * I will begin today by looking at the situation on the financial markets. Then I will discuss structural changes on the foreign exchange and money markets which are of importance for the SNB. I will close with a few comments on the progress that has been made in reforming benchmark interest rates. Situation on financial markets The positive sentiment on financial markets overall has continued since the beginning of the year. On the one hand, investors have been encouraged by the fact that economic recovery has continued on both sides of the Atlantic, even if it has been hesitant, as well as by mainly positive business results. On the other, the general low-interest-rate environment, with the accompanying search for yield by investors, is likely to have been a major factor. Nevertheless, this positive sentiment was put to the test on a number of occasions – for instance, in January, when signs of economic weakening and political risk in a number of emerging economies gave rise to considerable uncertainty, and again in March, when the political conflict in Ukraine intensified. The gradual tapering of the US Federal Reserve bond purchase programme, however, was taken quite calmly by market participants. In this situation, most stock market indices have registered gains since the beginning of the year. Indeed, a number of indices, such as Switzerland’s SPI, the US S&P 500 and Germany’s DAX, have attained record levels in recent weeks. Meanwhile, demand for sovereign bonds issued by euro area peripheral countries was high. This was attributable, first to a gradual improvement in fundamental data, but also to the fact that investors were anticipating the monetary policy easing measures introduced by the European Central Bank at the beginning of June. Consequently, risk premia against German sovereign bonds declined again significantly. They are currently at levels last seen in 2010, before the onset of the sovereign debt crisis. Sovereign bonds issued by emerging economies also benefited from investors’ increasing risk appetite. Despite the uncertainty at the beginning of the year which I mentioned before, their risk premia are now lower than at the end of 2013, apart from a very few exceptions. Alongside sinking risk premia, volatility on financial markets has also decreased since the beginning of the year. Chart 1 shows the standard volatility measures for US equities (VIX), US government bonds (MOVE) and foreign exchange markets (Global FX), all of which are derived from option prices. To ensure comparability, the individual data series have been normalised. They show how many standard deviations above or below their long-term average the figures are situated. In addition, the troughs since 2000 have been indicated at the right-hand edge of the chart. In January, volatility measures rose temporarily; since then, however, they have returned to a declining path. At present, they are at least one standard deviation below average in all markets – and only marginally above the lowest level. Apparently, expectations that the major central banks will continue their exceptionally accommodating monetary policy in the foreseeable future have firmed. The danger here is that risks will no longer be correctly priced, thereby making financial markets vulnerable to sudden mood swings on the part of investors. Despite the fundamentally positive investor sentiment, demand for secure investments remains high. Yields on sovereign bonds with high credit ratings have therefore declined significantly since the beginning of the year, particularly in the US, Germany and Switzerland, where ten-year yields are currently around 50 basis points lower than at the end of 2013. The 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  decline in yields was especially marked in January, when uncertainty in a number of emerging economies and surprisingly weak economic data from the US spurred demand. In April and May, yields decreased further. This time, demand was attributable less to the publication of economic data and more to investors who, having speculated on rising yields, had covered their short positions when yields declined. The cautious attitude of many investors was also reflected in the continued high value of the Swiss franc. Chart 2 shows how the Swiss franc has moved sideways against both the euro and the US dollar since the beginning of the year. In trade-weighted terms, the Swiss franc is currently almost unchanged from January. Structural changes in the foreign exchange and money markets As you will know, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) implements its monetary policy via the money and foreign exchange markets. Consequently, structural changes in these markets are particularly important to us. I would now like to talk briefly about the major changes and their significance for our work. On the foreign exchange market, we are seeing a substantial decline in turnover in the primary interbank market. Meanwhile, the size of the market as a whole has decreased only slightly. This means that the interbank market has lost market share. The primary interbank market covers trading via the electronic communication networks. Between 2010 and 2013, turnover through these networks fell by almost 40% overall. In chart 3 you can see an example of this decline in turnover for the EURCHF and USDCHF currency pairs. In 2013, this was already below the previous levels, and a further decline in turnover is becoming evident for the current year. This development is attributable, in essence, to three factors. First, there is an increasing tendency for large merchant banks to use internal clearing for customer transactions. This means that the need for hedging transactions on the interbank market has declined. Second, to an increasing extent, merchant banks are offering liquidity via other electronic distribution channels such as their own trading platforms or multibank platforms. This enables them to attract more business and to benefit from the additional internalisation. Third, smaller banks are increasingly becoming direct customers of larger banks, which means that less trading is taking place on the interbank market. Nevertheless, because the interbank market allows for price determination and therefore provides reference prices, it performs a key function for the foreign exchange market. Consequently, a well-functioning interbank market is also very important for the SNB. Our analyses show that the decline in turnover has not yet resulted in a deterioration in market quality. Despite the fall in turnover, transaction costs are low and the interbank market is still working properly. However, we are keeping a close eye on developments in the structure and quality of the market.  The focus of monetary policy implementation is currently the foreign exchange market. However, a well-functioning money market is no less important to us. Structural changes have also taken place in this market. On 2 May 2014, SIX Group Ltd commenced operations with a new trading platform for the Swiss money market. Since then, the SNB has conducted all open market operations, all transactions for its standing facilities as well as the auctions for the Swiss Confederation through this platform. This also means that banks can only obtain funds under the liquidity-shortage financing facility through this platform. The successful launch of the new platform can be measured by the fact that 140 foreign and domestic participants already have access, and additional participants have applied to join. With the introduction of the new platform, collateral eligible for SNB repos has been combined in new baskets. For the first time, the SNB has classified these securities according to the new Basel III liquidity coverage ratio requirements, which require credit institutions to hold a minimum level of high-quality liquid assets so that they can cover an exceptional short-term liquidity requirement themselves. These new baskets therefore meet 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  a significant market need. In this way, the SNB is helping to ensure that the repo market remains liquid, also under the new liquidity requirements. Reform efforts in the area of benchmark interest rates I would like to close by talking about progress that has been made in reforming benchmark interest rates. The international efforts to improve the credibility and acceptance of benchmark interest rates are being coordinated by the Financial Stability Board, whose final report on this matter will be published this summer. As part of this work, a group of private sector financial market participants has drawn up alternatives to the Libor. Data are currently being collected so that the proposals can be evaluated. Surveys are being carried out in all currency areas affected, including the Swiss franc area, and the first results will also be available this summer. Both the final report and the survey results are important steps towards reforming benchmark interest rates. However, the organisation that will administer the Libor interest rates has already been established. It is ICE Benchmark Administration Limited (IBA), a London-based subsidiary of the US exchange operator, Intercontinental Exchange (ICE). Along with the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve, the SNB is represented as an observer in the IBA oversight committee. Matters discussed by the oversight committee include methodology, definition and data basis for the Libor rates; as such it plays an important role in supporting and evaluating the reforms that have been adopted.   
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Charts       
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Christian Noyer: Does Europe face the prospect of a lost decade? Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the International Economic Forum of the Americas, Conference of Montreal, Montreal, 9 June 2014. *      *      * It is always a privilege to speak alongside Larry. But it is also a challenge. I will make the most of it by referring often to salient remarks made by Larry in recent months. I will address three questions: is the euro crisis over? Does Europe face the prospect of a lost decade? What short-term policy challenges are we facing today? I/ – Is the euro crisis over? Less than two years ago, the euro area was fighting for its existence. Euro pessimists were questioning its ability to survive. Not anymore. Analysts may be questioning Europe’s ability to grow. But the challenges that we are facing are different. They are macroeconomic, not existential or systemic. Thanks, mainly, to the Eurosystem’s actions, financial conditions are normalising. Spreads in peripheral countries have been dramatically reduced. Soon, budgets will be reasonably balanced and there will be no more fiscal drag on the economy. Households and corporates have strong balance sheets. Recent forecasts put German growth at more than 2%, Italy in positive territory, and the outlook for France has improved markedly. Growth of business activity in the euro area in April was the highest in the past three years. But the crisis has left an important legacy: • Money and financial markets remain excessively segmented. The monetary transmission mechanism is severely impaired and credit conditions are still very different across countries and sectors. • Deleveraging in the banking sector still acts as an impediment to recovery and growth. Bank credit remains flat in the euro area as a whole, and SMEs’ financing is a major concern, especially in stressed countries, where the percentage of financially constrained but viable borrowers is estimated at 25% vs 1% in “core” countries. We are very aware that balance sheet repair is a prerequisite for credit to resume and for monetary policy to be efficient. So, we are addressing the problem as a priority. 1. We are building a safer and more robust system of financial intermediation. A major step has been the creation of a banking union that, as you all know, will delink bank and sovereign risks and ensure a harmonised and tough financial supervision. It is easy to underestimate this achievement. The idea was adopted less than two years ago. The Single Supervisory Mechanism is now up and running. There is no example in contemporary European history when so much has been achieved in so little time. 2. We have launched a tough and comprehensive AQR and subsequent stress tests that should be completed by the end of this year. For the first time, these exercises will be conducted in a fully integrated way – under the aegis of the SSM – with full accountability of the results. Completion should mark a turning point where there will be no more doubts about the sustainability of our banks and credit should resume at a normal pace. 3. In the longer run, a major policy challenge for the euro area is to “reinvent” a new and robust financial integration model. We need sound cross-border capital flows, 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  because we do not want the Eurosystem to intermediate permanently between borrowers and lenders from different countries. Developing a safe securitisation process should be a priority, despite the major technical difficulties. II/ – Is Europe facing the prospect of a lost decade? Questions about long-term growth are not limited to Europe. What we hear about our continent reflects a more general concern: the possibility of “secular stagnation” in advanced economies. Larry has launched this crucial debate. I don’t know whether he was thinking specifically about Europe, but, of course, this question is very relevant for us. Secular stagnation rests on the assumption that the natural interest rate is negative. This may happen for two reasons: • In the short run, we may have a downward shock on demand and an increase in savings resulting from the deleveraging process. I have just explained how we are currently addressing this issue. • In the longer run, ageing and slower innovation may push up saving rates and bring down the return on capital. Therefore, the ultimate response to the risk of secular stagnation is to improve the return on investment, thus pushing the natural interest rate back into positive territory. Again, this is not only a European problem. But we do have difficulties in this regard. Structural reforms are not easy.  Many, however, are currently being implemented. Italy is abolishing its provinces, generating savings that will allow for a reduction in taxes and liberalising its labour market. France is on the same track and has reduced taxes on its labour costs as well as improving labour market flexibility. III/- short-term policy challenges and responses The main challenge, of course, is low and declining inflation, with inflation expectations in the euro area drifting downward at short to medium-term horizons. This prevents adjustments in relative prices, – an important mechanism to eliminate gaps in competitiveness – and increases the risk of outright deflation, should a negative shock occur in the future. Strangely, in the euro area, growth and inflation are moving in opposite directions. As growth accelerates, inflation keeps going down. This “disconnect” in the Philips curve is puzzling. We must look, then, at the broader picture. Euro area economies have attracted strong capital inflows over the recent months, with two opposite effects on financial conditions: first, easing through lower long-term interest rates. And, second, an appreciation of the euro exchange rate. It’s not clear whether the overall effect is positive. While nominal conditions are more accommodating in euro area than in the US, real indicators point to a more restrictive stance. We may see a perverse feedback loop develop, with low inflation, increasing real rates, capital inflows and exchange rate appreciation mutually fuelling each other. The financial economy may be heading towards a bad equilibrium that would threaten the real economic recovery. The situation called for an appropriate policy response and, as you know, the Governing Council has agreed last Thursday on a strong package of four significant measures:  First the refinancing and deposit rates have both been reduced – bringing the deposit rate into negative territory for the first time. This should encourage financial intermediaries to actively put their cash balances at work both on credit and asset markets.  Those cash balances themselves will be significantly boosted as: 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Second, the ordinary regime of unlimited liquidity provision has been extended to the end of 2016.  Third, the Eurosystem will conduct a new set of targeted longer-term refinancing operations. This exceptional liquidity will be provided at long maturity (up to four years) and a guaranteed fixed rate, a clear sign that monetary accommodation should persist for a very long time. Finally, the Eurosystem is actively preparing to buy asset based securities that will help channel monetary accommodation and ease financial conditions to private non-financial borrowers, especially SMEs. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Raghuram Rajan: Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Committee Report (FSLRC) – what to do and when? Talk by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the First State Bank “Banking and Economic Conclave”, Mumbai, 17 June 2014. *      *      * The Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Committee (FSLRC) Report is one of the most important, well researched, as well as well-publicized reports in Indian financial history. It not only lays out the functions of the financial sector and how it should be structured, but also how legislation and regulation governing it ought to look like. The authors of this report truly have to be commended for their national service. The report’s influence will be felt for many years to come. There is much to like and agree with in the report. In laying out the need for consumer protection, raising the issue of whether products sold are suitable for the target customer, and putting the onus on the financial institution to determine suitability, the report has forced regulators to review their consumer protection frameworks. We at the RBI are indeed engaged in such an exercise, informed by the valuable guidelines in the FSLRC report. There is more of great value. The FSLRC’s emphasis on the need for a clear monetary framework culminated in the Dr. Urjit Patel Committee report, which will guide our thinking in the years to come. Similarly, its focus on creating new institutions like the Financial Resolution Authority, which will help us resolve distressed financial institutions at minimum cost to the economy, is much needed. I could go on. But I come here not to praise the FSLRC Report, but to debate some of it. I will argue that there are two fundamental areas of tension. One is the oversight of regulators. The FSLRC suggests laws that do not micromanage, giving regulators the freedom to fill in the details in consonance with the changing needs of the economy. At the same time, the FSLRC wants to check and balance the activities of regulators through judicial oversight. Too much of checks and balances could completely vitiate the flexibility afforded by rewriting laws. We need to find a proper balance, and the balance may vary with our level of development. I worry we have not thought through this fully. The second area of tension is the appropriate size and scope of regulators. The FSLRC’s recommendations seem somewhat schizophrenic here. On the one hand, it emphasizes synergies in bringing together some regulators into one entity. But in the process it suggests breaking up other regulators, with attendant loss of synergies. There is no discussion of the empirical magnitude of the synergies gained or synergies lost, which makes the recommendations seem faddish and impressionistic rather than based on deep analysis. Indeed, across the world, we see a variety of organizational structures in existence, suggesting that there is no one right structure. If so, there should be strong arguments for departing from the status quo, which the FSLRC does not provide. Let me elaborate on these two issues. The logic for regulation The logic for regulation according to the FSLRC is to deal with market failure or, more colloquially, bad behaviour. The Commission talks about incomplete information or poor incentives as a reason for bad behaviour, but one of the most important reasons for the bad behaviour necessitating regulation is what economists call incomplete contracts; that is, the behaviour of the regulated entity (vis a vis customers, the public at large, the taxpayer, or the market) cannot be completely specified in contracts because it is too difficult to observe or verify in real time, or it can only be gauged across many contracts. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches This means that while courts can enforce specific contracts, the regulator can sometimes do better. For instance, a bank may attract a lot of complaints from its credit card customers. While no single customer may think the case worth taking to court, and while no customer may be able to prove the bank was in the wrong, the large number of complaints will suggest to the regulator that the bank needs to shape up. By comparing the nature of the complaints it gets from this bank’s customers with the complaints it gets from other banks, the regulator can gauge whether something is wrong with the bank and act. Similarly, if a particular product attracts a lot more complaints than other products, the regulator can ask the industry to modify the product appropriately, or even ban it. A regulator may also have to prevent certain forms of contracting – such as the CDO squared and CDO cubed that emerged before the financial crisis. If the regulator thinks a certain kind of security will impose undue risks on the system, it can ban the security, even though it would have traded amongst consenting adults. While the regulator has no proof that the security will behave as it thinks, the regulator cannot wait till the risks occur, for it may be too late. The broader point is that a lot of regulatory action stems from the regulator exercising sound judgment based on years of experience. In doing so, it fills in the gaps in laws, contracts, and even regulations. Not everything the regulator does can be proven in a court of law. Courts do not interfere in the specific decisions of a corporate board – using the business judgment rule, they do not second guess business decisions, and only pull up boards when there is a violation of the legal process of arriving at a decision. In the same way, there are a range of regulatory decisions where regulatory judgment should not be second guessed. The danger of excessive legal oversight Yet one reading of the FSLRC is that almost everything the regulator does, not just the framing of regulation or the process by which decisions are reached but also the exercise of regulatory judgment as well as policy decisions, is to be subject to legal appeal. For that, it wants to create a Financial Sector Appellate Tribunal. The intent is to place more checks and balances on regulatory actions. Note that the process by which the regulator reached a decision, as well as the conformity of the decision with basic principles such as natural justice, can already be challenged through a writ petition in High Court. Even now, some regulatory decisions can be appealed to the central government. But how much checking and balancing is enough? Do we want even policy decisions to be appealable? Can legal oversight become excessive? There are three dangers we have to guard against. The first is to ask tribunals to make judgments that they simply do not have the capability, experience, or information to make, and where precise evidence may be lacking. If we attempt to do this, we will undermine the very purpose of a regulator. Of course, one could trust the good sense of the tribunal to follow a “regulatory judgment” rule and not intervene in a broad array of matters, but does this not imply a double standard – we trust the tribunal’s judgment but not that of the regulator. More likely, though, past experience suggests that entities like to justify their existence, and if set up, a tribunal will intervene more than necessary. The second danger is that easing the appellate process will invite appeal. In a developed country with well-established regulations, a case history of judgments, and speedy delivery of justice, this would not be a problem. In India, where the financial system is developing and many new regulations have to be framed (more so if we move to a principle based approach for legislation), and where the tribunals will have a significant amount of learning to do, the encouragement to appeal could paralyze the system and create distortions, as needed regulations are held up and participants exploit loopholes. Finally, in every country, a healthy respect for the regulator serves to keep participants on the straight and narrow. In a developing country, where private behaviour is less constrained by norms or institutions, this is especially important. But to the extent that private parties with 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 their high priced lawyers can check the regulator, that healthy respect dissipates. So the final danger is that the regulator could become a paper tiger, and lose its power of influencing good behaviour, even in areas that are not subject to judicial review. Am I arguing that no checks and balances are needed? Certainly not! But there are already checks and balances in place, including review by constitutional courts like high courts through writ petitions. Senior officers of the regulator are appointed, and can be removed, by the government. The FSLRC recommends an annual report to parliament, as well as regular discussions with parliamentarians. These are good suggestions, which would add to oversight. Some could argue that SEBI is already under the Securities Appellate Tribunal, so why not bring other regulators under a tribunal? So long as the Tribunal only questions administrative decisions such as the size and proportionality of penalties, I do not see a problem. But if it goes beyond, and starts entertaining questions about policy, the functioning of a regulator like the RBI, which has to constantly make judgments intended to minimize systemic risk, will be greatly impaired. Indeed, because of the tendency of any new organization to overreach to justify its existence, one should be careful about tying the financial regulator with further judicial oversight. Better to revisit these issues a few years from now when both regulation and oversight mechanisms are better developed. Finally, we do understand that if the regulator wants to be trusted, it has to display the greatest competence and integrity. The RBI, despite the general deterioration in the probity of public institutions, has maintained a reputation for integrity. We cannot be complacent about this and have to work on maintaining a culture, as well as service conditions, that encourage integrity. We also have to work continuously on upgrading our capabilities so we match the fast pace of change in the financial sector. Regulatory architecture Another area where there are tensions in the FSLRC’s reasoning is on regulatory architecture. Let us take the suggestion to merge all regulation of trading under a new Unified Financial Agency. So the Forward Markets Commission, as well as the bond regulation activities currently undertaken by the RBI, would move under a new roof, as would SEBI. But this assumes that the central synergy is the fact that the instrument is traded. But could other synergies exist? And how important are they? For instance, in forward trading where a real commodity is delivered, regulatory oversight over the real markets for the commodity where price is discovered, as well as over warehouses where the commodity is delivered, may be important sources of regulatory synergy. Should the FMC be subsumed under the Unified Financial Agency or would it be better off having stronger links to the ministries overseeing the real commodities? I think the answer needs more investigation. Similarly, is the regulation of bond trading more synergistic with the regulation of other debt products such as bank loans and with the operation of monetary policy (which requires bond trading) than with other forms of trading? Once again, I am not sure we have a compelling answer in the FSLRC report. My personal view is that moving the regulation of bond trading at this time would severely hamper the development of the government bond market, including the process of making bonds more liquid across the spectrum, a process which the RBI is engaged in. The FSLRC also seems to be inconsistent in its emphasis on synergies and regulatory uniformity. It proposes all regulation of trading should move under one roof, all regulation of consumer protection should move under another roof, but the regulation of credit should be balkanized – banks should continue to be regulated by the RBI but the regulation of the quasi-bank NBFCs should move to the Unified Financial Agency, a regulatory behemoth that 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches would combine supervision of trading as well as credit. This balkanization would hamper regulatory uniformity, the supervision of credit growth, and the conduct of monetary policy. More broadly, the FSLRC seems to have a somewhat idealistic view of the benefits of reorganization. It seems to believe that once activities are combined in an organization, synergies can be fully exploited while if they exist in separate organizations, synergies will not be exploited. I too shared such a view, but I now believe it is too extreme. Silos within a large bureaucratic regulator may prevent synergies from being exploited, while frequent inter-regulatory meetings can allow regulators to capture many of available synergies between their activities. Indeed, one particularly useful proposal by the FSLRC is to put the Financial Sector Development Council on a firmer footing. It is a good venue for inter-regulatory cooperation, and its benefits are further augmented by personal interactions. For instance, Chairman SEBI and I try to get together once every month to note and resolve issues. At the same time, while negotiations and cooperation between regulators can overcome organizational barriers, it is not wise to give a regulator a responsibility and leave the tools for exercising that responsibility in other hands. The RBI has responsibility for managing the internal and external value of the rupee, and more broadly, for macroeconomic stability. As a number of multilateral agencies and academics have recognized, the ability to shape capital inflows is now a recognized part of the macro-prudential tool kit. But by taking away control over internal capital inflows from the RBI, isn’t the FSLRC taking away an important tool from the RBI? If it ain’t broke… Lest all this sound like an unthinking defence of regulatory turf, let me add that there are places where the RBI could give up powers. For instance, if the government wants to manage its own debt, there is no reason for the RBI to stand in the way. I don’t believe the government suffers any less from conflicts of interest in debt management (unlike the views of the FSLRC), but the RBI could well carry out the government’s instructions without any loss in welfare. I imagine, however, that the government will depend on deputations from the RBI for a while for advice. Instead, think of my remarks as an attempt to draw out the important and undoubted benefits of the FSLRC report, while eschewing grand schemes with dubious chances of success. Undoubtedly our laws need reform, but that is no reason to try entirely new approaches to legislation, overlaid on entirely new regulatory structures, complemented by entirely new oversight over regulation. Undoubtedly, we have had, and will have, periods when regulators have not gotten along with each other. But is that a reason to merge some organizations and break up others, perhaps ensuring dysfunctionality along many other dimensions? After all, there is no single regulatory architecture that has emerged with distinction from the crisis. Instead, different regulatory architectures have succeeded or failed based on the circumstances of the country and the quality of the regulator. Undoubtedly, we have also had occasions when regulators have exceeded their remit or been high-handed. But is that a reason to subject their every action to judicial second-guessing? Is there a reason we need more checks and balances, or are we trying to solve a problem that does not exist. As the Chinese would say, let us recognize the value of crossing the river by feeling each stone before we put our weight on it. Let us not take a blind jump hoping that a stone will be there to support us when we land. Or in American, if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it! 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Christopher Kent: Cyclical and structural changes in the labour market Address by Mr Christopher Kent, Assistant Governor (Economic) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Wall Street Journal’s Labour Market Developments gathering, Sydney, 16 June 2014. *      *      * I thank David Jacobs, Kim Edwards, Daniel De Voss, Sharon Lai and Josef Manalo for help in preparing these remarks.  I appreciate the opportunity to talk to you today about some key cyclical and structural forces affecting the Australian labour market over recent years. Not surprisingly, we spend considerable time and effort at the Bank trying to understand labour market developments given their relevance to both unemployment and inflation. Developments over the past couple of years Over recent months, labour market conditions have shown some signs of improvement. Following only very modest growth last year, employment has grown by almost 0.9 per cent so far this year. The unemployment rate ticked down a few months ago and the participation rate appears to have stabilised somewhat, after a significant decline through 2013. These improvements appear consistent with some signs of better growth in economic activity, although I’ll come back to this point in a few minutes.1 Despite these improvements, there is still a fair degree of spare capacity in the labour market. This is apparent across a number of dimensions (Graph 1): • the unemployment rate is high relative to its recent history • the participation rate is around the lowest it’s been over the past eight years • there’s been a significant decline in the ratio of employment to the working-age population since 2010 • wage growth has declined, to be well below its average of the past decade. Graph 1                                                  1 The lags between activity and the labour market are discussed in RBA (2014), “Box B: Lags from Activity to the Labour Market“, Statement on Monetary Policy, May, pp 39–41. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  My plan today is to discuss some of the key forces at play that have led the labour market to this point, and think about prospects for the future. Demand and supply: what’s driving labour market developments? Like all markets, developments in the labour market reflect the interplay of demand and supply. These determine outcomes in terms of quantities (such as employment) and prices (namely wages). There are three key developments that help to explain the dynamics over the past few years: • First, over that period there has been a weakening in the growth of labour demand, reflecting the decline in mining investment and the still weak state of overall demand across the non-mining economy. • Second, there’s been a decline in the growth of labour supply, some of which reflects a cyclical “discouraged worker” effect, but the ageing of the population is also a significant and enduring influence. • Third, wages are adjusting to the degree of spare capacity in the labour market. Moreover, slower growth of wages is playing a part in the real exchange rate adjustment that is required as the terms of trade and mining investment decline. To a large extent, these developments reflect an unwinding of some of the adjustment that was seen over the period when commodity prices were rising and the mining boom was in the midst of its investment phase. As my colleagues and I have noted elsewhere, that period saw a significant appreciation of the nominal and real exchange rates, alongside relatively strong growth in both employment and wages – particularly for mining and mining-related activities.2 These changes are now working in reverse, with the nominal exchange rate and growth of wages lower than they had been. Both are helpful parts of the necessary adjustment process. Monetary policy is also playing its role by providing support to demand. Labour demand: the transition away from mining-led growth In large part, subdued growth of labour demand over the past couple of years has reflected below-trend growth in output over much of that period. The economy has been facing various headwinds over that time, including: the decline in the terms of trade; the decline in mining investment; the high level of the exchange rate; and weak growth of public demand. The demand for labour can be thought of as being derived from the demand for the goods and services it helps to produce. So it is not surprising that employment growth weakened and the unemployment rate turned up from around the middle of 2012. That corresponded to a noticeable slowing in the growth of economic activity, which remained relatively subdued, at least up until late 2013 (Graph 2). In turn, much of that owes to the decline in mining investment. Meanwhile, growth of activity in the non-mining economy was subdued through that period, but it picked up slightly from late last year. That modest pick-up may have contributed, at least in part, to improved employment growth over the past few months. It may also be that some of that improvement reflects a “catching-up” of employment growth after only very modest growth through 2013.                                                 2 As discussed in Plumb M, C Kent and J Bishop (2013), “Implications for the Australian Economy of Strong Growth in Asia“, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2013–03. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Graph 2  GDP growth lifted noticeably around the turn of this year – and was running at a bit above trend over the year to the March quarter 2014. But much of that owed to a very strong contribution from the production and export of resources, which does not draw on much labour. The strength of resource production of late partly reflects an improvement in labour productivity in the mining sector, which is to be expected as new productive capacity comes on line. However, measured labour productivity growth has improved over the past few years across a broader range of industries, following a period of quite weak growth (Graph 3). If this can be sustained, it would be a very positive development, including for employees who will in time benefit through sustainable gains in their earnings. Over the past couple of years, it has meant that the growth in output that we’ve seen has been achieved with relatively moderate growth in employment. Outside of the mining sector, the general improvement in productivity growth may have been in response to a range of competitive pressures coming to bear during a period of weak growth of aggregate demand. The still high level of the exchange rate is one such competitive pressure. Graph 3  
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The transition from the relatively labour-intensive investment phase of the mining boom to its capital-intensive production phase is apparent in employment growth across different industries. Stepping back for a minute to the period from 2008/09 to 2011/12 (just prior to what appears to have been the peak in mining investment), resource-related activity accounted for a bit more than half of the growth in employment (Graph 4).3 Much of that was in the mining industry itself, but much was also in industries that provide inputs to resources extraction or investment. Business services, manufacturing and construction all benefitted directly from this resource-related activity. Graph 4  Now, as we are starting to see the decline in mining investment, there has been a reversal of some of these earlier trends. Most notably, business services employment has declined significantly, with firms more exposed to the mining sector particularly affected (Graph 5). Also, mining employment has plateaued since about mid-2012. Meanwhile, there has been further strong growth in employment in household services, which has accounted for a significant share of the growth in employment over recent years. There’s also been a slight upward trend in employment in construction, consistent with the prospect of a strong pick-up in both residential and non-residential building, which will require more workers in this sector in the period ahead.                                                 3 Rayner V and J Bishop (2013), “Industry Dimensions of the Resource Boom: An Input-Output Analysis“, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2013–02. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Graph 5  The relatively weak state of overall labour demand over the past couple of years has been evident in measures of employment intentions, job vacancies and advertisements. Some of these have shown signs of improvement of late, but they remain at relatively low levels. Households’ expectations have adjusted as well; weak growth of labour demand has translated into concerns over job security. In turn, concerns over job security and labour market conditions have led to a decline in the rate of employee resignations which, in spite of an increase in the rate of dismissals, has seen turnover in the labour market decline a little. Labour supply Labour market outcomes also depend on the supply of labour. Like labour demand, growth in labour supply has slowed substantially over the past year or so. This reflects both cyclical and structural influences. The slowing in the growth of labour supply is evident in the rate of labour force participation. A smaller proportion of the working-age population is employed or looking for work. This decline in the participation rate has been larger than the average experience during earlier episodes of rising unemployment (Graph 6). So even though the population has continued to grow at a strong rate, the growth in the labour force has been a little slower than previous experience might have suggested. Graph 6  
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  It is not unusual for the participation rate to fall during periods of weak demand. As jobs become more difficult to find (at the prevailing wage), some individuals become discouraged from searching. These individuals may still be available to work, but they might choose to sit on the sidelines of the labour market, ready to take up an opportunity or at least begin searching for one when conditions improve. Discouraged individuals represent an element of labour market slack that is not captured by the conventional measure of unemployment because they are “marginally attached” to the labour force.4 In recent years, there has been a rise in the proportion of the working-age population that is marginally attached to the labour force, which is consistent with a discouraged worker effect (Graph 7). This has contributed to the decline in the participation rate – that is, a rise in the share of the working-age population not in the labour force. But since 2010, the rise in the marginally attached only accounts for less than one-quarter of the rise in the share of the working-age population not in the labour force. Many of those not in the labour force may still have been discouraged, but they chose to make themselves unavailable for work; for example, they may have embarked on a period of study or decided to retire earlier than might have otherwise been the case. Graph 7  The noticeable increase in the number of people that are not in the labour force and are not considered to be marginally attached suggests that there are other, potentially more structural factors at play. An important one is ageing. An increasing share of the populace is moving into older age brackets, which tend to have lower rates of participation (Graph 8). Also, older workers are more likely to work part-time, so even those participating do so with fewer hours on average than when they were in the prime of their working-age lives.                                                 4 The definition of marginal attachment includes individuals who are available for or searching for work, but not both (in which case they would be classified as unemployed). Note that some “discouraged” workers may not be classified as marginally attached; for example, some individuals will choose to take up further study, in which case they are no longer available for work nor are they searching for it. Conversely, some individuals will be considered marginally attached even if they are not “discouraged” from searching for a job; for example, those that are searching but not yet available to enter the labour force. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  Graph 8  The ageing of the population is not new. By itself, ageing is estimated to have subtracted from the participation rate by between 0.1 and 0.2 percentage points per year over the past decade and a half (Graph 9). However, the effect has picked up a little in recent years as baby boomers have begun to reach the age of 65 years. Graph 9  What has begun to deviate more noticeably from its historical path in recent years is the participation rate among older workers. In the past, rising participation of those people in older age brackets worked to more than offset the effect of an increasing share of older people in the population. That is, while the workforce was ageing, more people were working later into life than was the case in the past. In particular, older women were more likely to participate than was the case for their predecessors. But in recent years this trend increase 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  in the participation of older age groups has slowed, and their participation rates have been flat or even falling a touch (Graph 10). Graph 10  What’s not clear though is why this upward trend has tapered off. It may be a response to the cyclical weakness in the labour market, in which case participation rates of those aged 55 years and over might trend up again, in time. Alternatively, it may be more structural. Perhaps earlier forces, including rising longevity and a general ability and preference to work later into life, may have largely run their course. However, given the long history of rising longevity, it seems likely that this will continue. One possibility though is that the forces underpinning the earlier rise in participation at older ages (including longevity) have run up against current incentives for many to retire by the age of 65 years. However, the story of lower participation rates is not entirely about ageing and the behaviour of older workers. Participation has also declined for other groups, most notably younger people – many more of whom are participating in education (Graph 11). Again, these declines may have both cyclical and structural elements. Graph 11  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  Wages While the growth rates of labour demand and supply have both been weaker over the past couple of years, we know that the former has been more significant than the latter. The fact that labour supply has not been constraining employment growth is evident in the rise in the unemployment rate and the substantial decline in the growth rate of wages over that period (Graph 12). Graph 12  The slowing in wage growth is clear also in the leftward shift in the distribution of wage growth across individual firms (Graph 13). The data shown here are from the NAB business survey. This is also consistent with the Bank’s liaison which suggests that wage outcomes of more than 4 per cent have become far less common than was the case a few years ago. Indeed, outcomes of 2–3 per cent are more common than 3–4 per cent. Slower wage growth has also been helped by inflation expectations remaining contained.5 Graph 13                                                  5 See RBA (2013), “Box B: The Slowing in Wage Growth“, Statement on Monetary Policy, August, pp 51–52. 
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The implications of a slowing in labour demand (relative to supply) depend significantly on the responsiveness of wages. Changes in demand will have less of an effect on employment and output if wages respond sooner and by more than otherwise. In this respect, the more flexible labour market in comparison to earlier terms of trade booms has been helpful. This flexibility allowed for a rise in relative wages to encourage labour into resource and resource-related activities during the run-up in mining investment, without this leading to a large rise in the growth rate of wages across the economy more broadly. The same flexibility is helping as the terms of trade and mining investment turn down.6 Indeed, the decline in wage growth of late has been particularly pronounced in mining and business services, but it is evident elsewhere (Graph 14). The move from the investment to the production phase of the mining boom is freeing up and will continue to free up labour to move back into the non-resource sectors of the economy. This has weighed on wage growth across the economy and is likely to do so for a while yet. Graph 14  The slowing in wage growth across all industries has meant that firms have experienced relatively slow growth in their labour costs. This is more striking after accounting for the growth in the productivity of labour, which as I’ve already noted has picked up somewhat compared with the pace we had become accustomed to over much of the 2000s. Over the past year and a half, the growth in nominal wages has been matched by growth in labour productivity. As a result, there has been no increase in the cost of labour required to produce a unit of output.7 In turn, slower growth in labour costs is having a beneficial effect on international competitiveness. The link between labour costs and competitiveness can be illustrated by a measure of the real exchange rate based on unit labour costs (the real trade weighted index (TWI) in Graph 15). This tells us about the labour cost of producing a unit of output in                                                 6 See Battellino R (2010), “Mining Booms and the Australian Economy“, RBA Bulletin, March, pp 63–69; and Plumb M, C Kent and J Bishop (2013), “Implications for the Australian Economy of Strong Growth in Asia“, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2013–03. 7 The average growth of nominal unit labour costs over the inflation targeting period is around 2½ per cent, which is consistent with the CPI inflation target in the absence of trend changes in firms’ profit margins or the exchange rate. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11  Australia relative to the cost of doing so in our trading partners (both measured in equivalent currency terms). Over the decade to 2011, the real exchange rate appreciated significantly, consistent with the rise in the terms of trade and the mining investment boom. Much of that occurred via the nominal exchange rate, which appreciated by a little more than 50 per cent over that period. But part of the adjustment occurred via a pick-up in the pace of wage growth, at a time when labour productivity growth was relatively slow. Hence, nominal unit labour costs in Australia increased by around 25 per cent relative to our trading partners over this same period, contributing noticeably to the decline in competiveness (outside of the resources sector, which benefited from much higher commodity prices). Graph 15  Now that process is beginning to change course. A decline in the real exchange rate is one important way in which the economy can adjust to the decline in the terms of trade and the transition to the production phase of the mining boom. Over the past year, we’ve seen a noticeable decline in the nominal exchange rate, although it still remains high by historical standards, particularly given the further decline in commodity prices in recent months. At the same time, Australian unit labour costs have stopped rising relative to our trading partners and even declined just a little since mid-2012. This is part of the adjustment to the decline in commodity prices and will assist the non-mining economy regain some competitiveness and generate employment growth as demand for labour in the resources sector turns down. Adjustment via slower wage growth and stronger productivity growth may not contribute as much nor as quickly to a real depreciation as might be expected from a decline in the nominal exchange rate. However, it is still preferable to the alternative of little or no adjustment in the growth of unit labour costs, which would come at the expense of more unemployment and the associated economic and social costs. Conclusions To conclude, growth in both labour demand and labour supply has been slow over recent years. Demand for labour has been affected by several headwinds. The downturn in mining investment has weighed on domestic demand, while the commensurate pick-up in exports has been less labour intensive. On the labour supply side, much of the slowdown is likely to have had a cyclical element, although structural factors such as ageing are also playing a role. 
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The slower growth of wages over the past couple of years has been a helpful part of the process of adjusting to the downturn in commodity prices and mining investment. The decline in wage growth has contributed, at the margins, to a turnaround in the real exchange rate and helped cushion the effect of slower growth of domestic demand on employment growth. It has also helped to contain domestic cost pressures thereby offsetting the effect of the lower exchange rate on consumer prices. The demand for labour has improved over recent months, although some of that may reflect a “catch-up” after a period of weak employment growth last year. Some forward-looking indicators are higher than they have been, though they are still at levels consistent with only moderate employment growth in the next few months. The Bank’s latest forecasts are for employment growth to pick up gradually over the next two years. The unemployment rate is expected to remain elevated over that period, declining from later in 2015 when we anticipate GDP growth to be picking up to an above-trend pace. Looking well beyond that horizon, demographic changes loom large and will play an increasing role in the discussion of labour market developments. As we’ve suggested on a number of occasions, in time it is likely that the availability of workers, not jobs, will be the main concern.8[8] And in that world, one imagines that real wages might grow a little more rapidly than otherwise, in order to encourage participation.                                                  8 See Stevens G (2014), “Economic Conditions and Prospects”, Speech to the American Chamber of Commerce (Qld) AmCham iiNet Business Luncheon, Brisbane, 3 April; and Kulish M, C Kent and K Smith (2010), “Aging, Retirement, and Savings: A General Equilibrium Analysis”, The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 10(1), pp 1–32. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Luis M Linde: Monetary policy following the Great Recession Presentation by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, of the Papeles de Economía issue: “Monetary policy following the Great Recession”, Fundación de las Cajas de Ahorros, Madrid, 13 June 2014. *      *      * Let me first thank FUNCAS for their kind invitation to inaugurate this presentation of the issue of the review Papeles de Economía Española dedicated to “Monetary policy after the Great Recession”. In my address I will briefly review the predominant view before the crisis. I will then discuss how the crisis has affected this consensus. Finally, I shall conclude with some thoughts on two changes which, as a result of the foregoing, are already taking place in monetary policy conduct: how to structure its interaction with macro-prudential policy and the role of unconventional monetary tools. Before the crisis Before the crisis, low inflation, low price volatility and the high degree of economic stability attained in the advanced economies enabled a certain consensus to be forged on what the essential components of a successful monetary policy should be. Monetary policy would be delegated to an independent central bank whose remit saw the maintenance of price stability as its main objective. This objective, in turn, could be translated into a more explicit goal in terms of inflation targets. To fulfil its mandate, the central bank would confine itself to controlling the short-term interest rate. Its interventions would be transmitted to the real economy through three main channels: the long-term interest rate, inflation expectations and financial asset prices. The credit channel played a secondary role. Indeed, in most of the macroeconomic models used by central banks, the private banking sector would play a marginal role, if any at all. The assumption of financial market efficiency and self-regulation meant that credit was not a central variable. The consensus then prevailing also had it that, in order to ensure financial stability, it sufficed to supplement price stability with regulatory and micro-prudential supervisory policy action geared to ensuring the strength of individual credit institutions. In step with this concept, the role of monetary policy in the face of potential risks to financial stability would be confined to cleaning up or repairing damage when such risks ultimately materialised. The Federal Reserve’s measures following the bursting of the “dot.com” bubble illustrate this type of conduct. The crisis From the summer of 2007 and, above all, following the Lehman brothers’ debacle in September 2008, a crisis broke that generated the most severe global economic contraction since the Great Depression. Among other side-effects, this crisis obliged us to revise much of the previous consensus on monetary policy. It would however be unfair to ignore the fact that, in the specific monetary policy realm, discordant voices had some years back raised objections to the predominant model. In particular, the Bank for International Settlements had maintained since the early 2000s that, in specific circumstances, central bank conduct in the face of severe risks to financial stability would have to be pre-emptive and not only reactive. Simply put, the damage wielded by a financial crisis might be so great that some price stability slippage in the present would be 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  warranted in exchange for preventing a future, more serious deviation that might prove more difficult and costly to reverse. The Bank for International Settlements also asserted that the combination of a price stability-oriented monetary policy and a merely micro-prudential supervisory policy did not ensure the stability of the financial system as a whole. In this connection a third tool was needed: a macro-prudential supervisory policy. While it is still too early to draw all the economic policy lessons arising from our experience of this crisis, I believe certain necessary changes can be discerned. Among these, the need to pursue macro-prudential policies is one of the most evident implications. Macro-prudential policy The crisis has demonstrated that the previous combination of monetary policy and micro-prudential policy is insufficient both for shoring up the stability of the financial system as a whole and for ensuring, in the event of crisis, that the impact on the real economy is limited. To achieve these goals a macro-prudential policy is also needed, and it must be equipped with new objectives and instruments. There is already some agreement on the need to have this new macro-prudential policy rest on two levels or dimensions. First, a cross-sectional dimension, focused on controlling the distribution of risks within the financial system at each point in time. This requires analysis of how institutions interact and what are the consequences of these interactions for the system as a whole. The aim should be to identify those interactions of most global systemic significance in order to subject them, logically, to more demanding soundness requirements. Further, macro-prudential policy should also heed the time dimension, which analyses how aggregate risk evolves and how it interacts with the normal functioning of the real economy. This is the perspective needed in order to design, for example, measures to temper the procyclical tendencies inherent in the financial system. As is known, the Banco de España was a pioneer in this field when, in 2000, it introduced dynamic provisioning. In the initial stages of the crisis the potential of such a tool was evident; however, the subsequent heightening of the crisis also showed its limitations. The interactions between monetary and macro-prudential policy will pose complex challenges to central banks. Theoretically, monetary policy should continue focusing on maintaining price stability; and macro-prudential policy, on ensuring financial stability. In practice, however, action by each of them will inevitably exert a strong influence on the objectives of the other, and that has implications for the institutional design of the macro-prudential authority. The advantages arising from coordination between both policies would suggest assigning the central bank with a pivotal role in the pursuit of macro-prudential policies. This has been the path followed to date in most cases. Thus, for instance, in the United Kingdom a sister committee has been set up within the Bank of England and alongside the Monetary Policy Committee, namely the Financial Policy Committee. Italy, Belgium and Ireland have followed similar arrangements. In other countries such as France and Germany, committees have been set up with the participation of other economic authorities, but the central bank plays a very important role in them, and actually wields veto powers over the decisions of the macro- prudential body relating to or affecting the field of competence of the national central bank or of the Eurosystem. Nonetheless, concentrating different and occasionally conflicting economic policy objectives within a single institution no doubt makes accountability more complicated and may make the institution’s mandate more ambiguous. This is indeed one of the reasons why in other instances, such as the United States, the option chosen was to create institutions in which 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  responsibilities are distributed more symmetrically between the central bank and the other economic authorities. This is no doubt a complex debate with unquestionable political connotations. I see more advantages than drawbacks in the European approach, since I believe that to achieve good coordination between monetary and macro-prudential policies and ensure sufficient capacity and speed of response, the central bank should play an important role in the design and management of the new macro-prudential instruments and measures. The use of unconventional measures in monetary policy implementation The second change I wish to discuss regarding monetary policy management is the role of what are dubbed unconventional measures. As you will recall, central banks’ immediate reaction to the first signs of the crisis was to deploy all available conventional instruments. Firstly, faced with clogged-up interbank markets, central banks had to directly assume the task of liquidity re-distribution among banks.  Also under the heading of conventional measures, most central banks aggressively cut official interest rates to prevent an abrupt and deep decline in activity from triggering a deflationary process. This policy ultimately took intervention interest rates to very low levels. Accordingly, when the worsening of the crisis made it necessary to relax the monetary policy stance even further, most central banks had to look to unconventional instruments. Unconventional measures can be grouped into three major blocks: forward guidance; measures aimed at expanding the central bank balance sheet, and changes in the composition of this balance sheet. The use of forward guidance to steer inflation expectations and interest rates has spread among the main central banks. The ECB resorted to this last summer to anchor interest rate expectations. The Federal Reserve and, to a lesser extent, the Bank of England have also used this instrument to signal their intention to provide a greater stimulus to the economy. Unconventional measures affecting the size and composition of the central bank’s balance sheet are also being extensively used. In the euro area, in October 2008, the ECB changed its liquidity management policy, implementing its main refinancing operations at a fixed rate with full allotment. In May 2009 it lengthened the average maturity period of monetary policy operations and set in train a purchase programme for covered bonds and other similar assets to reactivate this market segment. One year later, faced with the qualitative leap that the euro area sovereign debt crisis entailed, it introduced the Securities Market Programme. Under this programme it purchased, always on the secondary market, public debt of the countries where the tensions were disproportionately restricting the funding of their economies. Finally, when doubts over the viability of the euro reached critical levels in summer 2012, the ECB responded with an announcement that it would, within its mandate, do whatever was needed to save the euro. It designed a new securities purchase programme – the Outright Monetary Transactions Programme – which, though its use has not been necessary, has been instrumental in changing expectations in a favourable direction for market stability and normalisation. Conversely, in the United States, the changes in the Federal Reserve balance sheet have been linked to massive asset purchases as part of a standard quantitative easing programme. These purchases, far higher than those in Europe, have been conducted with the express purpose of contributing to easing monetary and financial conditions. The Bank of England has, in this respect, been closer to the Federal Reserve than to the ECB. There have therefore been notable divergences in the use of unconventional instruments between the ECB, on one side, and the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England on the other. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  These divergences reflect the characteristics of the respective financial systems, in particular the predominant role of banks in the euro area compared with the greater significance of capital markets in the United States and the United Kingdom. However, they also respond to a different perception of the risks that a central bank can and should assume in terms of its credibility and reputation. Widespread opinion has it that the Fed’s strategy has involved some blurring of the boundaries between monetary, fiscal and financial stability policies. The ECB, on the other hand, has kept a greater distance from these boundaries because the joint existence of a single central bank with the fiscal and financial authorities of 17 independent countries (18 as of today and, possibly, 19 as from January) poses particular challenges and difficulties. In sum, I have focused on structural aspects of monetary policy. I believe, nonetheless, that some brief thoughts on the monetary policy decisions adopted by the ECB governing Council last week would not go amiss. As you know, a broad raft of measures was agreed last Thursday covering the three main spheres of action of the ECB throughout this crisis. The conventional monetary policy stance was additionally eased with a further cut in official rates which, for practical purposes, have now reached their lower bound. The horizon for the policy of generous liquidity provision was extended once more to 2016. And, lastly, a further step was taken in respect of unconventional measures with the launch of a new, four-year, long-term refinancing operation aimed and designed at promoting greater credit flow. As we know, neither the ECB nor monetary policy alone can resolve the problems at the root of the crisis still besetting the euro area. But decisions such as those last Thursday no doubt contribute to facilitating the action of other economic policy tools which, by their nature, may have a more powerful and lasting effect on growth and employment. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  R Gandhi: Indian banking sector – role in triggering future growth Valedictory address by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 6th ICC Banking Summit, Kolkata, 14 June 2014. *      *      * Assistance provided by Ms Rekha Misra, Director, Dr. Saibal Ghosh, Assistant Adviser & Shri Radheshyam Verma, Research Officer is gratefully acknowledged. Good evening, Ladies and Gentlemen! 2. It is both an honour and a privilege to attend this important Conference at the Indian Chamber of Commerce (ICC) in Kolkata. From humble beginnings in the early 1920s, the ICC has come a long way and has presently evolved into a leading national chamber operating from Kolkata. With banks being the mainstay of the financial system, I am sure that the deliberations in the Conference would have provided important insights to all attendees on how the banks’ role is getting re-oriented in the new milieu. The Conference has a healthy mix of participants spanning not only representation from the Government and eminent commercial bankers, but also people from auditing firms and general audience. I am sure that this diversified representation would have provided a varied perspective to each of the issues being debated and thrown up possible solutions. Financial sector and economic growth 3. Banks’ primary purpose is to mobilize otherwise idle savings for the purpose of lending to productive investments. A lot of research work has been undertaken to study the relationship between the financial sector and real sector economic growth. The old model of economic growth as a function of land i.e. capital, labour, technology and entrepreneurship has been modified. The new paradigm of economic growth is that it is a function of savings rate, return on investment and cost of intermediation. We can easily see the role and importance of the financial sector with regard to all of these three factors. Thus while there is consensus about finance having significant impact on the quantity, quality ie productivity and the efficiency of capital, jury is still out in determining whether it is the banks or capital market which drives economic growth. Research opinions and conclusions are equally divided. Very often the examples of the United States of America and the United Kingdom are quoted to prove that it is the capital market which drives growth. To counter that, the examples of Germany and Japan are quoted to establish that it is the banks which drive the growth. 4. Banks constitute the backbone of a nation’s financial system, performing manifold functions through liquidity, maturity and risk transformation. Indeed, it needs no gainsaying that the health of the economy is, in a way, the mirror reflection of the banking system, especially in bank-based financial systems such as ours. Of course, the reverse is also equally true. I am reminded of a saying that a bank is like heart of the human body and the capital it provides is akin to the blood in it. So long as the blood circulates seamlessly, the organs remain sound and healthy. However, if for any reason, the blood were not supplied to any organ, then that part would be rendered useless. Not surprisingly therefore, there is always a conscious attempt on the part of the Reserve Bank to provide adequate liquidity and credit to all productive sectors of the economy. Indian experience 5. India has the distinction of long history of both banks and capital market. Economic history of India narrates how both have been vibrant in many important cities, though Mumbai did dominate all others. However, slowly and steadily, especially in the last twenty five years or so after the financial sector reforms, the banking sector has emerged as THE source for investment funding. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  6. What has been the actual contribution of banks for engineering investments in the Indian economy? Bank credit increased from  5 billion as at end March 1951, to  13 billion by March 1961,  47 billion by March 1971,  254 billion by March 1981,  1164 billion by March 1991,  5114 billion by March 2001,  39420 billion by March 2011 and  52604 billion by March 2013. What has been the contribution of capital market in these years? During the 1970s, while capital market helped raising  10 billion worth of equity, bonds and debentures, banks extended credit worth  207 billion in that period. During the 1980s, the corresponding figures were  233 billion and  910 billion. In the 1990s, they were  1172 billion and  3950 billion respectively and in 2000s they were  2115 billion and  34206 billion respectively. In the fiscal 2011 and 2012,  318 billion by the capital market and  13284 billion by banks. 7. Actually banks do extend funds by way of investment in the bonds and debentures. As these are heavily in government bonds, rather than in those issued by corporates and the split figures are not readily available, I have not included them here. 8. While we can lament the lackluster performance of the capital market, a redeeming feature has been the growth of private placement market in the past twenty years. Though the issues thereat had been predominantly in the form of bonds and debentures, the growth in size has been very reassuring. It gained popularity from mid 1990s; from 1995–96 to 2000–01, this market raised  752 billion, in the next ten years, it helped raise  7614 billion and in fiscal 2011–12 and 1012–13, this market raised  2009 billion. 9. While we are happy that banks have been doing such a wonderful yeoman service for the growth of the economy, will we be happy to continue to depend on bank financing as the predominant mode? Are we compelling the banks take too much risk, thereby endangering the depositors’ money? 10. However, taking note of the predominant position of banks in the Indian financial system and taking a realistic view, can we expect the bank finance to comprehensively cater to all types of investment needs? Irrespective of whether it is short, medium or long term, or whether it is loan, debt or equity financing, or it is with low, medium or higher risk propositions? Should we turn our banks like the universal banks in Germany, catering to every type of investment demand of the entire economy? 11. Or, alternatively, should we develop capital market so that it can cater the increasing need for investment and also risky investments? Like those in the USA? 12. These are sets of questions that we need to ponder over and take strategic decisions. Twelfth plan 13. 12th Five Year Plan aims to usher in faster, more inclusive and sustainable economic growth. It notes that today, India can sustain a GDP growth of 8 percent a year. Increasing this to 9 or 10 percent will need more mobilization of investment resources; better allocation of these resources through more efficient capital markets; higher investment in infrastructure through both public and PPP routes; and more efficient use of public resources. 14. Twelfth Plan has ambitious target for investments to usher in high growth rate of 8 percent during 2012–17. It aims to mobilise resources worth  5.4 trillion. The total public sector investment in infrastructure envisaged in the Twelfth Plan is  16 trillion by the Centre and  12.89 trillion by the States. Investment by the private sector, which includes PPP projects, makes up the balance of  26.83 trillion, which is 48.14 percent of the required investment during the Twelfth Plan, a much higher share than the anticipated 36.61 percent during the Eleventh Plan. Accordingly the Plan aims for an eclectic mix of development of capital market, more specifically debt market, besides exhorting bank finance. 15. Being from the Reserve Bank, let me ponder more over banks’ role in the coming years. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Banking sector reforms 16. Leading economists most often cite the importance of sound financial sector reforms as being central to a healthy banking system that aids economic growth. India is the largest country in South Asia with an extensive financial system characterized by varied financial institutions, comprising of both banks and non-banks. Banks are the mainstay of the financial system with bank assets comprising, on average, around 70 percent of GDP during the post-reform period. The commercial banking segment comprises of 26 public sector banks in which government has majority equity stake, 20 private sector, including 7 de novo (which became operational after initiation of economic reforms in 1991) private banks, although RBI has recently done away with this distinction and over 40 foreign banks, which operate as branches. 17. Prior to the inception of financial sector reforms in 1991, the Indian financial system can best be characterized as highly regulated and financially repressed. The prevalence of high reserve requirements, interest rate controls and allocation of financial resources to pre-designated sectors adversely affected banks’ resource mobilization and allocation. 18. The period 1992–97 laid the foundations for reforms in the banking system. The reforms comprised of five major planks: cautious and proper sequencing, mutually reinforcing measures, complementarities between banking reforms and other associated policies (e.g., monetary, external, etc.), developing financial infrastructure and nurturing and developing financial markets. Some of the salient reforms undertaken in the financial system, included, among others, lowering of statutory reserve requirements; liberalizing the interest rate regime, first on the lending side and later, on the deposit side; infusing competition by allowing more liberal entry of foreign banks and permitting the establishment of de novo private banks; institution of prudential measures (capital adequacy requirements, income recognition, asset classification and provisioning norms for loans, exposure norms, accounting norms) and enhanced disclosures and levels of transparency in their annual audited statements to promote market discipline. 19. Over the period of reforms beginning 1992 through 2013, real bank assets have grown at a compound annual rate of about 10%; the growth rate of deposits and credit both in real terms, during the same period has been roughly of the order of 10% and 12%, respectively. 20. I am happy to note that the issues deliberated today are those that are likely to shape the future of the industry, going forward. I would like to take this opportunity to share with you my views on some of these and other related concerns, which, as I see it, will shape the contours of the industry in the years ahead. Financing of infrastructure 21. The first issue, which immediately comes to my mind, is the issue of infrastructure financing. I am sure that this issue will also be uppermost in your minds as well. Inadequate infrastructure exerts a cascading impact on the economy, negatively affecting productivity, employment, personal income and international competitiveness and costs. The 12th Five Year Plan as mentioned earlier has estimated the infrastructure requirement at around INR 56 trillion, with a gradually increasing role for the private sector. Given the limited fiscal headroom and the long gestation lags involved in its fructification, there is a need to rope in long-term providers of funds. Can banks chip in? Yes and in fact has already done so. As the capital market’s significance has been waning, bank finance for infrastructure steadily grew. The outstanding bank credit to the infrastructure sector, which stood at  72 billion in 1999–2000, has increased to  7860 billion in 2012–13, registering a compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) of over 40 per cent against an overall CAGR of bank finance to all industries at 20 percent during the same period. However, this kind of growth and the general economic downturn and policy conundrum have resulted in concentration risk for banks (Infra funding is as high as 15% in 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  the banking books); banks are saddled with large scale stress assets in the infra segment. Further, there is the structural problem of using short term nature of the bank funds for very long term funding. Banks did evolve a midway solution, of medium tenor funding for 12 to 15 years. This, though solved the initial problems, is fundamentally a weak arrangement and the recent stress period has brought the cracks into open. Banks will have to appropriately structure their infrastructure lending keeping in view their asset-liability mix; they also may have to raise long term resources. They should develop long-tenor fixed rate or floating rate products or develop appropriate hedging instruments to tackle counterparty and other risks. Takeout finance is another possible solution, as do Infrastructure Debt Funds (IDFs). These initiatives are presently at a nascent stage, but hold long-term promise. 22. Over the longer-term, an efficient and vibrant corporate bond market is a sine qua non for ensuring viable financing of infrastructure. By facilitating long-term funding for the sector, it can provide much-needed debt capital that will be beneficial to both borrowers and investors alike. This will also ensure deep and broad financial markets, one of the key pillars of RBI’s financial sector policies. Financing of SMEs 23. A second issue I would like to touch upon is the financing of micro, small and medium enterprises or MSMEs, as we call them. In 2011–12, the sector accounted for a significant proportion of manufactured output and over 12 per cent of our GDP. In addition to their strong export orientation, they also have a strong employment potential, providing bread- and butter to nearly 100 million people, perhaps next only to the agricultural sector. With a big chunk of them being located in rural areas, it also offers tremendous potential for rural development. Given their forward and backward linkages with the corporate sector, I view them as “silent” engines of growth, especially in slow economic cycles. 24. Numerous studies have documented that, given the lack of reputation and tangible collateral, debt financing, mostly from informal sources, comprises the primary source of external funds for these entities. Given the often onerous documentation requirements for banks, these entities tend to get a raw deal when it comes to bank finance. The Fourth Census of MSME revealed that only 5.2 per cent of the units (both registered and unregistered) had availed of finance through institutional sources; the majority of units – 93% of them in fact – had either no finance or depended on self-finance. A World Bank Enterprise Survey in 2011 also reinforces these conclusions. The moot point is that the credit flow to MSMEs from institutional sources is not commensurate with the economic activity undertaken by them. 25. A RBI Discussion Paper in 2013 had propounded an innovative combination of banks and private equity, with a potential role of state in providing credit enhancement mechanisms/ solutions as a way out of this credit constraint. It also put forth the proposal that small banks can provide a useful role by catering to the needs of this segment, for example, through relationship banking. 26. There is also an oft-heard complaint from bankers that MSMEs are often quite lackadaisical when it comes to settling their dues. It needs to be recognised that MSMEs often act as ancillaries to large industries, and their cash flows are lumpy. The business orientation of large industries often affects the MSMEs directly, in turn hampering the recycling of funds and business operation of MSME units. Banks need to take a proactive view, carefully analyzing the linkages of the MSME units, when sanctioning funds. The existing provisions of the Interest on Delayed Payment Act, 1998 for these entities have been suitably modified taking on board their unique characteristics. In addition, banks have been advised to sanction separate sub-limits within the overall limits sanctioned to the corporate borrowers for meeting payment obligations in respect of purchases from MSME sector. The Parliament has passed the Factoring Regulation Bill that is expected to address delays in payment and liquidity problems of micro and small enterprises. I am sure that these 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  measures will contribute in no small measure towards alleviating the extant constraints that plague this sector. Mobilising resources 27. As we have seen, country needs enormous resources for its development. How do we raise them? Banking sector has a major role here, in mobilizing the savings of the people. As at end March 2014, the scheduled commercial banks had mobilized deposits to the tune of  76 trillion. There are 146 scheduled commercial banks (including the Regional Rural Banks) in the country, with more than 1.2 lakh branches undertaking this activity. However, to support economic growth, we need to reach out more and hence there is a need for more banks to be functioning in India. Not just more banks, perhaps we need more variety of banks. I am not talking about public, private, foreign bank variety here. I am talking about the variety of functions that they will undertake, the niche in which they want to excel. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank has decided to license more banks. Two licenses we have given recently. We intend to offer this on tap basis. We are working on new set of guidelines for both full service commercial banks and differentially licensed banks. We hope that with more number of players, the banking sector will mobilize more resources for funding faster economic growth, will bring in financial inclusion and thereby support inclusive growth in a sustainable way. Conclusion 28. I have touched upon several issues that are of contemporary relevance and are expected to remain important for quite some time in the near future. Conferences such as these offer a platform for interchange of views in a structured and systemic manner, whilst taking into consideration the regional-specific concerns as well. I hope that the organizers will not stop at this one-off Conference and instead, will arrange follow-up discussions to further brain storm the issues and ensure that the discussions reach their logical conclusion. 29. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Juyeol Lee: Bank of Korea’s 64th anniversary Speech by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the commemorating ceremony of the Bank of Korea’s 64th anniversary, Bank of Korea, Seoul, 12 June 2014. *      *      * Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea family, Today marks the 64th anniversary of the foundation of the Bank of Korea. On this occasion I should like to express my sincere gratitude to those who served in the Bank of Korea before me, devoting themselves over many years to our Bank’s development, and also to those who have been unstinting in their encouragement and sage counsel. I wish in addition to commend all members of our staff for their hard work in faithfully carrying out the duties entrusted to them. The Korean economy is showing signs of slowing down in its recovery, due to weakening to some extent of consumption under the influence primarily of the recent Sewol ferry accident, while exports remain buoyant owing to the modest growth in the world economy. During the second half of this year we expect the Korean economy to maintain its trend of improvement as exports continue their steady movements, and consumer price inflation to gradually rise from its current low level. However, together with external risk factors including changes in the US Fed’s monetary policy stance, there are downside risks to growth present domestically as well, including the after-effects of the Sewol ferry accident and the appreciation of the Korean won, and there is thus a need to closely monitor the trends of these conditions. Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea family, The recent domestic and foreign economic environments are giving us much cause for concern. First, the uncertainties concerning the external economic environment are still very high and have become more complex. In terms of growth, worries are increasing about a weakening of growth momentums in emerging market countries. On the prices front, we have not yet ascertained clearly whether the current low level of global inflation is a phenomenon that has emerged in the course of the business cycle, or a structural change. International financial market conditions are also growing increasingly complex due to the divergent monetary policy stances of the major advanced countries. Our domestic difficulties are also by no means trivial. Above all, we cannot but worry about the possible weakening of our economy’s growth potential caused by population aging and the delay in improvement of investment conditions. And resolving the imbalances accumulated across various sectors of the economy – such as our economy’s heavy structural dependence on exports rather than domestic demand, the polarizations of income between large companies and SMEs and between regular and temporary employees, and the buildup of household debt – is a task that cannot be delayed any longer. In order for the Bank of Korea to carry out its proper role of leading the national economy in the correct direction under these conditions, an accurate judgment of the situation and timely implementation of the appropriate policies are above all important. I would like to emphasize once again that we should be unsparing in our endeavors to closely analyze the shifts in international and domestic economic conditions and their influences, and to formulate the optimal policies in response. Fellow members of the Bank of Korea, I would like now to discuss the matters that the Bank of Korea should focus and concentrate on from the second half of this year. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Our interest rate policy operations will need to comprehensively take into account not only the economic situation in the second half of the year but also the situations in the medium to long term beyond next year. Within the scope of maintaining price stability, we must provide support to sustain the recovery of Korea’s economic growth trend. In doing so we will need to scrutinize very closely the changes in major advanced countries’ monetary policies and their influences, the pace of the recovery in domestic economic activity, and the effects arising from continuation of the accommodative monetary policy stance. We must also strive to do our utmost for the stability of our financial and foreign exchange markets. We will have to enhance our capacities for early detection of and prompt response to factors posing risks to financial stability, through the establishment of a comprehensive framework for the monitoring of macroprudential conditions. To prepare for a possible increase in financial market volatility triggered by the emergence of risk factors at home and abroad, measures to more effectively utilize open market operations should be explored. Additionally, we will need to continue our efforts to enhance the qualitative development of the foreign exchange market, so as to strengthen its capacity for autonomous absorption of external shocks. In the management of the foreign exchange reserves, we will place our emphasis on securing their safety and liquidity as external payment reserves of the last resort. We will have to redouble our efforts to strengthen the central bank’s credibility with the general public and with the markets, through constant dialogue with the markets. While maintaining policy consistency, we should at the same time improve our methods and tools of communication so as to better convey to the market the substance and background of our policy decisions. Nor should we neglect efforts to prepare for the day when unification comes. We must carry out detailed analyses of the major issues pertaining to finance and the economy during unification, including currency integration, and explore effective policy options. Fellow members of the Bank of Korea staff, We must above all brace ourselves anew to carry out our duties, so that the Bank of Korea can develop further as a policy institution enjoying public confidence in the current situation where our economy is facing difficulties and policy conditions are shifting rapidly. As a first step, it will be desirable for us all to carry out our tasks with active and progressive attitudes. Recently the public’s expectations regarding expansion of the role of the Bank of Korea have been gradually growing larger. And before being told what to do by the public, we must ourselves actively examine the best ways of contributing to the development of our national economy, and incorporate them into our policy operations. We will also need to strive harder to enhance our expertise. It is no exaggeration to say that a central bank’s competitiveness lies in its acquisition of high degrees of expertise in the research and policy fields. We need to examine objectively whether our economic analysis and forecasting techniques and methods of operating our policy instruments, which were evaluated highly in the past, are still as effective in this transformed economic environment. We will be called upon to act boldly to carry out any related improvements, as and where needed. Last but not least, we will need to foster mutual trust and harmony. We should bear firmly in mind that it is the creation of the sense of unity among our staff that drives the development of the Bank. Even while competing in good faith with other departments and colleagues, we must never lose a spirit of mutual regard and cooperation. My dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea staff, The recent tragic Sewol accident has come as a painful lesson to us all, of the type of tragedy that can occur if each member of society does not fulfil his or her given duties and responsibilities. We should take this opportunity to look back objectively, to see whether we 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  have been fully carrying out the tasks entrusted to us as members of an important policy institution charged with one major aspect of the national economy. I would urge you all to do your very best in carrying out the duties entrusted to you, imbued with a sense of duty to contribute to the development of our national economy and with a spirit of public service dedicated to the stability of people’s lives. Please bear firmly in mind also that high standard of moral virtue and legal compliance are required of you as employees of the central bank, and thus steady your minds and adhere to the straight and narrow path of virtue in selflessly carrying out your duties. To draw my remarks to a close, I should like to voice my gratitude to all of those involved in the preparation of this commemorative event, and wish you all and those whom you hold dear the very best of good health and the greatest of happiness. Thank you very much. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Financial System Review Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press conference following the release of the Financial System Review, Ottawa, Ontario, 12 June 2014. *      *      * Good morning. It is my pleasure to hold this press conference with Carolyn Wilkins. Carolyn assumed the post of Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada on the 2nd of May. We are pleased to be here with you today for the inaugural press conference for the Financial System Review (FSR). The Bank published the June issue this morning. An important part of the Bank’s work is to promote a stable and efficient financial system. We do this in a number of ways: providing liquidity facilities and serving as lender of last resort; overseeing key domestic clearing and settlement systems; and collaborating with domestic and international policy-makers to develop and implement policy. Our research and analysis of financial stability is vital to this work. Since 2002, the FSR has been our flagship publication for promoting informed public discussion on all aspects of the financial system. This morning’s press conference extends that effort. Our job today is to help you leave with a solid understanding of the Bank’s assessment of financial stability in Canada, an appreciation of the complexity of the analysis and, importantly, how this work fits into our thinking about Bank policy. Let me provide some context. Over the two decades leading up to the global financial crisis, a consensus emerged that keeping inflation low, stable and predictable was the best contribution that monetary policy could make to the financial well-being of Canadians. Our inflation-targeting framework has always had a degree of flexibility built into it; and financial stability issues have always been part of the discussion. However, the crisis crystallized the view that financial stability and the outlook for economic growth and inflation are intrinsically linked. As a result, the Bank of Canada – like many other central banks – is reconsidering how to better integrate financial stability and monetary policy objectives. The assessment of financial stability is becoming more rigorous and now follows a more structured analytical process, informed by models, better data and richer dialogue. This leads to more informed judgments around the risks to the financial system. In this issue of the FSR, we have introduced an enhanced framework that explicitly identifies the underlying vulnerabilities in Canada. These are the pre-existing conditions that could amplify and propagate shocks through the Canadian system, regardless of where they originate. This sets the stage for assessing risks – events that, if they occurred, would threaten the ability of the financial system to perform its core functions. Such risks materialize when trigger events interact with vulnerabilities to cause stress in our financial system. This added depth allows a more complete understanding of our financial stability concerns. One can see that these diverse risks cannot literally be summed to estimate an overall level of risk. Nevertheless, after weighing the risks to financial stability through our improved framework and applying judgment, our level of comfort as policy-makers remains similar to what it was six months ago. The clear separation of cause and effect – vulnerabilities and risks – allows a more accurate weighing of the risks to economic and financial stability. It allows us to consider both in an integrated fashion as we deliberate policy. That’s why our assessment of the risks to the financial system is so relevant. And that’s why we’re here with you now. Before Carolyn and I take your questions, let me note the highlights from today’s FSR. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches The top two vulnerabilities are related to the household sector. The first is the imbalances in Canada’s housing market. We still anticipate a soft landing. However, stretched valuations and some signs of overbuilding would expose the financial system to a sharp correction in house prices – which is a risk we’ve identified. The second is the elevated level of indebtedness among Canadian households. This leaves households vulnerable to an unemployment shock or a sharp rise in interest rates. The third vulnerability is our exposure to sizable potential external shocks. An example is the significance of global commodity prices to our economy and financial system. The risks are viewed in the context of these vulnerabilities. The most important domestic risk is, as mentioned, a sharp correction in house prices. The probability of this risk materializing is low, given the expected strengthening of the global and Canadian economic recoveries. However, if it were to happen, its impact on the economy and financial system would be severe. We also focus on three other key risks:  a sharp increase in global long-term interest rates;  stress emanating from China and other emerging markets; and  serious financial stress from the euro area. Before I open the floor to you, it is important to note that Canada’s financial system remains robust. It will continue to benefit from enhanced policy measures as the G-20 reform agenda is implemented, both domestically and globally. With that, Carolyn and I are happy to take your questions. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Mark Carney: Speech at the Mansion House Bankers and Merchants Dinner Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial Stability Board, at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London at the Mansion House, London, 12 June 2014. *      *      * Introduction My Lord Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen. A year ago when my predecessor Lord King delivered his final Mansion House speech, he noted “clear signs that a recovery in the UK, albeit modest, [was] underway.” That recovery was due in no small part to measures he and his colleagues had initiated including extraordinary monetary stimulus, recapitalisation of the banking system and innovative support for lending. The task a year ago was to secure that recovery in the face of continued domestic frailties and ongoing international weaknesses. At home, unemployment and underemployment remained elevated, productivity growth was anaemic, and debt levels were high. Abroad, the European crisis had moved only from its acute to its chronic phase and financial markets were demonstrating their fragility during the “taper tantrum”. With this backdrop and with real wages around 10% below their pre-crisis levels, it was not surprising that consumer confidence, though improved, remained low. Business confidence was similarly shaken by past shocks and current scepticism about the ongoing strength of demand. The Bank responded to these challenges. Forward guidance gave households and businesses confidence that Bank Rate would not be raised at least until jobs, incomes and spending were growing at sustainable rates. Guidance encouraged businesses to hire and spend, and helped keep expected interest rates low, even as the economy recovered strongly. In parallel, we encouraged banks to continue repairing their balance sheets. Changes to the Bank’s liquidity policy further supported lending. The core of the financial system is now on a sound footing and making an increasingly important contribution to the recovery. We are now faced with the challenge of turning that recovery, which has steadily gained momentum and breadth over the past year, into a durable expansion. To do so, we need balance. Its absence can have serious consequences. One has only to look back to 1931 when Britain’s economic prospects were strained by high unemployment, a large budget deficit and a deteriorating balance of payments. In the ensuing crisis sterling was forced off the gold standard and the government of the day resigned. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches And the Governor? With the uncanny foresight of a central banker, Montagu Norman had already left the scene “to get a bit of rest [in Quebec]”, he said, “for I have had a very hard time of it lately and I have not been so well as I would like to be.”1 However tempting, I will lean on Canada not for restoration but for a nautical analogy to describe how we can address the challenges we now face. Rather than appeal to the stately Duchess of York on which my predecessor sailed, I will look to the trusty canoe – a craft that can navigate the most rapid and treacherous waters…provided its paddlers work in sync. Those economic currents are flowing swiftly, with the economy expanding at an annualised rate of 4% and jobs growing at a record pace.2 But there are rapids ahead, with old imbalances persisting and new ones emerging. The economy is still over-levered. The housing market is showing the potential to overheat. And the current account deficit is now at a record level. Navigating these hazards requires close coordination between all those in the boat; that is, between fiscal, monetary and prudential authorities. Tonight I want to explain the Bank’s contribution to delivering a durable expansion characterised by balance in the macroeconomy, the housing market, and the financial sector. Before doing so, I would like to join the Chancellor in paying tribute to two individuals. The first is Sir David Lees, who as Chairman of Court has overseen the transformation of the governance and responsibilities of the Bank. David, I am extremely grateful for your support during my first year as Governor. I’m also enormously grateful for the wise counsel of Charlie Bean during the past year. Always working, Charlie is tonight discharging his duties as President of the Royal Economic Society. Throughout his career, at the Treasury, in academia and at the Bank, Charlie has been a leading thinker and practitioner in the pursuit of macroeconomic balance. Internationally he has inspired countless policymakers, myself included. On behalf of all colleagues past and present, I would like to echo the Chancellor by thanking Charlie for his exceptional period of public service and the enormous contribution he has made to the economic well-being of this country. Macroeconomic balance The UK economy is currently unbalanced internally and externally. Internally, there is wasteful spare capacity – an output gap – concentrated in the labour market. The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) currently estimates this gap to be around 1–1½% of GDP, though we caution against false precision as there are wide confidence bands around this central view. The MPC’s current guidance makes clear that we will set monetary policy to meet the inflation target while using up that spare capacity. This has implications for the timing, pace and degree of Bank Rate increases. There’s already great speculation about the exact timing of the first rate hike and this decision is becoming more balanced. It could happen sooner than markets currently expect.                                                  1  As reported in the Montreal Gazette, August 17, 1931. The Financial Times of the same day reported Norman as saying “I feel I want a bit of a rest, because I have had a very hard time lately. I haven’t been quite as well as I would like, and I think the trip will do me good”. 2  Bank staff project annualised growth of 4% for the current quarter. That incorporates expected upward revisions to early official estimates. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 But to be clear, the MPC has no pre-set course. The ultimate decision will be data-driven. At this point it is safest to conclude, as the MPC has, that there remains scope for spare capacity to be used up before policy is tightened and that a host of labour market, capacity utilisation and pricing indicators should be watched closely to determine how that slack is evolving. Growth has been much stronger and unemployment has fallen much faster than either we or anyone else expected at last year’s Mansion House dinner. So far this has been largely matched by indicators which suggest that there is more supply capacity in the labour market than we had previously thought. As a result of these two welcome developments, despite rapid jobs growth, pay pressures and unit labour cost growth have remained subdued.3 The MPC expects the rate at which slack is being eroded to slow during the second half of this year as output growth eases and productivity growth recovers. But thus far there are few signs of a deceleration in output growth. And a challenge in deciding when to begin normalising policy is that actual output can be observed but potential supply cannot. That is why the MPC is monitoring a broad range of indicators including coincident ones such as the behaviour of wages and prices. Of course navigating the upcoming bend in the river isn’t the end of the journey. The MPC has rightly stressed that the timing of the first Bank Rate increase is less important than the path thereafter – that is, the degree and pace of increases after they start. In particular, we expect that eventual increases in Bank Rate will be gradual and limited. That is because the economy will face the ongoing challenges of public and private balance sheet repair, a 10% appreciation of sterling over the past year or so, and muted growth in our main export markets. In addition, in the medium term, higher capital, liquidity and other prudential requirements can be expected to lead to higher spreads between borrowing rates and risk-free rates than before the crisis. Moreover, a highly indebted private sector is particularly sensitive to interest rates.4 Caution over the path of rate increases once they begin is also needed because we start at a point from which interest rates cannot easily be reduced. The effects of an excessive or an excessively rapid tightening of monetary policy could prove damaging and difficult to undo. Perhaps for these reasons, financial markets expect Bank Rate to rise to only 2¼% over the next three years and, on that basis, the MPC expects the economy to move towards internal balance – almost closing the output gap – in the same period. Just achieving internal balance will not be enough to guarantee a durable expansion. It matters how we do so. Excessive reliance on consumption or non-tradable sectors, such as housing, all financed by borrowing abroad at an overvalued exchange rate would prove only temporarily satisfying. The UK’s current account deficit is at a record level. The perennial trade deficit has been reinforced by the fact that the UK is growing much faster than its main trading partners. More                                                  3  In May 2013, the MPC projected annual growth of 1.7% for 2014Q1, only half of the rate at which it now estimates the economy to have grown over that period. Meanwhile the 2014Q1 outturn for unemployment, at 6.8%, was some 0.8ppt below the MPC’s May 2013 central projection. Despite these upward surprises to activity, annual earnings growth in 2014Q1 was 0.5ppt weaker than expected in May last year. That contributed to annual unit wage costs growth around 1ppt below the MPC’s May 2013 central projection. 4 Private non-financial sector debt is 163% of GDP. Around two thirds of bank loans to individuals and more than half of loans to businesses are at variable interest rates.  
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches recently the sharp fall in the returns we earn on our investments abroad has led to a negative 3% swing in our net investment income. This is not an immediate cause for alarm. As the world and particularly Europe recovers, demand for our products and returns on our investments should increase. More competitiveness gains from the past depreciation may yet be realised, and in any event, unlike for much of Montagu Norman’s time, our exchange rate will remain flexible. Nonetheless, sustained borrowing from abroad to consume at home is hardly a recipe for a balanced and sustainable expansion. Borrowing to invest, improve productivity, competitiveness and incomes is. Amidst much commentary about an unbalanced recovery, it should not be forgotten that business investment has accounted for more than a quarter of GDP growth over the past six months. The MPC’s forecasts rely on continued rapid growth of business investment over the next few years, leading to a revival in productivity and real wages, which in turn will allow consumption to grow without an unsustainable decline in household savings. Creating the right conditions for investment is thus essential. In a world of corporate caution this will likely require interest rates consistent with our guidance. The Bank is well aware that such a monetary stance could encourage other risks to develop. For instance, there is evidence of growing vulnerabilities in financial markets. Across asset classes, implied volatilities are well below their long-term averages. Spreads in high yield and peripheral bond markets have collapsed. And covenant-light loans are the new normal. While the banking system is much more robust to spikes in volatility, end investors may not have fully absorbed the extent to which financial reforms will distribute shocks across the financial system. This may be a case of still waters running deep – often the most dangerous time on the river. That is why an essential counterpart to our monetary stance is macroprudential vigilance and activism. Nowhere is the need for that more acute than in the housing market. Balance in housing Across the country, house prices have risen by around 10% over the past year, approaching their early 2007 levels. Price inflation has broadened and accelerated across regions. Expectations that prices will continue to rise are now most marked outside London. There have been some signs of a slowdown in activity, with mortgage approvals falling back to their mid-2013 levels. The Bank is watching closely to determine the extent to which this reflects an underlying slowing of housing demand. However, some of this likely stems from lenders adjusting to the Financial Conduct Authority’s (FCA) tough new Mortgage Market Review underwriting requirements. More worryingly, surveys suggest some slowing could reflect would-be sellers holding back properties from the market in anticipation of higher future prices – an early sign of extrapolative price expectations. The underlying dynamic of the housing market reflects a chronic shortage of housing supply, which the Bank of England can’t tackle directly.5 Since we are not able to build a single house, I welcome the Chancellor’s announcement tonight of measures to increase housing supply.                                                  5  Ten years ago, former MPC member Kate Barker estimated that construction of around 260,000 homes a year would be necessary to contain real house price growth at 1 per cent per annum (Barker, 2004). Far fewer have in fact been built in the years since – just 110,000 in 2013.  Because housing demand tends to rise more than one-
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 To be clear, the Bank does not target asset price inflation in general or house prices in particular. It is indebtedness that concerns us. This is partly because over-extended borrowers could threaten the resilience of the core of the financial system since credit to households represents the lion’s share of UK banks’ domestic lending. It is also because rapid growth in or high levels of mortgage debt can affect the stability of the economy as a whole. An economic expansion is more precarious if there are a large proportion of heavily indebted households. History shows that the British people do everything they can to pay their mortgages. That means cutting back deeply on other expenditures when the unexpected happens, potentially slowing the economy sharply. That’s why recessions that follow rapid credit growth tend to be deeper and longer lasting. It is for these reasons that the Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee (FPC) is mandated to address systemic risks arising from unsustainable levels of debt, leverage or credit growth. In this regard, the UK starts from a vulnerable position with household debt at 140% of disposable income.6 There are some signs that underwriting standards are becoming more lax, with the proportion of new mortgages at high loan-to-income ratios now at an all-time high.7 The increase in house prices in the past year means we can expect the proportion of high loan-to-income mortgages to grow further in the coming year even if the housing market begins to slow. This is concerning because a durable expansion requires mortgages to be serviceable over their lifetime not just when interest rates are at record lows. The vulnerabilities associated with debt build up over longer periods than the ups and downs with which monetary policy is usually concerned. In that sense, the credit and business cycles are distinct. Using monetary policy now to target indebtedness would risk undershooting the inflation target and damaging growth. For all of these reasons, monetary policy is the last line of defence against financial instability. Raising interest rates today would be the wrong response to this potential vulnerability tomorrow. Fortunately, we are not up the proverbial creek without a paddle. We have many of them which we can use to steer towards two objectives. The first is to ensure that the banking system is resilient. To that end, the Bank is conducting a stress test to assess how well major banks and building societies can withstand a sharp housing market correction during a prolonged and painful recession. The results and any consequences that flow from them will be announced later this year. The second objective is to reduce the risk of excessive indebtedness itself by taking out insurance. Given recent experience, few can now believe that the right policy is to wait to mop                                                                                                                                                             for-one with income, supply constraints are likely to put increasing pressure on prices in a now rapidly-growing economy. 6  That is high relative to other advanced economies. Household debt stands at between 105% and 115% of disposable income across the Euro-area, US and Japan (IMF, 2014). 7  By latest estimates, around 40% of new mortgages were at LTIs of at least 3.5x. 25% at were at LTIs of at least 4x. 10% were at LTIs of at least 4.5x. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches up the consequences of debt-driven busts after they crystallise. That is even more obvious when Bank Rate is at its effective lower bound. In other words, when you hear the thunder of the falls, it is wise to get off the river. Measures to take out insurance can be graduated and proportionate if action is taken sufficiently early. We can limit risks tomorrow by acting against a loosening in underwriting standards in new mortgage lending today. The value of acting early is reinforced by uncertainty around the precise impact of macroprudential tools. While these have proven effective in other countries, they are still relatively novel here.8 By acting, assessing, and if necessary re-calibrating, we are more likely to strike the right balance to support durable growth over the medium term. That’s why authorities have already moved. Last autumn we took our foot off the accelerator by removing capital relief for banks on new mortgages and, with the Treasury, by re-focussing the Funding for Lending Scheme away from mortgages towards business lending. Those steps were followed by the implementation in April of the Mortgage Market Review to reinforce banks’ underwriting standards and the stress test to underpin their capital discipline. The FPC has a wide range of other tools if further action is justified. We can direct lenders to raise capital held against mortgages or against all credit. Thanks to the FCA, we are now able to recommend a tougher interest rate stress to which new borrowers are subjected when banks assess affordability. We can also make prudential recommendations about the share of high loan to income, loan to value and long tenor mortgages in banks’ and building societies’ new lending. In this regard, I applaud the Chancellor’s intention to grant the FPC additional directive powers in relation to these aspects of mortgage portfolio composition. I also welcome the Chancellor’s commitment to adjust the Help to Buy Mortgage Guarantee Scheme to comply in full with any FPC actions. When we meet later this month, the FPC will weigh carefully recent and prospective changes in activity, prices and credit as well as the merits of graduated and proportionate actions to mitigate the potential vulnerabilities arising from what is the greatest risk to the domestic economy. Balance in financial markets The housing market is not the only market at risk of losing balance. Confidence in some core financial markets has been buffeted by revelations of manipulation of interest rate, FX and commodity benchmarks. There have been too many such episodes to think each is an aberration. We are working to restore balance through reforms based on the firm belief that the City’s strength is founded on markets. To restore the primacy of true markets, authorities are already seeking to:                                                  8  Lim et al (2011) use data from 49 countries from 2000–10 to examine the efficacy of various macroprudential measures, including loan-to-value and debt-to-income caps, on mitigating systemic risk. They find that caps on loan-to-value ratios, caps on debt-to-income ratios, ceilings on credit or credit growth, reserve requirements, countercyclical capital requirements and time-varying/dynamic provisioning help to dampen pro-cyclicality. See also Dell’Ariccia et al (2012). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 – End too big to fail. I thank many of you who are engaged with the Bank and the Treasury to help make this the year we complete the job. – Align risk and reward by developing a new remuneration code. This is not about the societal question of the level of pay, but about the prudential question of its structure. To properly align risk and reward, the Prudential Regulation Authority will be prescribing deferral of variable remuneration, the ability to reduce deferred bonuses when subsequent performance reveals them to be undeserved, and the ability to claw back bonuses after payment. But as the Chancellor stressed tonight, we must do more. Recent events have shown the necessity of measures to ensure the fairness and effectiveness of core markets. That is why I welcome wholeheartedly the Fair and Effective Markets Review announced tonight by the Chancellor, and to be led by the Bank’s new Deputy Governor, Minouche Shafik. Through that Review, we will build true markets: – Markets that are open and transparent; – Markets where access extends beyond a privileged few; – Markets where all who wish to trade have common information and commonly accessible prices; and – Markets where the informational integrity of key benchmarks is beyond question. Some of this will require changes to the way markets work, including changes to how benchmarks are calculated and the implementation of reforms currently underway to create greater pre- and post-trade transparency of standardised derivatives. Some can be delivered, as the Chancellor announced, by bringing more activities within the scope of regulation. And some may require new codes of conduct. Specific codes for professionals in markets will complement broader efforts to raise standards in banking by the new Banking Standards Review Council. For those in markets we need a simple approach that recognises a fundamental principle of the City: namely that true markets are the source of dynamism, prosperity and progress. Seeking to manipulate, game or profit from unfair access transgresses that principle. It weakens the effectiveness of markets for all. It holds back prosperity. It should thus have clear consequences, including professional ostracism. We must work together to ensure that everyone on every trading floor understands that dealing in a market means serving the needs of clients, investors and customers fairly and effectively. I am delighted that one of the City’s most experienced professionals and proven leaders, Elizabeth Corley, has agreed to chair a panel of market practitioners that will inform the Review. Now, recognising the centrality of markets doesn’t mean the Bank has a naïve faith that all markets always function smoothly. The City’s markets are not those of a textbook. We all know that real markets can seize up in crises of confidence, threatening financial stability and the wider economy. Just as there will be times when central banks must backstop the banking system, there are also times when they should backstop core markets in a way that supports their contribution to the real economy but doesn’t encourage excessive risk taking. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches That need was behind the recent transformation of the Bank of England’s sterling market framework for banks, and it is why I can announce that, in the coming year, the Bank will widen access to our facilities to include the largest broker-dealers regulated in the UK and to those central counterparties authorised to operate in UK markets. We will also look into whether we should further develop our capacity to lend in currencies other than sterling. Conclusion As tonight’s announcements demonstrate, promoting a durable and balanced expansion will sometimes require coordination between the Bank, the Treasury, other public authorities and the private sector. The Bank will also have to act on its own by using all of its tools in as complementary a fashion as possible. The FPC is considering using macroprudential tools to insure against potential vulnerabilities associated with the housing market. Doing so could reduce the need for monetary policy to be diverted to address a sector-specific risk. However, macroprudential policy is not a substitute for monetary policy. If it is used for insurance it won’t necessarily affect the path of interest rate increases. The need for internal balance – to use up wasteful spare capacity while achieving the inflation target – will likely require gradual and limited interest rate increases as the expansion progresses. The start of that journey is coming nearer. Unlike a canoe trip, the quest for economic balance never ends. With economies and markets always moving between equilibria, it is the journey that matters. By working together we can make that journey as pleasant and as prosperous as possible. The need to work together extends beyond policymakers to all in the City. So I am delighted to take up co-presidency of Heart of the City with you, Lord Mayor. This umbrella group for City charities, co-founded by Eddie George fourteen years ago, is a great example of how cooperation and social responsibility can be at the heart of business, building the social capital necessary for vibrant and inclusive capitalism. Fiona, you are to be commended for the energy and enthusiasm you have brought to your role – as well as the excellent hospitality you have provided tonight. So let me invite everyone here to rise and join me in a toast of good health and prosperity to “The Lord Mayor and the Lord Mayor’s Consort”, Fiona and Nicholas Woolf. References Del’Ariccia, G, Igan, D, Laeven, L, and Tong, H (2012), “Policies for macrofinancial stability: how to deal with credit booms”, IMF Staff Discussion Note 12/06, June. IMF (2014), World Economic Outlook, April. Lim, C, Columba, F, Costa, A, Kongsamut, P, Otani, A, Saiyid, M, Wezel, T and Wu, X (2011), “Macroprudential policy: what instruments and how to use them?” IMF Working Paper No. 11/238, October. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Prasarn Trairatvorakul: The ASEAN Economic Community’s impact on the Greater Mekong Subregion’s economies Keynote address by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Euromoney Conference “The Greater Mekong Investment Forum”, Bangkok, 12 June 2014. *      *      * Excellencies, Honorable Speakers, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 1. It is an honor for me to be back here at the Euromoney Greater Mekong Subregion Investment Forum. Let me thank the organizers for inviting me to speak at such a distinguished forum once again. This conference takes place at an important juncture as we are on the eve of the ASEAN Economic Community which will be launched at the end of next year. My remarks today will focus on how the AEC will have meaningful impacts on the GMS economies. Also, I will share with you some thoughts on how we can overcome challenges to capitalize on the region’s growth and prosperity. 2. The GMS has become one of the most vibrant regions in the world, transforming itself into a new investment frontier. The global attention on this region is reflected in the large inflows of foreign direct investment, which have increased dramatically in the past two decades. According to World Bank statistics, the FDI inflows to the CLMV countries over this period increased forty-fold to around 13 billion dollars in 2012.1 This wealth of investment opportunity has been underpinned by the smooth transition to market-based economies, the rich and diverse resources as well as the improvement of intra-regional logistics. 3. Most importantly, we are in an exciting time for the GMS when the AEC draws closer. As most GMS countries are members of the AEC, the GMS will significantly benefit from the growth opportunities of the AEC in the coming years.  4. With integrated markets being forged under the AEC, this will greatly benefit the GMS through a more interconnected production base. Let me give you three key examples where I see this will materialize: 5. First, on the tariff reductions. Much has already been completed here, with the group of ASEAN-6 countries,2 including Thailand, having already removed tariffs for almost all of our products since 2010. The plan according to the AEC Blueprint, will see CLMV countries’ tariffs being removed by 2015. The benefits will of course multiply throughout production and distribution chains of the region. The increase in trade and related investments will naturally spill over to peripheral areas such as southern China, which has strong trade ties with the region as part of the GMS. 6. Second, on trade logistics facilitation. This is another crucial element to complement tariff reductions to reduce costs and time in order to facilitate cross-border trade. One of the key initiatives under this area is the “ASEAN Single Window”, which will streamline customs procedures and expedite cargo clearance. Owing to this, cross-border traders can save both costs and time for customs clearance region-wide. 7. Third, on payment systems linkages. What ASEAN central banks are aiming for is to enable businesses and individuals to make and receive electronic payments more conveniently yet less costly. A prominent example here is the “Asian Payment Network” which translates to full regional ATM interoperability. Through this initiative, an ASEAN                                                 1 World Bank website (2014) (http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/BX.KLT.DINV.CD.WD) 2 ASEAN-6 includes Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore and Thailand. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  resident, for instance, can use his or her local ATM card to withdraw cash from a machine in another ASEAN country without having to pay the fees charged by third-party payment providers. 8. We can see that the upcoming realization of the AEC is a springboard for a more vibrant GMS region. However, the benefits for the region go beyond the AEC. I can see some points where tangible outcomes will take place in the near future. 9. The first one is the more integrated production networks of the main industries which dominate the GMS. We all know that the region has a comparative advantage in primary industries which are demanded by other ASEAN countries. This is why we have observed the large inflows of investment into agro-industry, garment and mining sectors. Realizing the high potentials of these sectors, we have also seen contract farming practices in Laos, where key commodities such as corn and sugarcane are produced using advanced technology and practices. 10. The other point concerns the development of infrastructure. This is particularly important given the lack of well-developed road and rail networks of the region. Countries in the GMS are addressing this through various projects, the main one being the road corridors. The North-South Corridor which connects Yunnan in China, with Myanmar, Laos and Thailand has been completed. Also, the East-West Corridor which links Vietnam, Laos, Thailand and Myanmar is near completion. This will make the whole region more closely interconnected, hence investments in any of the GMS country stand to benefit the rest. 11. The final point is on the demand side. The GMS will enjoy a larger consumer market base with distinct needs and increased purchasing power. The AEC is home to over 600 million people. In tandem with this is the significant rise of the middle class population. The Asian Development Bank estimates that the share of ASEAN’s middle class is expected to increase to 65% by 2030.3 Moreover, ASEAN continues to pursue closer integration into the global economy through various Free Trade Agreements. This includes China and India, both superpowers at the crossroads of the GMS. Therefore, the AEC will also be an important gateway, connecting the GMS to major markets of the Asia-Pacific region. 12. The bright future is ours for the making. The GMS economies are blessed with abundant resources and promising growth prospects. With the realization of the AEC, the region’s opportunities will be multiplied. Yet there remain important challenges. The bright future is ours only if we work to overcome the challenges together. I will list two important challenges: First is how we can share our resources and expertise to capitalize on the region’s growth. Second is how we can match regional demand with regional supply of savings and investment for the much-needed infrastructure development. 13. On the first challenge. Our resources will be better utilized if we regard our neighbors not as competitors but rather as partners in the regional production network. Here, we need to explore new opportunities to create industry clusters in the region by taking on our diverse comparative advantages and specialization. An existing example here is the cluster of industries relating to the garment industry, where one GMS country imports textile yarn from another country, manufactures it into apparels and then exports it to countries outside the region. 14. The second challenge concerns infrastructure financing. The projects that I mentioned earlier cannot be efficiently realized without proper funding mechanisms. What we need is to match the huge amounts of regional savings with the much-needed investment in infrastructure, which is as high as 8 trillion dollars over the next decade as estimated by the                                                 3 ADB website (2012) (http://www.adb.org/features/fast-facts-asean-prc-and-india-great-transformation) 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  ADB.4 To match this huge demand for funds, ASEAN along with China, Japan and Korea have put in place several initiatives: two key projects include the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund, which pools regional saving into funds for investment in infrastructure projects and the Asian Bond Markets Initiative, which develops and deepens regional bond markets so as to tap regional savings. 15. To conclude, there are great opportunities in store ahead. At the end of the day, the benefits of trade liberalization and infrastructure development will extend to all of us if we work collectively to overcome the challenges. The AEC will be a springboard to benefit the whole region, particularly for the GMS. This is because the whole region will be more closely knitted, not only in terms of physical connectivity but also in terms of shared production networks. I believe that this conference today will be an excellent platform for us to come together and share our ideas towards realizing long-lasting prosperity in the GMS region. Thank you.                                                 4 ADB website (2009) (http://www.adbi.org/files/2009.08.31.book.infrastructure.seamless.asia.pdf) 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Yves Mersch: Next steps for European securitisation markets Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the Information Management Network (IMN) Global ABS Conference, Barcelona, 11 June 2014. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, It is a pleasure to be here with you at the 2014 Global ABS Conference. Over the last year ABS have become a major focus of discussion within European policymaking circles. There is a growing consensus that an instrument once seen as part of the problem could in fact be part of the solution. I am therefore happy to see that the conference agenda contains many sessions touching on the key issues we are thinking about, such as regulation and economic growth. I am sure there will be several useful insights we can draw on. In my remarks today I would like to provide you with the ECB’s perspective on securitisation markets and how they fit within our overarching objectives. I also want to offer some further proposals and thoughts on how to stimulate European ABS markets, which I hope will provide some food for thought over the remainder of the conference. The Eurosystem’s interest in securitisation markets Let me start with the ECB’s perspective. As you may know, in recent months the ECB has put a great deal of public focus on reviving the European ABS market. Why are we so interested in this particular market segment? There are three parts to the answer: price stability, financial stability, and the stability of our balance sheet. First, and most importantly, we see ABS as a means to an end, and that end is achieving our primary objective of price stability. ABS provide a channel for the funds of liquidity-rich bank or non-bank investors to reach the real economy, in particular its more opaque segments. By stimulating further credit creation, which in turn feeds into consumer prices, this supports the transmission of monetary policy and the fulfilment of our mandate. This mechanism is useful at any stage of the cycle, but especially in an environment of low interest rates and low inflation as we see today. It is in this context that the Governing Council decided last week to intensify preparatory work related to outright purchases in the ABS market. Under this initiative, the Eurosystem might consider purchasing simple and transparent ABS with underlying assets consisting of claims against the euro area non-financial private sector. Moreover, we see longer-term monetary policy benefits to a stronger ABS market: firms that are less reliant on bank finance in future downturns, and banks that are less constrained in their lending decisions by their capacity to hold credit risk. The second reason for our interest in ABS is their potential financial stability role. Of course, we know that overly-complex and opaque ABS, particularly in the US, contributed to the financial instability witnessed in 2007 and 2008. But as I have long argued, alongside other policymakers, simple and transparent instruments can spread well-understood risk across different financial actors and hence play a stabilising role. As ABS can be customised, for example in terms of asset exposure, geography, and maturity, they can satisfy the needs of most non-bank investors, whether a pension fund, an insurer, or an asset manager. And sharing credit risk among the non-bank sector is important because, in a severe market disruption, the correlation between banks and non-banks’ financial health is likely to be lower than the within-banking industry correlation. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Finally, the ECB takes a close interest in ABS because they are an important component of the Eurosystem’s own balance sheet. As of the end of March this year, 307 billion of ABS collateral was pledged, amounting to 15% of the total pledged collateral for Eurosystem operations. If a counterparty were to default on its obligations, the Eurosystem would gain ownership of this ABS collateral and would then seek to liquidate it in secondary ABS markets without incurring a loss. Thus, we have a strong interest in ensuring that ABS is a safe and transparent asset class traded in well-functioning, liquid markets. So these are the reasons why the ECB sees ABS as deserving specific attention. Let me add, however, that the ECB does not believe that ABS should warrant special treatment where it is not justified from a theoretical, empirical and practical perspective. The ECB is interested in ABS insofar as they can help us achieve our policy objectives in compliance with our legal obligations, while ensuring risk equivalence in our collateral framework. In other words, supporting the ABS market is not an end itself. If the ABS market benefits along the way to securing our objectives, so much the better, but we do not a priori favour any one type of financial instrument over another. Still, it is no secret that, broadly speaking, European securitisation markets are not doing too well. Market-placed issuance is low, trading is thin in some segments, the size of the investor base has not recovered and various conservative regulations are under discussion. What can be done to revitalise securitisation markets in this context? Proposals to unblock European ABS markets Much has already been written on this topic and I will not attempt to repeat all the arguments in the limited time we have today. I would like instead to offer three proposals that I see as important to keep moving the debate forward. These relate to the regulatory treatment of ABS, transparency and standardisation requirements and the treatment of ABS by credit rating agencies. The proposals should be seen as complementary to the suggestions made elsewhere, including the recent joint discussion paper from the ECB and the Bank of England. Regulatory treatment My first proposal to revive EU ABS markets is to find a more holistic approach to their regulatory treatment. There has been a lot of discussion about various individual issues related to ABS: for example, excessive securitisation capital charges, transparency and risk retention improvements, higher credit enhancement requirements, as well as the current liquidity rule proposals, which I see as overly constraining. And regulators have responded by making efforts to overhaul the securitisation capital framework, categorise ABS in liquidity categories, finalise securitisation capital requirements for insurers, and reform transparency and disclosure requirements for these instruments. In my view, however, this focus on discrete issues is causing us to miss their continuous dimension. There is still a sense that the regulatory agenda is proceeding in an uncoordinated manner. One example concerns “high quality” treatment across regulations. The BCBS’ efforts to finalise the securitisation capital framework before end-2014 will not consider “high quality” preferential treatment. In a few weeks, however, the European Commission must identify which ABS are “high quality and liquid” in the Liquidity Coverage Ratio. Another example concerns transparency requirements across asset classes. Substantial efforts are underway to further improve the transparency and disclosure requirements of ABS in a pan-EU manner, building on the improvements to ABS transparency brought in by the ECB’s ABS loan-level data templates. Yet, while so much effort is being devoted to improving transparency over an asset class where substantial progress has already been made, covered bonds continue to have no common transparency framework and indeed no 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 common supervisory framework. Nonetheless, they benefit from preferential risk weights in the Capital Requirements Regulation – which, by the way, deviate from the Basel capital framework. Still another example concerns capital requirements across different investors. The proposed insurer securitisation capital requirements have been set using a spread risk approach calibrated to 99.5% Value at Risk. By contrast, the bank frameworks are based on a credit risk approach calibrated to 99.9% Value at Risk. Finally, closer to home, the ECB, Bank of England, and ESMA are all involved in loan-level data reporting requirements for ABS, where there appears to be significant but not perfect overlap. One might reasonably respond that coordinating such an approach would be challenging, that deadlines are fixed by legislation, and that it is difficult to coordinate simultaneously at the global, EU, and national levels – especially given the different mandates and scope of the various parties involved in regulation. However, I believe all of the actors are present and pieces in place to go down this route. Indeed, the European Commission, the ECB, the Bank of England, the three European Supervisory Agencies, and the European Systemic Risk Board, cover the near totality of EU ABS considerations under discussion at the moment. They also possess many legal powers to reframe the regulatory debate in a more holistic and sequentially-sensible manner. Would it be too challenging to regularly align views at least at the EU level, and to speak with a common voice in global fora? This is already beginning, but much more could be done in my view. Transparency and standardisation requirements My second proposal concerns transparency and standardisation requirements for ABS products. I wholeheartedly support disclosure for ABS. This is because ABS will always have the potential to be highly complex, which implies much more room for opacity than other standard financial products. As I mentioned, much has already been achieved or envisaged in the area of ABS transparency: the loan-level data requirements, the proposals by ESMA to have minimum common information for ABS in a single portal, and reforms mandated in the Prospectus Directive. Yet we could still streamline the reporting requirements: for example, ABS investor reports could be standardised to allow a consistent set of information to be provided across transactions and across time. These same investor reports could also be aligned, in terms of data cut-off dates, with loan-level data submissions. This would provide greater means for market participants to verify the accuracy of data provided by issuers and exert market discipline. Another interesting area for exploration is the provision of standardised ABS prospectus templates, including common diagrams, which would allow non-specialised investors greater ability to make comparisons across products. ABS are of course highly diverse instruments and so I would not propose to shoe-horn all types into a single form. Rather, the idea is to provide a common starting template for describing ABS transactions that could then be departed from as needed. My concern here is that prospectuses and broader transaction documentation must inform both legal and financial specialists. Some creative thinking on how to present the information in an accessible manner may help preserve legal precision while avoiding information overload. This would build on what I believe are the very helpful ESMA proposals for a transaction summary. Looking forward, I believe that greater standardisation of ABS products is a key goal to stimulate greater market activity. SME ABS, for instance, are widely acknowledged to be extremely heterogeneous across EU countries, in part reflecting both the type of business and banking relationships that prevail in each jurisdiction. Any efforts that could be made to 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches enhance the transparency and consistency of ABS structures could, I believe, provide greater comfort to investors reluctant to take the plunge into these instruments. Treatment of ABS by credit rating agencies My third proposal relates to the treatment of European ABS by credit ratings agencies. Currently many ABS in stressed economies are constrained by the rating of the corresponding sovereign. The rationale put forward by rating agencies is that there are immitigable risks that affect all issuers and assets in a particular country, above all the sovereign. As regards calibration, some quantitative and many qualitative factors are taken into account by the agencies when setting this ceiling. Yet, I question whether this ceiling is appropriate. For example, I am not aware of any defaults on Greek RMBS or ABS transactions, despite the partial sovereign debt exchange in 2012. Or, in Italy, the vast majority of RMBSs appear to be constrained by the sovereign ceiling despite an average of 25% current credit enhancement. And, from my latest check, the ECB’s Composite Index of Systemic Stress for the euro area is around the 5th percentile of the distribution since January 1999 and six times lower than the median from 2010 to 2012. This suggests that many of the systemic risks used to justify the country ceiling approach seem far off. From all these examples, and others, I find it hard to believe that the redenomination risk that is driving so many sovereign ceilings still justifies such stringent caps. Moreover, I am not fully reassured that there is no double counting taking place in these calculations: in other words, that country credit risk is not already being captured in the credit risk assessment of the pool and third parties to an ABS transaction. Be that as it may, I recognise that it is the rating agencies’ prerogative to decide on the best methodologies to assess risks and that these methodologies will not change overnight. I do believe nonetheless that providing more transparency on how ratings are derived and, in particular, disclosing ratings absent the sovereign ceiling to investors could certainly help, as suggested in our recent paper with the Bank of England. This proposal is underpinned by my conviction that it is investors who should decide whether to apply the sovereign cap or not when assessing a transaction. In fact, I would argue that rating agencies should publish the ratings absent any cap – whether for a sovereign, swap counterparty, account provider, or other entity – and then add on the caps in a building block approach, all for the sake of clarity. And, in my view, it behoves the rating agencies to provide more transparency on the precise methodologies for determining and applying sovereign ceilings, given the impact of these measures on the structured finance market. This points to the important role that market participants themselves have to play in reviving European ABS. It is one thing for regulators to improve transparency or credit ratings agencies to provide more granular information; it is another for market participants to analyse it and trade on it. For example, I recommend that market participants look closely at what the ECB is doing with our loan-level data initiative. We are providing much higher quality information on which they can make informed credit risk assessments of ABS, either on the basis of the individual underlying loans, or on the basis of the summary information made available in the respective data repositories. I realise that there is no free lunch, and that there are financial and resource implications to such detailed scrutiny. But I am convinced that the more market participants “get their hands’ dirty”, the more the ABS market as a whole will benefit. This is because more informed market participants means greater discipline for data providers, less automatic reliance on others’ opinions, and greater awareness of gaps in the transparency requirements across financial products. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Conclusion Let me conclude. The Eurosystem places great importance on the health of European ABS markets. ABS are an important means to achieve our policy objectives in a prudent manner, which could be achieved either by ensuring the applicable haircuts or by outright purchases in this market. Our decision to intensify the preparations could help to catalyse new securitisation activity. But for a virtuous circle to take hold, the regulatory and market barriers that are preventing the revitalisation of European ABS markets need to come down in tandem. Much work is already on-going to improve the environment for ABS issuance. What I have tried to outline today is several practical steps that can be taken to take this work forward. I believe that a holistic and coordinated approach among EU policy-makers, as well as greater standardisation and more methodological transparency by rating agencies, could help encourage the revival of the ABS market that we all want to see. Thank you for your attention. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jwala Rambarran: The changing face of supervision Feature address by Mr Jwala Rambarran, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at the Caribbean Group of Banking Supervisors XXXII Annual Conference, Port of Spain, 5 June 2014. *      *      * Good morning, To all our friends from the Caribbean and beyond, I extend a warm welcome to Trinidad and Tobago. For the next two days, you will be discussing, “The Changing Face of Supervision”. To us, it’s a catchy theme, but just say this to the man on the street here in Port of Spain, in Kingston, or even in Castries, and they will see little connection to their lives. But if their bank crashed next week and they can’t access their life savings, the man in the street would immediately demand an explanation. Fingers would naturally point towards government who would rightfully say “talk to central bank, it’s their job”. The “who” is to blame would be of little comfort to the man in the street who has lost his money. However, someone must be called upon to account for the bank failure and, of course, that “someone” will be us, the central bankers. If I sound like I’m talking from experience, well, you all know that I am. Following the collapse of CLICO, our largest insurance company, we at the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, have been listening to these sentiments repeatedly over the last five years, and we know many of you in this room have also had to deal with the contagion effects of the CLICO crisis which sent shockwaves throughout the Caribbean. So, I therefore want to give you three messages, as we begin this Conference on the changing face of supervision. 1. First, let’s consider CLICO and its contagion as an early warning for us in the Caribbean region. Let’s look at it as a warm up for something even bigger, as the risks to the regional financial system are ominously gathering in the distance...This leads to my second message. 2. Our protection against those gathering storms is changes in the approach to supervision…and finally my third message. 3. The changing face of supervision is each one of you in this room. I’m going to start with my third message first – you – the face of supervision, as each of you represents the change that needs to occur in supervision. As supervisors you are, of course, distinct from supervision; you are the heads, the reasoning, the human element, while supervision is essentially black or white, there are hardly any shades of grey. Today’s central banker no longer enjoys obscurity. The spotlight has been beaming on us as supervisors for the last six years. Supervision of the financial system is a task, a responsibility and, perhaps at times, a burden, we must carry for our countries. Before 2008, the typical person with a savings account, a mortgage, or an insurance policy, never really cared about who was keeping an eye on the people and institutions managing their money. Now we are more scrutinized than the financial players themselves. No regulation, no matter how sophisticated, can fully anticipate all potential situations. As supervisors we now have to look at the entire financial ecosystem over which we preside. We must not only pay particular attention to the individual trees but, more importantly, to how their branches intertwine with nearby trees, forming the entire forest and supporting its existence. In this financial ecosystem there are some who may want to play with fire; and don’t care if they burn down the entire forest. Our success, as supervisors, is measured by managing, or even better, preventing fires from actually starting. When they first occur, these may be small 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  fires or sparks that we can quickly stamp out. Such prevention is, of course, much cheaper than the billions it would cost to resuscitate an entire ecosystem. Here at home, the CLICO fire has so far cost the taxpayers of Trinidad and Tobago over US$3 billion dollars. Three billion US dollars, that’s more than the size of eight of our neighboring economies in the Caribbean. In Trinidad and Tobago, that US$3 billion could have built twenty new, state-of-the-art Children’s Hospitals, or built and fully outfitted one thousand new primary schools (more than double the existing number of primary schools), or purchase medicine for all our major hospitals for the next decade. CLICO also damaged confidence in the financial sector and left psychological scars on many citizens, in Trinidad and Tobago and in your countries, as well. Successful supervision happens behind the scenes. It is what the public will never ever see. We will never be thanked for this job, because no one is supposed to see these sparks, far less smell or see smoke. But when we save the day we get to go home with lighter hearts. It’s the fires that supervisors miss or could not control in time that bring the villagers running out with their pitchforks and ropes for the fire starters and for us, the supervisors. So what does this have to do with my third message which in the changing face of supervision is “you”. The word “Face” gives supervision a human element, so all supervisors are the face of supervision. So how is the metaphorical/symbolic face of supervision – yours, the supervisors and inspectors – changing? Good supervision is an extremely challenging and often underappreciated task. At the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, two initiatives are supporting good supervision: the ability to act and the will to act. This is intended to give the face of supervision, our supervisors, more power and presence . . . after all a face should not just be about good looks. We currently regulate the banking, insurance and private pensions sectors of the financial system, but we are also planning to supervise five systemically important financial institutions, credit unions and bureau de change. We have re-examined the areas we must now supervise and are re-resourcing to suit. We do not have the luxury of time to grow supervisors from entry level to seasoned professionals – a process that can take upwards of a decade. The country will not tolerate the excuse of not having enough competent and highly-skilled supervisors. We are, therefore, taking a more pragmatic approach to building supervisory capacity. We are aggressively recruiting experienced people from the private sector and placing them in key supervisory positions in the Financial Institutions Supervision Department. We have recruited a Second Deputy Inspector, brought in a highly sought after Chief Actuary and for the first time we have hired a Pension Fund Specialist, Credit Risk Specialist and Anti Money Laundering expert. The faces are changing. They are moving from middle-aged central bankers who came up through the ranks, to more specialized experienced professionals who come from the private sector. We are exploring all the areas that currently need our supervisory attention and also thinking ahead. We will continue to head-hunt respected talent from the private sector. Let me ask you this question, “What are the backgrounds of your staff in your respective supervision departments?” Therefore while you are the changing face of supervision, and I’ve discussed that face and how it is changing and what it should go to, please allow me to address some major changes, not to the face of supervision, but to supervision itself, the black and white. My second message is about changing your approach to supervision. Your approach represents one of the changes desperately needed for true success, to ensure no sparks turn into raging fires. The CLICO crisis taught us that it’s even more important for supervisors at all levels to keep their eyes on the ball, at all times. Here at the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, we are instilling in our supervisors the need to be more intrusive. Our 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  supervisors must no longer stay on the sidelines of regulated financial institutions, relying solely on the results of institutions’ “internal controls and risk management systems”. Over the past five years, supervisory priorities at the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago seem to have been seriously affected by the CLICO crisis, leading to a more legalistic approach to dealing with supervised institutions. I find supervisors are displaying an overemphasis on compliance and formal letters notifying institutions of sometimes minor breaches, which, in my respectful view, is diverting attention away from important issues of safety and soundness of institutions. For example, the minutes of one of FISD’s “Breaches Meetings” referred to efforts to force a financial institution to address a perceived under-provision for doubtful accounts. These efforts included consultations with the legal department as well as six letters and two emails to the affected institution. I wonder whether this matter could have been dealt with in one meeting following completion of FISD’s analysis, in which the institution was advised to make the additional provision, and quietly reminded of the Central Bank’s legal powers. Of course, I fully understand and appreciate the need for enforcement activity to ensure a high standard of compliance with laws and regulation. While this is important, I believe it is not as important as addressing the safety and soundness of financial institutions, whether or not such issues are covered in specific legislative requirements. Without abandoning the compliance function, supervisors must find ways to balance rules with discretion, and so free up the time for supervision of those issues that could cause an institution to fail, and potentially destabilize the financial system. You must move beyond the compliance mentality, where your inspections are considered thorough once you check the boxes. You must be brave and look beyond, to places that are not on your list of boxes to tick. Supervisors need to move from being inspectors to investigators. So while supervisors in the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago must not stay on the sidelines, if I may humbly suggest, and I know virtually everyone in this room knows this already, ALL supervisors in the Caribbean must become more intrusive. Look for the risks that are not before you. If you identify or suspect a risk, saying nothing, because it is not your territory, it makes you just as culpable as the fire starters. I know some of you may be taken aback by what I am saying, as we are often warned about straying out of our territory and peeking over fences not in our jurisdiction. However, another change that has come about in supervision at the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago is that we have teamed up with fellow regulators and signed Memoranda of Understanding to work with them to share information so we can cover all our bases when it comes to supervision. So if we come across something suspicious that’s not in our jurisdiction, we can refer it to one, or perhaps our two partners, the Financial Intelligence Unit and the Trinidad and Tobago Securities and Exchange Commission. There is the cliché, timing is everything, and this should not be overlooked in the context of our Conference. While you gather and enter into discussions here for the next two days, I want you to keep my second message in mind about the changes to supervision and my third message that you are the face of supervision, so this all rests in you. Let me take you to my first message – the gathering risks to the Caribbean region. We are in a precarious position right now. Several financial conglomerates control a large market share in many countries throughout the Caribbean and are interconnected to other financial institutions. Please allow me to give three examples of the rising interconnectedness in the Caribbean financial sector. • The four largest banking groups – RBC Financial, Scotiabank, First Caribbean International Bank and Republic Bank – control about 75 percent of total banking assets in the region. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  • In the Eastern Caribbean, many governments and their national insurance schemes are connected to indigenous banks, not only as shareholders but they are also important providers of deposits. • The Sagicor Financial Group, which has the largest insurance network in the Caribbean, has 60 percent of its investment portfolio in Jamaica and Barbados, making the Group connected and vulnerable to sovereign credit risk events in these two countries, both of which are rated non-investment grade by Standard and Poors. The two largest shareholders of Sagicor are the National Insurance Board of Barbados and Republic Bank. This increasing interconnectedness is building up systemic risks and raises the chance of financial contagion spreading throughout the Caribbean region, especially if another major hurricane strikes or another government undertakes a significant restructuring of its sovereign debt. I must remind you all that we are living in one of the most natural-disaster-prone regions in the world: the six small island states in the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union stand out in terms of the frequency of hurricanes. A natural disaster can be expected to hit the Eastern Caribbean roughly once every two and a half years. The Caribbean is also home to nine small island states considered to be among the world’s heavily indebted countries, with a rising probability of debt default. Grenada is currently negotiating a restructuring of its sovereign debt, which, when completed, will bring to ten (10) the number of sovereign debt restructuring episodes in the Caribbean within the past decade. We, therefore, cannot afford a tick-box, compliance mentality. As supervisors, we must not underestimate these gathering risks. We must expand cross-border cooperation through exchange of information and policy collaboration. Remember … the Caribbean’s financial ecosystem is at stake. As I close, let me encourage you to use this opportunity for discussion, but not just as a talk shop. Take this meeting seriously, as given our current situation what is discussed here can have the potential to impact the Caribbean region. Take this experience and return to your home, wiser and ready to act. As supervisors, we need to remember who are at the heart of the financial system. We need to remember it is real human hearts: a teacher with a loan, a market vendor with a savings account in a bank, a bus driver with an insurance policy, or a doubles vendor with an investment in a mutual fund. Our duty is to these market participants, who all rely on us. When the story is told, let it be said you, we as the guardians of the financial system, did all we could in our power, to protect the economies of our region. To conclude, let me reiterate the following key messages: • First, CLICO and its contagion was an early warning for us in the Caribbean. Rising financial interconnectedness is building up systemic risks and the likelihood of financial contagion throughout the region. This requires supervisors to see the whole financial ecosystem and not just the individual trees. • Second, changes to supervision are our protection against those gathering financial storms. Supervisors must be brave enough to move beyond the compliance, tick-box mentality to being investigators, addressing the safety and soundness of financial institutions, whether or not such issues are covered in specific legislative requirements. • Finally, every one of you in this room must be the desired changing face of supervision. Ladies and Gentlemen, our work has just begun. I am confident we can continue to improve and learn from each other’s experience, applying these lessons to preventing another systemic financial failure in the Caribbean in the future. I wish you a productive session and hope you enjoy your stay. I thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Yves Mersch: Tackling unemployment in Europe – increasing mobility, enhancing flexibility, optimising education Keynote speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg, 26 September 2014. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, First of all: congratulations to all doctoral students, whose graduation we are celebrating today! I am confident that you have a bright future ahead of you, as you stand well prepared to enter the labour market and to find jobs that match your skills – be it in academia, in the private or public sectors, here in Luxembourg or elsewhere. Holding the relevant qualification is a precondition for receiving a suitable job offer. However, it might not always be enough to secure a job. In several European countries, prospects are rather dismal, especially for young people. I am aware that unemployment may not be the most obvious challenge to talk to you about on such a celebratory occasion. It is, however, a major concern for the euro area. And I am convinced that well-educated people like you can really make a difference. High unemployment in the euro area – merely a temporary phenomenon? Temporary rises in unemployment rates are typical of cyclical downswings. Such cyclical increases in unemployment are distressing for those affected and can have dire consequences, but they tend to reflect a transitory downturn in labour demand and do not necessarily have a strong structural component. Firms that are uncertain about the strength of the recovery are unlikely to invest or to rehire workers. At low interest rate levels and high labour market rigidities, firms tend to favour capital intensive investments over hiring. Yet, developments during the second recessionary episode in Europe differ from those observed at the beginning of the crisis. During the Great Recession, unemployment rose, as there was a shortage of vacancies. However, during the second recessionary dip, unemployment increased, although aggregate vacancy rates remained close to long-term averages. In addition, the second recessionary period led not only to extensive, but also to very persistent job losses in some euro area economies. The proportion of people in long-term unemployment rose substantially. This is particularly worrisome, as it reduces the chances that they will be rehired: if workers are unemployed for a long period of time, their skills might simply erode. Long spells of unemployment may thus easily turn into structural unemployment. Indeed, the mere fact that firms are willing to hire, but people willing to work are unable to find a job is already indicative of structural factors playing a role. Estimates suggest that structural unemployment in the euro area, which was already high prior to the crisis, rose by about 17% from 2008 to 2013.1 Structural unemployment is not only distressing for those                                                 1 The European Commission, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) use different estimation methods, resulting on average in structural unemployment being estimated at 8.8% in 2008 and 10.3% in 2013. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  affected, but can have a substantial impact on potential output in the longer term. It is essential, therefore, to avoid hysteresis effects from rises in spells of long-term unemployment. Particularly in countries that were hard hit, a large part of the decline in employment can be attributed to certain sectors. For instance, in Estonia, Ireland and Spain, the previously oversized construction sectors had to downsize substantially. The Spanish construction sector alone has accounted for around half of all job losses in the country since the start of the crisis. Moreover, such a collapse in the construction sector has an enormous impact further down the production chain. So, the number of people affected – for instance those providing building materials or real estate services – is estimated to be much greater than the 1.8 million who lost jobs in the construction sector. The resulting mismatch between the skills offered by unemployed workers and those that employers require explains why vacancies are not filled, despite people being willing to work. In fact, skills mismatch has increased noticeably in the euro area and seems to be becoming more entrenched.2 Potential solutions to increase high qualified employment If labour market developments are so heterogeneous across countries, why don’t the unemployed simply move to places where the demand for labour is higher? Indeed, labour mobility is a powerful tool for tackling high localised unemployment levels and alleviating emerging bottlenecks in faster-growing euro area economies. That is why labour mobility is a core element of a successful currency union. It leads to a better match between workers’ skills and employers’ demands. In economic jargon, it aids factor re-allocation by moving labour to where it is needed, which in turn contributes to overall growth in a monetary union and acts as an effective adjustment mechanism. So, how does Europe fare in terms of labour mobility? The free movement of workers is a fundamental right enshrined in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. But how much use do citizens make of this right in practice? Since the enlargement of the European Union (EU) in 2004, labour market mobility has certainly risen, albeit from very low levels.3 [The number of EU workers residing in another EU country rose from 4.7 million in 2005 to 8 million in 2013, representing an increase from 2.1% to 3.3% of the total labour force.] The crisis boosted intra-EU mobility. Some studies suggest that the migration response to the crisis might have been even stronger in the EU than in the United States.4 This is quite remarkable given that the United States is often taken as a benchmark for mobility. Moreover, it has sizeable macroeconomic effects: estimates suggest that post-enlargement mobility flows over the period 2004–09 increased the GDP of the EU15 by around 1%. The impact on the GDP of major destination countries for migration, such as Ireland, Spain, Italy and the United Kingdom was even higher. Increased labour mobility is certainly good news – both for originating and destination countries. Another piece of potentially good news is that the level of education that migrants                                                 2 Ad hoc task force of the European System of Central Banks, “Comparisons and contrasts of the impact of the crisis on euro area labour markets”, Occasional Paper Series, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, forthcoming. 3 OECD Economic Surveys: European Union 2014, http://www.oecd.org/eco/surveys/economic-survey-european-union.htm. 4 Jauer, J., Liebig, T., Martin, J. and Puhani, P., “Migration as an adjustment mechanism in the crisis? A comparison of Europe and the United States”, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, No 155, http://www.oecd.org/eu/Adjustment-mechanism.pdf. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  bring to their destination countries has improved. With highly-skilled people willing to move for work, skills shortages in destination countries could be compensated for by workers emigrating from other countries. At least, this is how it should work ideally. What is worrying, however, is that many intra-EU migrant workers are employed below their skills level. The resulting underutilisation of human capital shows that reforms are needed to improve the efficiency of cross-border mobility in order to fully reap the benefits of workers’ migration. One issue is that recognition of qualifications remains uneven across EU Member States. According to a recent survey5, current procedures that tend to be cumbersome could easily be replaced by more automatic ones: more than 90% of requests submitted result in the qualifications being recognised. But even if their qualifications have been recognised, migrants might simply not be able to take up a position matching their level of education owing to lack of language skills. More training in this area would certainly be welcome. Beyond efforts at Member State level, the reformed European Social Fund could be instrumental in this respect. Among other things, its objectives include investment “in education, skills and lifelong learning”, as well as measures for “promoting employment and supporting labour mobility”. It is up to the European Commission and the Member States to make the most out of the opportunity for mobility through operational programmes, such as language courses or exchange programmes. Another barrier to workers moving from one country to another is that they are uncertain as to what will happen if they cannot find employment immediately. Unemployment benefits are transferable only to a limited extent. EU law has been adjusted accordingly and now needs to be implemented rigorously. The same applies for the transferability of pension rights. To summarise, adjustment through mobility is not merely a theoretical concept, but a European reality. However, there is scope for both more inter-regional and more inter-country labour mobility. Mobility is not the sole answer, though. After all, employment will rise once firms are willing to hire. And they will do so if conditions are favourable. While policy-makers cannot interfere with employers’ decisions, they can certainly provide the right setting and eliminate barriers to more efficient labour markets. Euro area countries simply need to achieve the labour market flexibility that is compatible with membership of a monetary union. Traditionally, policy-makers have focused on passive labour market policies, such as unemployment benefits that are de-linked from incentives to find a job. In my view, such policies should be complemented by more active policies, such as job-search assistance and targeted productivity-enhancing training measures to foster employability. To ensure sustainable economic development, reforms are necessary and beneficial for countries that are currently facing high unemployment rates. Countries with more rapidly ageing populations also need to prepare, as they might soon face bottlenecks in labour supply. Some of these countries are already confronted with skills shortages. Just to give you an example of the implications: according to an OECD survey, potential GDP growth in Germany could decline to below 1% soon after 2020 as a result of an ageing population and skills shortages.6 Once I met a boy who said that his professional ambition was to become a pensioner like his grandfather. When I explained that this was related to age, he said that alternatively he                                                 5 OECD Economic Surveys: European Union 2014, http://www.oecd.org/eco/surveys/economic-survey-european-union.htm. 6 OECD Economic Surveys: Germany 2014, http://www.oecd.org/eco/Germany-Overview-2014.pdf. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  would accept to be an unemployment beneficiary like his father. Sadly, today he is in and out of prison. You see how wrong mind sets on fundamental values like work lead to social disruption. The same applies to the belief that you must only make an effort once and then live off your diploma for the rest of your life. Technological and demographic changes affect skill renewal and knowledge transmission. More frequent skill upgrades in life cycles and better social usage of the swelling so-called non-productive age cohorts are challenges to intergenerational knowledge transmission. The fraction of the elderly in the population will increase tremendously, while the fraction of those who produce resources is going to decline. This overall loss in productivity will also affect capital, rates of return on capital will go down at a moment when pension funds are already stretched. This is known under the catch phrase “asset market meltdown”. Even in Luxembourg, the annual growth rate of GDP per capita, or better per employee, has strongly decreased. The question is, can you mitigate the effects of ageing societies by a rise in human capital? Research at Goethe University has shown that “the projected fall in the rate of return on capital of 0.8 p.p. would be just 0.5 p.p. in the case of adjustments in human capital through better education.” Life-long learning, therefore also includes making better social use of the old. A University in an environment of finite financial resources has to address the challenge of including vocational training in its strategic spanning, in order to reap organisational and logistic gains in efficiency. A better use of facilities, resources and synergies increase financial efficiency and extend the sense of ownership of the University in the population at large. Of course, we must not forget the priority task of a University and the principle that quantity cannot replace quality. Striving for excellence must remain the guiding principle, especially in a country where the risks of complacency rise by the day. Conclusion On that note, I shall draw to a close. Unemployment in the euro area remains at unacceptably high levels. In order to tackle it effectively, we need to embark on a triad of measures: increased mobility, enhanced flexibility and optimal education. And this is why, at the beginning of my remarks today, I said that well-educated, highly-skilled people like you can make a difference. So, let me conclude by wishing all of you a very successful 2014/2015 academic year! Thank you to the departing President Rolf Tarrach, and all the best to the incoming President Rainer Klump. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Haruhiko Kuroda: The role of foreign financial institutions in Japan’s financial system Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting held by the International Bankers Association of Japan, Tokyo, 29 September 2014. *      *      * Introduction Thank you for having me at this event commemorating the 30th anniversary of the International Bankers Association of Japan or the IBA Japan. The IBA is a business association for foreign banks, securities firms, and other associated financial services firms operating in Japan. Since its establishment in 1984, the IBA has been making a substantial contribution to economic and financial developments in Japan. I wholeheartedly honor the 30th anniversary of the IBA Japan and pay respect for its constant efforts to date. To start with, let me look back on the developments in the cross-border integration of financial markets and the role foreign financial institutions have been playing during the 30 years since the IBA Japan was established. Then, I will touch on the importance of financial system stability from a central bank’s perspective, and close my speech by briefly explaining the Bank of Japan’s monetary policy management. Financial globalization and financial system stability The establishment of the IBA in 1984 coincided with the publication of the report by the joint Japan-U.S. working group on the yen/dollar exchange rate, financial and capital market issues. The report of the working group included the liberalization of, and the entry of foreign financial institutions into, Japan’s financial markets, as well as the development of the Euro-yen market in order to promote, so to speak, the opening of Japan’s financial markets to the rest of the world. In the 30 years since the publication of the report, the globalization of the economy and the financial system has progressed significantly. With the globalization of the financial system and the growing cross-border integration of financial markets, the role played by foreign financial institutions in Japan has been quite significant. Many foreign financial institutions that have started business one after another in Japan have been playing a leading role in Japan’s financial markets in various aspects, including the adoption of new financial technologies, the development of new markets, and the introduction of advanced risk management methods. In addition, they have played an important role in tightly linking financial markets across borders. The economic and financial globalization has proceeded rapidly in recent years first in advanced economies, then involving emerging economies. Naturally, such developments are part of the process of increasing the interdependence of financial systems in different countries. In case there is a shock in a market, its effects will spread globally and immediately. That suggests that financial system stability needs to be achieved on a global basis, not in each individual country. In fact, the global financial crisis triggered by the collapse of Lehman Brothers has made it clear that the impact of the manifestation of a risk in globalized markets can be severe and spread to a wide range of areas. Although Japan’s financial system was relatively robust when the crisis struck, it was not immune to the crisis. Looking back at the situation, there was a large impact on Japan’s financial markets. That included heightened concern over counterparty risk in the money market, the distortion of pricing in financial markets due to a liquidity shortage, and a decline in the functioning of the CP and corporate bond markets. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Unfortunately, there are not a few foreign financial institutions that had to cut back their activities in Japan following the crisis. Stability and functioning of the financial system It has become a shared recognition on a global basis that, to avert the reemergence of a financial crisis, it is important to analyze and assess the risks in the entire financial system as well as to take adequate measures to prevent systemic risk from manifesting itself. It is the so-called emphasis on a macroprudential perspective. Various international forums such as the Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision are vigorously examining the substantial reform of international financial regulation. In line with those developments, individual countries have been independently strengthening regulations and substantially reviewing the supervisory system on financial institutions. One of the aspects of a stronger macroprudential approach both on regulatory and supervisory fronts might be to clean up individual problems that have surfaced in the process of the global financial crisis. The cleaning up includes ensuring the soundness of individual financial institutions, solving the too-big-to-fail problem and thereby preventing the moral hazard problem, and avoiding taxpayers’ burden in the resolution of failed financial institutions. During the past decades, financial business has become increasingly sophisticated and complex, financial systems have globalized, and financial markets have integrated across borders. In this context, we should pay more attention to another aspect, to strengthen the financial system as a whole on a global basis. Therefore, it is critical to bear in mind the interconnectedness of financial institutions through market transactions and to gauge more extensively overall changes in financial institutions and financial markets that compose the financial system. On that basis, it is also critical to implement a wide range of initiatives to maintain financial system stability. In implementing the initiatives to enhance the stability of the financial system, we should not ignore initiatives to enhance its functioning so that the system can firmly support sustainable economic growth from the financial side. It appears that financial institutions’ role to support firms’ innovation and growth strategy from the financial side, is only bound to become larger in the future. Financial institutions play a variety of roles in encouraging firms’ growth, such as developing new financial products corresponding to social changes, providing efficient settlement services and risk-hedging measures, as well as supporting M&As and reorganizations of firms. It is extremely important for financial institutions to enhance such roles constantly. Going forward, from a perspective of supporting Japan’s economic growth from the financial side, I strongly hope that foreign financial institutions will continue to implement new initiatives while responding to changes in the surrounding environment. While taking account of changes including financial and economic globalization, the Bank of Japan will continue to make efforts to strengthen the functioning of Japan’s financial markets by enhancing payment and settlement services, including the development of the new Bank of Japan Financial Network System, the so-called BOJ-NET, and the extension of its operating hours, and by participating in initiatives to improve market practices, while closely cooperating with market participants. A macroprudential perspective for a central bank Now, let me further talk on the issues of financial stability and a macroprudential perspective for a central bank while taking into account their relationship with monetary policy. Monetary policy aims at ensuring price stability and does not aim at ensuring the stability of the financial system. However, there is a close relationship between monetary policy and the stability of the financial system. To begin with, monetary policy has a substantial impact not only on price stability but also on financial system stability through its effects on financial intermediation and various asset prices. For example, central banks in advanced economies 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  have been pursuing ultra monetary easing through unconventional monetary policies to achieve price stability while responding to the economic downturn after the global financial crisis. In that situation, investment in high-risk assets such as high-yield bonds and emerging economies’ bonds and stocks has been expanding considerably against a backdrop of declining volatility in interest rates, stock prices, and foreign exchange rates, as well as investors’ search for yields. Since the effects of monetary policy are transmitted to the real economy through the financial system, financial system stability is the basis for monetary policy that aims at ensuring price stability. If the functioning of the financial system declines, the effects of monetary policy will decline to that extent. If by any chance the functioning of the financial system is significantly impaired due to a financial crisis, it will be certain to see an adverse impact on price stability through a plunge in economic activity. In any event, central banks cannot be unconcerned about the stability of the financial system. Nowadays, while a macroprudential perspective has attracted attention in the context of regulating and supervising financial institutions, it is not at all new for central banks. Traditionally, central banks possess the Lender of Last Resort function. While that takes the form of central bank lending to individual financial institutions, its aim is to secure the stability of the financial system and it is not to bail out a single financial institution. In the global financial crisis, the Bank of Japan and other central banks responded to a rapid contraction of the markets by providing liquidity to the markets as a whole through open market operations, such as purchases of assets like CP and corporate bonds as well as unlimited fund provisioning to the markets. Those responses are often called a central bank’s functioning of Market Maker of Last Resort. And it can also be said to be a policy that is clearly associated with a macroprudential perspective. It safeguards financial system stability through dealing not with the liquidity provision to individual financial institutions but directly with a decline in overall market liquidity. In considering a central bank’s initiatives in a macroprudential aspect, it is often argued that there may sometimes be a trade-off between a central bank’s objectives of ensuring price stability and ensuring financial system stability. That point has been discussed at home and abroad and the jury is still out, but at least one can point out that history does suggest that substantial imbalances in financial and economic activity emerge through a feedback loop in which changes in the output gap and changes in the financial cycle reinforce each other. That is evident when you look back on the global financial crisis and the burst of the bubble in Japan in the 1990s. There have been many discussions on how to deal with substantial imbalances including a bubble: to what extent such changes could be gauged in advance and preemptive measures could be taken, or what measures should be implemented in response to the imbalances. In any event, the recognition has become widespread that the financial cycle could lead to significant changes in the economy as a whole. Even at normal times, it is important to appropriately grasp the conditions of the financial system in monetary policy management. Analysis and assessment on risks in the financial system Taking those points into account, the Bank examines risks in the financial system in establishing the guidelines for monetary policy. In establishing the guidelines for monetary policy, the Bank assesses the economic and price situation from two perspectives. The first perspective concerns examining whether the outlook for economic activity and prices in the coming two years or so suggests that the economy is on a path toward sustainable growth with price stability. At the same time, the second perspective, based on a longer-term viewpoint, concerns examining the risks that the Bank considers to be the most relevant to monetary policy management in achieving sustainable growth with price stability. This second perspective includes the examination of risks in the financial system as one element of medium- to long-term risks. Japan’s financial system currently maintains stability and has substantial resilience against shocks. Capital bases of financial institutions have been adequate on the whole, given that 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  the accumulation of capital has continued while the amount of risk borne by financial institutions has increased only slightly. Developments in financial intermediation show no indication of overheating or excessively bullish expectations. In the future, the globalization of the economy and transformation of industrial structures could lead to changes in the financial intermediation function and the risk profile of the financial system. In addition, financial and economic developments at home and abroad would affect financial institutions’ performance in securities investments. The effects of various environmental changes on financial system stability will continue to warrant attention. Analyses that form a basis for the Bank’s assessment of risks in the financial system as a whole are semiannually published as the Financial System Report. The next issue will be published in mid-October and I hope you will have a chance to read it. Concluding remarks Let me conclude by briefly touching on the Bank’s monetary policy management. Although a decline following the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike still remains and there has been some weakness in exports and industrial production, a steady improvement in the employment and income situation has been continuing and household sentiment has been improving. Firms have been maintaining their proactive stance for business fixed investment as corporate profits have improved. The virtuous cycle from income to spending has been operating steadily in both the household and corporate sectors, and Japan’s economy is expected to continue its moderate recovery trend and the effects of the decline in demand following the consumption tax hike are expected to wane gradually. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index, excluding volatile food and the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, is expected to be around 1¼ percent for some time. It is expected to subsequently follow an uptrend again from the second half of this fiscal year and reach about 2 percent around the middle of the current projection period from fiscal 2014 to 2016. Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, dubbed QQE, has so far been producing its intended effects. The Bank will continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. If the outlook changes due to the manifestation of risk factors and it is judged necessary for achieving the price stability target, the Bank will make adjustments without hesitation. I have high hopes that foreign financial institutions will continue to play the significant role they have played in Japan’s economy in the past 30 years and will contribute to the robust growth of Japan’s economy in the future. With such hopes, let me conclude my speech today. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Timothy Lane: Are we there yet? The United States and Canada after the global financial crisis Remarks by Mr Timothy Lane, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, 24 September 2014. *      *      * Introduction It is a pleasure to be here at Carleton University. It has been a long time since I was a student here, but I still get caught up in the back-to-school feeling of September. It’s a time of fresh starts and renewed energy. Today I would like to talk about the economies of the United States and Canada and how our economic ties are evolving as the recovery from the financial crisis of 2008–09 continues. I will discuss the impact on Canada of the Federal Reserve’s unconventional monetary policies, and how Canada will be affected as these policies are gradually brought back to normal. While there are risks associated with this process, the Bank of Canada sees it as a positive sign that the U.S. economy is experiencing its own fresh start and gaining renewed energy. Ties that bind ... sort of Let me start with the ties between the United States and Canada. We are more than neighbours; perhaps we are more like fourth-year roommates. Economically, we need each other and have strong links. Over the years, we’ve been through good times and bad. We live comfortably together, provided that we respect each other’s space. On the whole, having our fortunes linked with those of the United States works in Canada’s favour. Our businesses can take advantage of the opportunities of a much larger market. That means more jobs in Canada. But, over the past several years, we have also been reminded that these strong ties expose us to adverse forces in times of stress. The old cliché is that “when the U.S. sneezes, Canada catches a cold.” There is an element of truth to that adage, but it only goes so far. Our economies do not move perfectly in sync, partly because they are structurally different: most obviously, ours is much more reliant on natural resources. And despite the strong influence of the United States, as economic policy-makers in Canada, we have plenty of scope to follow a different path. To explore these ties – particularly as they relate to my own field, monetary policy – let’s take a closer look at the financial crisis of 2008–09, the subsequent worldwide recession and the bumpy recovery. First, I’ll talk briefly about how Canada’s experience through that period has been similar to, yet different from, that of the United States. Then I’ll elaborate on where we are now, the challenges facing policy-makers in the United States, and what they mean for Canada. Tales of a global recession The financial crisis, which started with an overheated and precariously financed U.S. housing market, did not just affect Canada – it triggered a worldwide recession. In 2008, the dramatic failure of Lehman Brothers was effective, if nothing else, in concentrating minds: the world looked into the abyss and took notice. In a historic display of consensus, the G-7 agreed to take whatever steps were required to stem the crisis. They lowered policy interest rates sharply (Chart 1) and in a coordinated 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  manner; they flooded the financial system with liquidity to quell the panic; and they stood behind systemically important financial institutions.    These aggressive and coordinated policy actions prevented a financial and economic collapse that could have rivalled the Great Depression. Nonetheless, they did not prevent a severe and protracted global recession, which led to a period of weak and uneven global growth that continues to the present day. Through the crisis and beyond, the Federal Reserve acted aggressively and unconventionally – first to stem the crisis and, later on, to support the recovery. Like other central banks, the Fed began by boldly lowering its standard monetary policy instrument, the federal funds rate, as low as it could go. With policy interest rates at their lower bound, the Federal Reserve also went to unusual lengths in providing forward guidance – communicating how long those rates would be likely to stay at their current level and, more recently, the factors that they would take into account in deciding when to start raising them. The Fed also innovated by introducing large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs), best known as quantitative easing, or QE. QE provides an injection of liquidity into a stalled economy through the central bank’s purchases of financial assets such as government bonds and mortgage-backed securities. These operations have had pervasive effects on financial markets – not only in the United States but globally. They work through a variety of channels, including by pushing down long-term interest rates and the external value of the U.S. dollar and pushing up the prices of risky financial assets such as equities (Chart 2).  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3    As a related effect, these operations by the Federal Reserve – together with the unconventional policies of central banks of other major economies – have pushed the volatility of financial assets down to near historically low levels (Chart 3). The resulting exceptionally buoyant financial conditions suggest that risk and vulnerability have increased in the financial system. But, during this period, returning the United States to sustained economic growth has been of paramount importance.    While there was some concern that QE could have resulted in runaway inflation, that hasn’t happened. In fact, the U.S. economy remained weak and inflation mainly below the Federal Reserve’s target. That’s because QE was being carried out in the context of the widespread 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  private sector deleveraging after the financial crisis; and, despite the unprecedented scale of the operations, it was still not enough to break the economy out of its post-crisis funk. Canada: innocent bystander? Here in Canada, we didn’t have a homegrown financial crash. While the Bank of Canada acted promptly and aggressively to provide liquidity to keep financial markets functioning, no banks had to be rescued and house prices didn’t plunge. This is not to say we were lily pure. In fact, in 2007, a specialized Canadian market collapsed – the market for non-bank-sponsored asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP). It was only through timely and forceful action by the public and private sectors that this situation was resolved without generating wider fallout. Nevertheless, the recession in Canada was painful. This was mainly because our exports collapsed. It’s not just that about three-quarters of our exports go to the United States, but also that they are linked to sectors of the U.S. economy, such as housing and business investment, that fared particularly badly in the recession. To get us through this period of very weak exports, we also relied on stimulative monetary policy. Like the United States and other advanced economies, we lowered rates to their “effective lower bound” – in our case, 1/4 per cent. Unlike the United States, we did not need QE, although we did provide forward guidance for our policy rate, itself a form of unconventional monetary policy, for the year following April 2009. Our financial system was more robust, so easy monetary policy was transmitted into expanding credit for Canadian households and companies. In contrast with the United States, we had a buoyant, albeit uneven, housing market through the recession and beyond. Another important factor is that natural resource prices remained at elevated levels, so our resource industries recovered quickly. These prices were supported by the strong growth in China and other emerging-market economies, which slowed down with the global recession but quickly picked up again. The resource economy powered ahead, boosting disposable incomes, employment, engineering investment and government revenues. Canada bounced back quickly. By late 2010, we had passed the pre-crisis peak in GDP and employment – we were out of the recovery and into the expansion. At the Bank of Canada, we saw a need to get interest rates off the floor and raised them in a series of steps to 1 per cent. But then we were in for a round of disappointments and challenges of our own. As Canada’s recovery unfolded, our economy became increasingly unbalanced. Our non-energy exports, after picking up quickly, stalled well below their pre-recession level (Chart 4). Economic growth became increasingly reliant on building more and more homes, mortgaged at rock-bottom interest rates and driving up the indebtedness of Canadians to unprecedented levels (Chart 5). That source of growth was increasingly tapped out. And it built up vulnerabilities in our financial system, which could spell trouble down the road. Another disappointment was that, last year, even as the U.S. economy began to strengthen, Canadian non-energy exports did not pick up as expected. Why not? This is a puzzle we are much closer to understanding – but our understanding is still imperfect. I won’t dwell on this topic, as my colleagues have already said a lot about our weak export sector.1 Suffice to say that weak exports have meant that Canada has had to rely on exceptional monetary policy stimulus for even longer than we expected. Our policy interest rate has stayed at 1 per cent since 2010.                                                 1 S. Poloz, “Float of the Loonie,” Speech delivered to the Société de développement économique de Drummondville in Drummondville, Quebec, on 16 September 2014. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5       What effects did the Federal Reserve’s unconventional monetary policies have on Canada during this period? Our analysis indicates that, for Canada, their net effect has been positive. The Fed’s policies have pushed down our market interest rates and, by promoting U.S. growth, have added to the demand for our exports. On the downside, these policies may have been one of the factors putting upward pressure on the Canadian dollar. But, on balance, the effects have been positive for Canada. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Morning in America? So where are we now, in this long process of getting back to sustained economic growth? The U.S. economy is in expansion, with the private sector taking the lead. The headwinds that came from deleveraging – consumers whittling away at heavy debt loads – are abating and the net worth of those consumers has improved markedly (Chart 6). And the process of fiscal consolidation – bringing the federal budget deficit down to a more sustainable level – is largely complete (Chart 7).     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  But growth has remained fairly modest. It’s not quite clear why. Perhaps uncertainty about demand is still holding back business decisions and investment. Given the rocky road of the last few years, this is to be expected. While U.S. housing markets are reviving, they are following an uneven and uncertain path, and there is a lot of room for improvement. Home construction is well below its pre-recession level, and the excess housing stock has largely been depleted (Chart 8).    Likewise, there is room for improvement in labour markets, which are a long way from normal. On average, about 200,000 net new jobs were created each month during the past three years. Unemployment, which spiked during the recession, has fallen by about 4 percentage points since its peak. How does Canada compare? Since Canada experienced a shorter recession, our labour market conditions did not deteriorate as much, and were also faster to recover. For instance, by January 2011, Canada had recovered the number of jobs it lost during the recession – whereas the United States only reached that point in May of this year (Chart 9). But since 2011, Canada has been creating new jobs at a much slower pace than has the United States. Similarly, our unemployment rate did not rise as much during the recession, but has been coming down more slowly – and, if measured in the same way, is now at about the same level as it is in the United States. In both countries, the unemployment rate does not fully capture the labour market slack. In both the United States and Canada, there are still elevated levels of long-term unemployment and involuntary part-time employment, while wage gains continue to be moderate relative to historical norms (Chart 10). And here, as in the United States, young people are having a hard time finding jobs, and many have dropped out of the workforce. Our comprehensive measure of labour market slack has shown less slack than in the United States, but the gap has been narrowing (Chart 11). 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches        In all, while the U.S. economy is improving, there have been bumps in the road, and there will be more as the expansion continues.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9   What is the Fed doing? It is in this context that the Federal Reserve has been winding down its QE purchases and has signalled its plan to return gradually to a more normal monetary policy stance, starting sometime next year. The precise timing and pace of that exit will depend on how the economy is performing. Like most decisions, this involves a balancing of risks. Tightening monetary policy too early could plunge the economy back into recession. Moving too late could let inflation take off and require more tightening to get it back under control. It could also result in bigger financial imbalances which, later on, if they unwind, could throw inflation into another downdraft. A formal difference between the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Canada is the Fed’s “dual mandate” to promote the goals of maximum employment and stable prices. This is in contrast to the Bank of Canada’s monetary policy framework: a target of 2 per cent inflation. But this contrast between our inflation target and the Fed’s dual mandate is not as sharp as it seems. When inflation expectations are well anchored, bringing inflation sustainably to the target depends mainly on bringing the economy to its potential – in other words, closing the output gap. In assessing the output gap, conditions in the labour market are one of the main things we look at. Last week, the Fed reconfirmed that it will likely end its QE program at its next meeting in October. This means that the Fed no longer expects to be purchasing additional financial assets under that program, which it has been gradually tapering since last January. The next challenge for the Fed is how to unwind the various other elements of unconventional monetary policy stimulus, which include ultra-low interest rates, a large volume of excess reserves in the financial system and a large Federal Reserve balance sheet (Chart 12). The composition of that balance sheet (e.g., government bonds of different maturities, mortgage-backed securities) may also matter. When is it time to start to reverse these policies? What are the right pace and sequence for each element?  
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches    A key step in normalizing policy will be to start increasing the target for the federal funds rate, which is currently still in a range of 0 to 1/4 per cent. This can be accomplished, in part, by gradually raising the interest rate the Fed pays on excess reserves. The Fed will also remove excess reserves from the financial system, in order to control short-term interest rates. They have introduced and test-driven an overnight reverse repo facility that they will use for that purpose. Restoring the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to its normal size is a process that is likely to be accomplished over a longer period. It is important to note, however, that the size of its balance sheet will not hinder the Fed’s ability to control the policy rate and liquidity in the economy. The framework they have outlined will limit the risk that large excess reserves could lead to excessive loan creation and a sharp increase in inflation. Does this sound complicated? Yes – because it is complicated. But we have full confidence in our colleagues at the Federal Reserve to manage this process well. How will the renormalization of monetary policy play out in the financial system – both in the United States and globally? Asset prices, risk spreads and volatility are at levels that reflect the abundant liquidity provided through unconventional monetary policies in the United States and some other countries, together with expectations that interest rates will be kept at very low levels for a long time. While the Federal Reserve will seek to guide the renormalization process so that markets readjust smoothly as monetary policy is brought back to normal, there is an important risk that there will be some bumps along the way. What will the exit mean for Canada? On the whole, the Federal Reserve’s planned exit from unconventional monetary policies is part of a good news story for Canada. It is a sign that a sustained U.S. expansion is well under way. A more sustained U.S. expansion – a stronger housing market and robust business investment – should help our non-energy exports, which remain below their pre-recession level. As the U.S. economy regains vigour, it should also contribute to improved business and consumer confidence in Canada. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11  However, from a policy-maker’s perspective, the renormalization of U.S. monetary policy will act to tighten Canadian monetary and financial conditions. The same analysis indicating that QE had stimulative effects on Canada should also work in reverse: unwinding unconventional policies will tend to push up market interest rates in Canada and dampen the U.S. expansion. This effect would only be partly offset by the downward pressure the exit would put on the value of the Canadian dollar. In the event that the Fed’s renormalization does not play out smoothly in financial markets, the impact on Canada could be significant. So how will all of this influence what the Bank of Canada would do? You can probably already anticipate my answer: “It depends.” The Bank of Canada’s goal is to achieve our 2 per cent target for inflation in a sustainable way, which requires that our economy run close to its full potential. We will need to assess the various countervailing effects in the context of Canadian economic and financial conditions more generally. Like the Fed, we will balance the risks of acting too soon and stifling burgeoning economic growth against the risks of acting too late and letting inflation overshoot and fuelling imbalances in our housing markets. But that balance of risks is likely to be different here than in the United States. Thus, while monetary policy in the United States has an important impact in Canada, I want to stress that Canadian monetary policy is independent and can diverge from the Fed’s policies. In fact, our policy rate is already higher than the Fed’s as a result of the moves we made four years ago in response to the improving economic conditions at that time. Looking forward, as always, our rate decisions will depend on the state of the Canadian economy. Preserving the value of money by keeping inflation low, stable and predictable is our mandate. Are we there yet? Let me conclude. The financial crisis of 2008–09 reminded us how tightly linked the U.S. and Canadian economies are – for better or for worse. And the economic recovery has shown us that healing after a financial crisis is slow and often painful. The steps taken by the U.S. Federal Reserve, the central bank closest to the epicentre of the crisis, prevented the crisis and subsequent recession from being much worse. And they continue to support the U.S. and global economies through that long healing process. The Fed’s unconventional monetary policies affected Canada through various channels, notably by pushing down market interest rates worldwide. By the same token, as Fed policy returns to normal – which is likely to be a different state than before the crisis – that will tighten financial conditions in Canada. But this will be happening against the backdrop of stronger economic growth. It’s another step away from the dark days of the Great Recession and an affirmation that the hard work of economic reconstruction over the last six years is taking hold.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Graeme Wheeler: New Zealand’s exchange rate – why the Reserve Bank believes its level is unjustified and unsustainable Statement by Mr Graeme Wheeler, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Wellington, 25 September 2014. *      *      * Introduction In its September Monetary Policy Statement (MPS) the Reserve Bank commented that: “The exchange rate has yet to adjust materially to the lower commodity prices. Its current level remains unjustified and unsustainable. We expect a further significant depreciation, which should be reinforced as monetary policy in the US begins to normalise”. Similar sentiments about the level of the exchange rate being “unjustified and unsustainable” were expressed in the 24 July OCR review. The September MPS noted that the economy appears to be responding to the policy measures taken by the Bank over the past year and that it would be prudent to undertake a period of monitoring and assessment before considering further policy adjustment. Nevertheless, it is expected that some further policy tightening will be needed to ensure that the objectives under the Policy Targets Agreement are met. This article discusses why the exchange rate has been strong, why the Reserve Bank believes the level of the exchange rate is “unjustified and unsustainable”, and the impact of the high exchange rate on the broader economy1. It also looks at episodes of exchange rate correction in New Zealand, and draws possible implications for future exchange rate adjustment. What is driving the current strength in the exchange rate? The New Zealand dollar exchange rate is at exceptional levels compared with its history. The Trade Weighted Index (TWI) is above its 90th percentile calculated from historical data. Relative to the US dollar, Japanese yen and the euro the exchange rate is above the 90th percentile. It is close to the 90th percentile against sterling and the Australian dollar. There are sound reasons why the New Zealand dollar should have strengthened in recent years. Three factors have been particularly important in stimulating demand for New Zealand dollar denominated assets. First, rising export commodity prices lifted New Zealand’s terms of trade late last year to their highest level since 1973, and about 40 percent above the average level of the 1990s. China’s expanding urbanisation and growing demand for protein drove much of this. China is now New Zealand’s main export destination, having increased its share of New Zealand’s exports from 5 percent to 21 percent over the past decade. Second, investors have also been attracted by the broad strength of the economy and our higher interest rates. Over the past three years New Zealand’s annual GDP growth has been 1.3 percentage points higher than the average of the advanced economies2. The differential between New Zealand’s OCR and policy rates in other advanced economies, which had been of the order of 1½ – 2 percent since 2009, began to widen in late 2013 as markets                                                 1  The concept of “unjustified” is part of the Reserve Bank’s exchange rate intervention assessment. For further detail on the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s intervention framework see Eckhold, K and Hunt, C (2005)“The Reserve Bank’s new foreign exchange intervention policy” RBNZ Bulletin March 2005. 2  Based on the IMF’s 36 country classification in its World Economic Outlook database. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  factored in the prospect of OCR increases. Countries that cumulatively produce around two-thirds of global output have policy rates between zero and 1 percent, with most having rates close to zero. Meanwhile, the Reserve Bank increased the OCR by 1 percentage point over the period from March to July 2014. Third, and related to the previous point, the weak and uneven recovery in the advanced economies has seen many central banks adopt unconventional monetary policy as the lower bound on short-term policy rates was reached. Central banks in large advanced economies have kept policy interest rates close to zero and injected over USD 6 trillion of liquidity into global financial markets. This inflated prices of financial and real assets, depressed yields and compressed spreads on risk assets. Yields on 10 year sovereign bonds in Germany were recently at an all-time low, France and Spain reached 250 year lows and the Bank of England’s policy rate is at its lowest level since the Bank’s inception in 1694. The subsequent “search for yield” by investors, coupled with excess liquidity and low levels of financial market volatility, generated substantial portfolio inflows into New Zealand and put upward pressure on the exchange rate. An additional factor exerting upward pressure on the exchange rate over many years has been the persistent gap between savings and investment. Over the past forty years New Zealand has demanded more investment in housing, infrastructure and other assets than its domestic savings could finance. New Zealanders’ relatively high propensity to spend means that interest rates need to be higher than elsewhere to achieve similar inflation outcomes. The higher interest rates are also needed to fill the domestic savings gap by attracting the savings of foreigners. This has the effect of putting further upward pressure on the exchange rate. Unjustified and unsustainable When assessing the implications of current strength or weakness in the New Zealand dollar, the Bank focuses on two broad concepts – whether the exchange rate is unjustified and whether it is unsustainable. The Bank examines the real effective (or trade weighted) exchange rate when making this assessment. This corrects the nominal effective exchange rate for differences in relative prices (or relative unit labour costs) between New Zealand and its major trading partners. It is a better measure of overall competitiveness than the nominal exchange rate. An exporter’s competitiveness is determined not just by the nominal exchange rate, but also by their cost of doing business relative to their foreign competitors. Figure 1 shows the movement in New Zealand’s real effective exchange rate since 1964. The current level of the real effective exchange rate is well above its 50 year historical average. The level of the real effective exchange rate is considered unsustainable when it is clearly deviating from its long-run equilibrium. That is, from where the exchange rate would be expected to settle when business cycle factors have fully dissipated. The long run equilibrium exchange rate will be consistent with external balance over the long term, given certain assumptions regarding the terms of trade, domestic and world growth rates, interest rates, and external debt levels etc. Persistent deviations from equilibrium are likely to result in external debt ratios that eventually become unmanageable and misallocations of resources that inhibit the country’s long term growth potential. The Bank considers that the real effective exchange rate is unjustified when the level of the real exchange rate is inconsistent with the economic factors that typically explain its movement during the business cycle. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3   The Bank uses a range of short term economic models to assess whether the real effective exchange rate is unjustified. These models can normally explain much of the cyclical fluctuation in the real exchange rate. For example, economic variables such as commodity prices, house prices and relative interest rates can account for much of the movement in the deviation of the real effective exchange rate from its long term average level. It is important to note that these cyclical variables are not necessarily the underlying cause of the movement in the real exchange rate. They can be proxies for broader considerations such as the strength of the economy and the expected returns from investing in New Zealand that investors compare against other international investment alternatives. Even allowing for New Zealand’s economic outperformance relative to most advanced economies, New Zealand’s real effective exchange rate is above the level that can be justified. In particular, the real exchange rate has not adjusted materially to the recent downward movement in commodity prices – the factor that normally best explains movements in the real exchange rate. Since July, the Bank estimates the real effective exchange rate has depreciated by around 3 percent. Since 11 July 2014, the nominal cross rate against the USD has depreciated by around 7.5 percent. Global dairy prices have fallen by 45 percent since February 2014 and Fonterra has cut its milk price from $8.40 per Kg of milk solids in the 2013/14 season to a forecast $5.30 per Kg of milk solids in the current season. Dairy farm incomes this season are expected to be about $5 billion lower – equivalent to a 2.2 percent decline in national income3. Despite this, in August, New Zealand’s real effective exchange rate was 1 percent higher than its February 2014 level.                                                 3  Dairy exports account for almost a third of New Zealand’s annual merchandise exports. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The Bank’s analysis indicates that the real exchange rate is well above its sustainable level and also above levels justified by short term business cycle factors. Other institutions also consider New Zealand’s real exchange rate to be unsustainable. In May 2014 the IMF suggested that New Zealand’s real effective exchange rate was  5–15 percent above the level consistent with medium-term fundamentals4. The Peterson Institute in Washington DC assessed the effective real exchange rate to be 15 percent above its sustainable level, the highest of 34 currencies reviewed5. Unjustified and unsustainable are important considerations in assessing whether exchange rate intervention is feasible. Another consideration is whether conditions in the foreign exchange markets are conducive to having an impact on the exchange rate. The economic impact of the high exchange rate The elevated exchange rate affects the economy in many ways. The appreciation of the New Zealand dollar has helped to lower inflation in the tradables sector. Annual tradables inflation has been negative for much of the past two years as a result of the global oversupply of manufactured goods, falling capital goods prices and the high exchange rate. This has boosted the real disposable income of consumers. The high exchange rate has also made it cheaper for some firms to obtain capital goods and access new technologies, and provided an incentive to improve productivity. Through these channels the high exchange rate has helped to spread the benefits of elevated commodity prices. However, the high exchange rate continues to be a significant and unhelpful headwind for the non-agricultural traded goods sector by restricting export earnings and encouraging imports over domestic tradables production. It imposes high costs on firms that are forced to exit and re-enter markets due to large movements in competitiveness. Its impact has been hardest on export firms that are not experiencing high international prices for their products, and on manufacturers and other businesses that compete with foreign imports. An unsustainable real exchange rate diminishes the tradable sector’s profitability and affects its investment and employment decisions. It can also result in a smaller than desirable tradables sector. International experience indicates that countries enjoying sustained rapid rates of economic growth have generally had significant growth contributions from competitive tradables sectors and strong international trade linkages. New Zealand’s past experience with elevated exchange rates Since the float of the New Zealand dollar, New Zealand has experienced four major exchange rate cycles, including the current cycle. Each previous cycle has been notable for an unjustified and unsustainable real effective exchange rate followed by an initial depreciation and then a rapid correction (table 1). On average, once the exchange rate has reached a peak, the peak-to-trough decline has occurred over 13 quarters. The average total decline has been 28%, while the average decline over the first year has been 11%.                                                 4  IMF Staff Report for the 2014 Article IV Consultation on New Zealand. 5  Petersen Institute for International Economics, Policy Brief 14/16. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5    Several factors led to the depreciation of the real exchange rate in the late eighties. The share market crash of 1987 initiated a period of deleveraging in the New Zealand economy and this was compounded by the strong rise in oil prices in 1990 and a downturn in the global economy in 1991. The Asian crisis was a key driver of the exchange rate depreciation from 1997. The downward pressure on the currency was exacerbated by a series of droughts from  1997–1999 and the financial shocks of the Russian debt default and the collapse of Long-term Capital Management. The New Zealand dollar declined significantly from 2007, during the global financial crisis. The failure of Lehman Brothers, and the subsequent crisis in the US and in global financial markets drove a significant downturn in demand for New Zealand’s exports and damaged business and consumer confidence. Conclusion Our modelling work indicates that the real effective exchange rate is above the level that can be justified by cyclical economic variables and that its current level is unsustainable over the longer term. The nominal TWI is currently 4 percent below the historical high reached in July 2014. This decline in the TWI is small in relation to the 45 percent fall in global dairy prices since February 2014. We expect a significant further depreciation of the exchange rate as a result of the weakening in price of our dairy and log exports. Past experience suggests that when the New Zealand dollar begins depreciating from an unjustified and unsustainable level, the ultimate adjustment can be large. Some of this reflects the limited overall liquidity in the New Zealand dollar markets, and the potential for pricing discontinuities when overall investor sentiment changes markedly and investors cut or exit their positions in volume. Several factors could cause such a change in financial market sentiment. These include a deterioration in global risk appetite as the result of an adverse economic or geo-political shock, further declines in New Zealand’s commodity export prices, a slowing in New Zealand’s or China’s economic growth, and stronger indicators of economic growth in the US. Under the current US outlook, the Federal Reserve is expected to start raising interest rates in the second or third quarters of next year. A stronger outlook for the US economy would likely trigger greater investor flows into the US dollar on the expectation that the Federal Reserve would begin to tighten sooner. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  In the Reserve Bank’s view, the combination of these factors makes the New Zealand dollar susceptible to a significant downward adjustment over the coming six to nine months. Such an adjustment would be welcomed by the Bank as a move towards a more sustainable exchange rate level. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Convergence in a divergent world Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central bank of the Philippines), at the ACI Phils-FMAP-IHAP-MART-TOAP Joint General Assembly, Makati, 23 September 2014. *      *      * Introduction Last time I addressed your General Assembly, I did a little “word association” game with you. I don’t know how many of you recall that, but I did that last year to highlight the fact that often, the same words we hear have different meanings to us. Often, this is so because of our individual “positions” in the market. In other words, that adage “where we stand depends on where we sit” is very true among you. Last time, I highlighted the BSP’s desire to get everyone on the same page, wherein the same words would mean the same thing. Because clearly that ideal situation of common understanding makes for more effective and efficient BSP policy implementation. This year, I will not do that game anymore. Rather, let me focus on just two words. Can anyone hazard a guess as to what these two words would be? Any guesses? The first word The first word is DIVERGENCE. I chose this word because of late, it has become quite an important word that describes some of the remarkable features of the current global economic environment. First. Divergence in the growth paths among major economies. We have seen that in the US there continues to be a sprinkling/sputtering of positive economic indicators, while both the EU and Japan are still struggling for their economic growths to gain traction. Second. Divergence between the current growth path of emerging market economies and the previous forecasts for the growth path of these economies. EME growth has broadly slowed down from the earlier anticipated growth trajectories. Together, these two “divergences” have important implications for the speed and manner of global growth rebalancing and policy normalization. Third. Divergence in the monetary policy stances among the AEs. Major central banks’ policy rates have remained at historic lows. But while the Fed has kept the phrase “considerable length of time” in its statement, it raised its expectations on the future path of the target rate (i.e., those infamous dots). It also reiterated its exit plan – stating that depending on data developments, it could raise its target rates sooner than earlier expected. My sense is that the markets have taken these statements from the Fed to be of a relatively hawkish tone, and therefore USD supportive. Particularly so when the market would contrast these statements against: 1. the ECB action of offering liquidity directly to banks under its TLTRO (which, subsequently received only a weak take-up by banks), and, 2. the BOJ preparing for further QE. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  This apparent divergence in the monetary policy postures among AEs is not necessarily a bad situation. It should give you in the market some comfort that global liquidity will not be drying up anytime soon. In the BSP, we refer to these as “countervailing forces”. But it should also give us cause to pause… as this sentiment could very well lead to the perpetuation of low volatility in the financial markets. For while there is disparity in the expected directions of policy among the AEs, this disparity is transpiring at very, very low levels of interest rates. With the forward guidance provided by the Fed, EU as well as Japan, helping to reduce some of the uncertainty about interest rate changes, the low volatility may actually lead to further investor complacency. This leads to a Fourth Divergence. The possible divergence in the “true state” of the global economy and the financial system against that which the low volatility in financial markets is portraying. Those of you have been “around the block” a few times and (I see a number of you in the front row!)… You have witnessed that serious episodes of market stress are often preceded by unusually low volatility, which oftentimes signal the gradual build-up in risk-taking. What then does this current global backdrop of divergence mean for us? For our domestic markets? Our monetary policy stance – the reasons behind Our last policy action speaks to this issue. Keenly aware of how our domestic market, i.e., your industry associations, is extremely reactive to US rate movements, the BSP acted “pre-emptively” against the expected rise in US interest rates. Ladies and gentlemen, I have maintained for some time now that, early, measured action is superior to belated, large, discrete re-actions. The latter could create more volatility in the markets in general, and on your own P/L in particular. Therefore, as we prepare for the eventual Fed “lift-off”, you may wish to also consider making only gradual, non-chunky adjustments in your own portfolios. Let me now spend just a few more minutes to speak about our current stance of monetary policy. The BSP has done a number of things over the past few months. We have raised reserve requirements, hiked the SDA rate, the RRP rate and then, recently, both the SDA and the RRP rates together. These we did in response to various factors to achieve the following results: 1. To rein in domestic liquidity growth. M3 growth is now down from above 30 percent to just above 18 percent in July this year. We expect M3 growth to continue on its deceleration path and reach more normal levels later this year.; 2. To help manage the financial stability risks of the over-all low interest rate environment. While we have not seen broad-based asset mis-valuations, the BSP remains cognizant that keeping rates low for too long could result in mis-appreciation of risks in certain segments of the market, including the real estate sector and the stock market as markets search for yield. So far, coupled with changes in reportorial requirements and macroprudential measures, the monetary policy actions appear to have achieved some success in moderating the buildup of “irrational exuberance” in certain market segments.; 3. To help steer inflation expectations. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Our most recent Business Expectations Survey showed that the number of those who expected inflation to go up in the current and next quarters has increased. In addition, our survey of private sector economists shows inflation forecasts that are precariously close to the upper end of our target range. This is particularly true of forecasts for 2015, for which the NG target is lower at 2–4 percent. Further, our own forecasts are also now higher. We now see 2014 inflation to average 4.48 pct, up from previous 4.33 pct, and 2015 inflation to average 3.79 pct, up from previous 3.72 pct. While most of the reasons cited for the heightened inflation expectations are due to supply side pressures, elevated expectations need to be addressed sooner rather than later. These could fuel second-round effects, which may be more difficult to arrest once they have set in; and 4. To reduce the possible financial stability impact of extended periods of negative real interest rates. Right now because of excess liquidity in the system, the industry doesn’t seem to mind much that real interest rates are negative. But ladies and gentlemen, when the tide turns, those projects that you may have “approved” based on a specific expected value may not provide you the “return” you anticipated. With this in mind, our policy actions have been aimed at helping you manage your own risk appetites. Given all these fundamental reasons for the series of BSP actions so far, what can the market expect from the BSP going forward? As I have always said, the BSP will remain watchful. We will keep our ears to the ground while we have our eyes on our price and financial stability mandate. And we will remain flexible to use all available tools in our now enhanced tool kit, including our strong external liquidity position. Validating our position of strength Indeed, in addition to: (1) a disciplined monetary policy framework, (2) a deep enhanced policy tool kit, (3) a healthy level of gross international reserves, and (4) ample monetary policy space we have built other buffers that make us confident we would be able to withstand the impact of the “divergences” in the external environment that I had just outlined. Of significance among these other buffers is our sound banking system. We have had numerous occasions over the last few years to point to the strength of our banking industry. Even before the sovereign attained investment grade, the Philippine banking system had already been cited for its resilience in the midst of global dislocations. Total assets held by universal and commercial banks increased by a little over two trillion pesos from end-2012 to July 2014. This translates into an annualized double-digit growth rate of 16.9% over this 19-month period. The same two trillion-peso increase can be seen in deposit liabilities, equivalent to an annualized growth of 23.1%. Asset-side accounts have also increased, with Loans growing at an annual rate of 14.3% and another 10.6% for Financial Assets. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  What is most impressive is that universal and commercial banks have continuously strengthened their balance sheet for possible exigencies. The Capital Account of U/KBs has increased by around Php156 billion in the past 19 months, driven by improvements in Retained Earnings (Php94 billion) and Paid-In Capital (Php46 billion). To top it all, our U/KBs appear to be purposely leaning on the side of caution. The account “Cash and Due From Banks” has significantly increased. Since end 2012, U/KBs have recorded an increase of Php867 billion or a staggering annualized growth of 37%. Reforms: How strength can be further enhanced As these numbers validate, there is definitely every reason to believe that we are in a position of strength and finding ways to sustain it. This is a feather on our cap. But we also must be circumspect enough to accept that strength is neither absolute nor eternal. Financial markets continuously evolve and the same position of strength can be a marked weakness at another time and under different market circumstances. This is why the BSP has made it clear that we support the principles underlying the espoused global reforms. We believe that there is reason to the global reforms. But we are open to both the timing and execution of the reform details. Bank capital – the very core of banking supervision principles – must always have the capacity to absorb losses from risk taking behavior. These are no longer from your plain-vanilla credit, market and operational risks. Instead, we need to be more cognizant of such issues as liquidity pressures, excessive leverage, interconnectedness, and the bar of governance applicable to each entity with a public franchise to operate as a bank, including and especially for those which are deemed systemic by virtue of their operations, market reach and the unique products and services that they provide. These are all enshrined in the Basel 3 reform agenda. And while we support the basic prudential intent of these reforms, we have also been very deliberate in our roll out of the reform components. Within the ASEAN-5, we were the last to implement the capital reforms for Basel 3. To-date, we have issued exposure drafts for the treatment of counterparty credit risk, domestically-operating systemically important banks, the data aspect of OTC derivatives and of leverage. And while the exposure draft for liquidity risk has yet to be issued, this too has been simulated, much like our prior efforts on capital, D-SIBs and leverage. Apart from the global reforms, we have quite a bit in the pipeline for things that we consider home-grown issues. It is a long wish list, and I shall not go through each of them here. I am fully aware that your industry associations are in constant conversation with the BSP on these topics through the BSPC. For all these to “work”, we need the plumbing. Just like in a house, the financial markets need to have efficient plumbing. This is why the BSP is currently reviewing, not just Philpass, but the whole financial market infrastructure as well. In market infrastructure, the BSP is a vested stakeholder – for whether it is wholesale or retail payments, securities transactions or the transfer of liquidity from one account to another, the backroom of our banks must ultimately meet at PhilPass to effect final and irrevocable settlement. For the BSP this goes well beyond the issue of efficiency. For us, it is about ensuring the flow of financial transactions through the appropriate management of liquidity across financial institutions and for the system as a whole. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Do we really need all these now? Ladies and gentlemen, I just went through 5 compacted slides of reforms... There is much that is already on the table as far as change is concerned. And the honest truth is that the market should expect more. We have been asked quite often: Do we really have to do all these now? In response, I ask those who can remember what it was a decade and a half ago. I believe quite a few of those on the presidential table were already here then! A few years removed from the immediate impact of the Asian Financial Crisis, the Philippines was strong enough to be as devastated as some jurisdictions around us but not strong enough to be deemed resilient. Before then was the so-called Tequila crisis and the Philippines figured in several publications as among the “most likely jurisdiction” to fall next. During those years, changes were also introduced. Back then, the question was also raised: Do we have to do these reforms now? The point of the matter is that reforms are inconvenient because they introduce change and change needs to be managed. The strength that we see around us in the industry is the by-product of calibrated change. And as the Central Monetary Authority, we have every intention to continue enabling the operating environment within the context of a pro-active culture of risk management and financial governance. The point, ladies and gentlemen, of all these is that the “position of strength” that we so cherish today is the result of reforms. This is the reward for introducing the facets of change that we needed, even when it was unpopular to do so. But in the end, it cannot be just the standards that have made a difference. Instead, we do recognize that the market has – to a large extent although not absolutely always – conducted itself in a prudent and professional manner. It is this combination of prudential governance and market conduct that has gotten us this far. As a community, we clearly value it. It is to our best interest to sustain and also find ways to enhance it. Final thoughts At the beginning of my remarks, I said I had TWO words… I have only given you one – DIVERGENCE. Let me conclude with the second word – CONVERGENCE. In this divergent world, where each is driven by his own bottom line considerations, we come to realize that there is no exercise that does not leave us short of breath. Whether it is a pro-active effort or an intervention to address parochial concern, the intention to make us better requires deliberate effort. There is no short cut to this and there cannot be easy wins if it is longer term competitiveness that is our objective. Strength is achieved, not granted. Reforms are consciously laid out, not wantonly enforced. Our efforts therefore need to CONVERGE towards purposeful reforms. If we value what we see around us in the industry today, let us actively find ways to improve ourselves and our operating environment. We are all vested parties and the future is a collective interest. This is the message I would like to share with all of you today. Be part of the pro-active change. Reforms are never convenient. But, with the right mix, they make us better. Indeed, we must find convergence in this divergent world we operate in. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mark Carney: Putting the right ideas into practice Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial Stability Board, at the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries General Insurance Conference, Wales, 25 September 2014. *      *      * Introduction It is an honour to be invited to address you today. Insurance is at the core of the new Bank of England. As regulator, we are tasked with ensuring the safety and soundness of the UK’s insurance companies and the protection of their policyholders. To discharge these responsibilities, we draw on the entire resources of the Bank. Fully one third of our regulatory staff – over 200 supervisors and 50 actuaries – are engaged in supervising insurance companies. But that is just the start. Our supervisors are supported by hundreds of credit risk analysts, scores of monetary policy experts and macro-financial analysts. As a central bank with responsibilities for both monetary and financial stability, we have a view of both the asset and liability sides of your balance sheets. And as a highly active participant in global financial reform, we influence the measures that are reshaping the global system. In all of our actions, we recognise the importance of insurance to the economy. The UK insurance industry makes a major, direct contribution: £25bn to annual GDP and 300,000 high-paying jobs including many of the 14,000 members of the Institute & Faculty of Actuaries. It is a major exporter with about 30% of premiums earned overseas. And the Lloyd’s market underlines London’s status as a world centre for insurance excellence and innovation. But the economic contribution of insurance goes much deeper. By spreading and managing risks, it increases the resilience of corporations, investors and financial institutions. It makes entrepreneurship and trade more viable. And it safeguards companies and individuals from perils they could not otherwise shoulder. From a financial system perspective, insurance companies play a vital role in the efficient allocation of capital. By matching long-term savings and investment, it finances the infrastructure essential to build our economy. The long-term perspective of insurance companies diversifies the financial system and reinforces its resilience.  The contribution of the UK insurance industry can’t be taken for granted – especially in a macro-financial environment that challenges traditional business models. Challenges from the macro-financial environment Of course, relative to the recent past, the economic outlook is much improved. The UK has experienced the strongest growth in the G7 over the past year. Job creation has been the quickest on record. Inflation has fallen below target having been above for most of the past five years. With many of the conditions for the economy to normalise now met, the point at which interest rates also begin to normalise is getting closer. In recent months the judgement about precisely when to raise Bank Rate has become more balanced. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  While there is always uncertainty about the future, you can expect interest rates to begin to increase.  We have no pre-set course, however; the timing will depend on the data. Moreover, the precise timing of the first rate rise is less important than our expectation that, when rates do begin to rise, those increases are likely to be gradual and limited. Why does the Bank expect this to be the case? In part, because the headwinds facing the economy are likely to take some time to die down. Demand in our major export markets remains muted. Public balance sheet repair is ongoing. And a highly indebted private sector is likely to be particularly sensitive to changes in interest rates. Over the medium term, several dynamics are likely to keep rates lower than in the past. UK rates could be restrained by continued imbalances between global saving and investment, together with potentially lower rates of global productivity growth. Central banks can also be expected to accommodate with lower risk-free rates the higher spreads that are likely to result from new regulatory requirements. All of these factors likely mean that, even when spare capacity is used up, Bank Rate will need to be materially lower than in the past in order to keep the economy operating at its potential and inflation at its target. The Bank is well aware that a prolonged period of historically low interest rates could encourage other risks to develop. In the UK, the biggest risks are associated with the housing market, which is why last spring the Bank took graduated and proportionate actions. We are also alert to the possibility that financial markets may be mispricing risk. As the FSB concluded last week, “there are increased signs of complacency in financial markets, in part reflecting search for yield amidst exceptionally accommodative monetary policies. Volatility has become compressed and asset valuations stretched across a growing number of markets, increasing the risk of a sharp reversal.” In such circumstances, insurers’ proven ability to look through such short term volatility is invaluable. Nevertheless, an abrupt correction in term and risk premia could have a sharp impact on the valuation of securities that are marked to market and reduce the effectiveness and availability of proximate hedging strategies. More fundamentally, by squeezing margins, persistently low interest rates challenge business models. Insurers feel this pressure on both sides of the balance sheet: through muted investment returns; and as long-term obligations to policyholders – most common for life firms but increasingly relevant to general insurers that have Periodic Payment Orders on their books – become more expensive in today’s terms. An understandable response would be to move towards less traditional types of investments – such as infrastructure; into new or more complex types of business – like telematics pricing; or into new geographies like emerging markets. All these strategies bring new risks that must be well understood and prudently managed.  Low rates are encouraging inflows of external capital into sectors like reinsurance. In effect, a “soft cycle” in financial markets is reinforcing a “soft cycle” in insurance – a particularly problematic combination. More capital boosts market capacity, but can also test underwriting discipline. Putting the right ideas to work As supervisor, the Bank of England is monitoring closely how these new risks are being managed and how your business models are evolving. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  At the same time we’ll be implementing reforms. Reforms to promote a more resilient insurance sector without standing in the way of an effective insurance sector, and without imposing unnecessary impediments on your ability to evolve your business models in response to the challenges I described. To borrow the theme of this conference we will be “putting the right ideas to work”. Today I want to highlight three of them: • Tailored, consistent and robust capital standards; • Holding the right people to account; and • Global standards for globally systemic insurers. With those right ideas, we are promoting a resilient, innovative insurance industry that supports the real economy. Right idea 1: tailored, consistent and robust capital standards The first right idea is to implement tailored and consistent capital standards to ensure the safety and soundness of insurers.  Resilience against unexpected losses requires risk-based capital standards and robust valuation practices.  The UK’s Individual Capital Adequacy Standards deliver this and were one reason why the UK’s insurance sector weathered the crisis so well.  The Bank of England wants the principles behind ICAS to be applied as widely as possible; to establish as level a playing field as possible.  That is why we support Solvency II. It embeds across Europe the core principles necessary for sound regulation, namely:  • appropriate market-based valuation methodologies; • a comprehensive measure of risk and solvency covering all group activities; and • capital resources of an appropriate quality to absorb loss. Solvency II is the biggest change to insurance regulation in a generation, and it will be live in just over a year. While our shared history with ICAS means the UK insurance industry is relatively well placed, we must not underestimate the scale of the challenge. Even the standard formula, which nine out of ten UK insurers will use to determine their solvency requirements, is significantly more advanced than the Solvency I approach it replaces. Although more demanding, we have worked to ensure the standard formula does not impede your provision of long-term finance to the real economy. Steps have been taken to make Solvency II more accommodative of securitisation. And in parallel, the Bank of England has been working with the European Central Bank to remove other impediments to the revitalisation of securitisation markets, including pushing for revisions to regulatory requirements for banks and for the development of simple, transparent and consistent products. Where the standard formula is not a good fit for a firm’s risk profile, firms will be asked to consider developing a partial internal model; making an application for an undertaking-specific parameter; or adjusting their underlying business model. Many of you in this room are acutely aware of the demands of the Solvency II model approval process. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  This rigour has a purpose. The dangers of using poorly designed models were made all too clear in the banking sector. So the Bank won’t hesitate to withhold approval of inadequate or opaque models. Models must be based on appropriate data and account for all quantifiable risks. Boards have the responsibility to ensure models remain appropriate and to show they are used in practice. Of course, risk-based capital standards are about more than models. Models can never be relied upon in all circumstances or in isolation, nor can they be substitutes for sound judgment. Solvency II recognises this in its three-pillar approach – supplementing a modernisation of the quantitative regime with new supervisory review, governance, risk management and transparency requirements. These requirements, under pillars 2 and 3, build a coherent framework for the future. Tools like scenario testing and the Own Risk Solvency Assessment are therefore fundamentally important. By thinking about the risks that could harm future solvency – and the possible responses to a stress – ORSAs promote the protection of safety and soundness of insurance firms, while providing insights into overall financial stability. Right idea 2: a regime that holds the right people to account The step-change in regulatory standards under Solvency II has several implications for the industry. Risk professionals like yourselves have a central role to play in building models; in using expert judgment to marry quantitative and qualitative assessments of risk; and in making technical subject matter accessible to Boards. Your work will be vital to making these new standards a reality and thereby to establishing a stronger, more consistent standard of resilience across the EU. But amidst our work to embed new regulatory standards, it must not be forgotten that the responsibility for running insurers rests with their Boards and senior managers. This leads to the second right idea we are putting into practice: the people running insurance companies should be more clearly held accountable for their actions. It is now clear that in some parts of the financial sector, the link between seniority and accountability had become blurred or even severed. The Parliamentary Commission on Banking Standards recognised this when they recommended a new regime for the senior-most managers in banks, ensuring their accountability. The principles underlying that regime are more widely relevant. Those individuals that run financial institutions should act with integrity, honesty and skill regardless of whether they work for global investment banks, regional building societies or in the general insurance sector. Solvency II recognises this imperative. It requires both firms and regulators to monitor the fitness and propriety of staff with key responsibilities in the insurance sector. As a consequence, the Bank of England is now working with other regulators to develop a regime for the key people in your industry. That doesn’t mean we are about to extend the banking regime indiscriminately. For one thing, unlike in banking, there will be no statutory provision for applying a “reverse burden of proof” in the insurance sector. In developing a regime tailored to insurance we will also have to consider the particular skills and roles that matter. This includes the central role of actuaries, which is one of the important 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  functions specifically recognised by Solvency II. In 18th century London, the title “actuary” was often interchangeable with that of Chief Executive. It’s your role in backing entrepreneurship with science; in ensuring premiums, reserves and capital are prudent; and in scanning the horizon for new risks and opportunities, that means we are minded to include both life and general insurance actuaries within the scope of our updated fit and proper regime for individuals in insurance. By including your profession in the new regime, we recognise the importance of your skills, the range of your contributions, and your personal propriety. Later this year we will consult on a regime that includes the most senior actuaries – alongside CEOs, Chairmen and Chief Financial and Risk Officers – in our senior managers regime, making them directly accountable for how a firm is run, for their decisions, and for their actions. These senior persons will be expected to prove their fitness to regulators before they take up a role, and the onus will be on them to ensure risks are understood, measured and properly considered. Right idea 3: global standards for globally systemic insurers While much progress has been made on the home front, the focus of the global reform agenda since the crisis has been on putting a third idea into practice: common global standards for systemically important insurers. The goal of this work is to increase systemic resilience; preventing spillovers from the failure of an insurer to the wider financial sector and the real economy. Policymakers agree that traditional insurance activities need not of themselves be a source of systemic risk. Indeed, recent events demonstrated three reasons why insurers are better able to withstand crises than other financial institutions. First, the underwriting cycle is generally not correlated with the business cycle;  Second, the inherent resilience of business models that take a long-term view, and Third, an insurer’s production cycle is inverted as they collect premiums today with a view to paying claims tomorrow. This model reduces liquidity risks and immunises insurers against risks of a run. Insolvency takes time to manifest, and wind-down when it happens has historically been more orderly.  Given all that, you might ask: why the concern about systemic risk in insurance? The answer is simple: The financial crisis laid bare that the actions of some individual insurers – like AIG – can have broad spillovers; that some insurance markets – like the monolines – are systemic, and that the insurance sector plays a systemic role in diversifying the financial sector thereby reinforcing its resilience. AIG was the extreme case of a systemic insurer. That sorry experience highlights the need to understand all the activities in which insurers are engaged, including on occasion substantial business beyond the boundaries of traditional insurance. Regulators have grouped those activities as “non-traditional” and “non-insurance” – including business involving extensive use of market instruments, like derivatives, and instruments that engage in substantial maturity transformation. Where this type of business is carried out in scale or across borders, risks to the system can be substantial. The crisis also showed how particular insurance markets can affect systemic stability. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The Monolines demonstrated how sub-sectors that are excessively concentrated or undercapitalised can amplify shocks. The failure of multiple insurance companies in response to economic stress can disrupt the provision of critical economic functions. It can also suddenly transfer risks to other parts of the financial system that may be ill-equipped to manage them; or shift assets around in a way that can amplify and spread distress. As I said previously, the insurance sector is systemic in a positive way. Insurance companies have different risk bearing capacities than many other financial institutions. They play a stabilising role by deploying funds over a longer time horizons, in a manner less vulnerable to sudden outflows. The resilience of large insurers is therefore important to safeguard that positive contribution to the global economy. The starting point for the application of global standards has been the identification of systemically-important insurers. More than four-fifths of that assessment rests on the extent of non-traditional non-insurance activities in a firm’s business model and on its interconnectedness to the wider financial system. Nine firms have been designated. It is vital that these systemic insurers, like systemic banks or financial market infrastructure, can be resolved in the event of failure without the need for taxpayer support and without disruption of the wider financial system. That’s why the development of resolution plans is a top priority. Nonetheless, given the externalities from the failure of a systemic insurer, it is of course preferable that their probability of failure is lower. That’s why systemic insurers will be subject to higher global standards. The Higher Loss Absorbency requirements, being developed now by the IAIS, will ensure that all of the activities of a systemic insurance group – but especially non-traditional, non-insurance activities – are backed with an appropriate minimum level of capital resources. Given the patchwork of capital standards across major jurisdictions, the first step towards applying these heightened resilience requirements is the development of the Basic Capital Requirement – an internationally comparable capital measure that will act as the baseline for additional resilience. Last week in Cairns, the FSB approved the final BCR proposal which will be presented to G20 Leaders at the Brisbane summit in November. It is simple and factor-based, contains a common valuation approach, and captures all activities of insurance groups. This is an important milestone – one that takes us further towards embedding the right idea of increased resilience for those few insurers that have the capacity to impact the global financial system. I look forward to your continued support as the IAIS builds on this progress to put into practice the overall package of requirements for systemic insurers by 2019. And we will need your support as we further develop, over time, an International Capital Standard to apply to all internationally active insurance groups. Our aim is nothing less than a standard which embodies the principles which underpin ICAS and Solvency II. Conclusion The ideas I’ve described today are vital to preserving the positive role of insurance in the financial system and the real economy. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  These ideas – tailored capital standards that promote a level playing field; a framework to hold the right people to account; and global standards for globally systemic insurers – are needed now in practice. The Bank knows that as our reforms are implemented and as your business models evolve we need a regulatory approach that is regularly reviewed, adjusted if necessary; and that takes account of evolving financial conditions, product innovation and changing markets. Robust interaction with the industry is essential to ensuring the right ideas can be put into action now, and for the future. The Institute & Faculty of Actuaries has been at the heart of the insurance industry for over 150 years, and the changes to regulation, the industry and the world around us mean your contribution is more essential than ever. Having the right people putting the right ideas to work has never been more important. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mario Draghi: Interview with Lithuanian business daily Verslo Zinios Interview by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, with Verslo Zinios, conducted by Mr Dalius Simenas on 25 September 2014. *      *      * The saying that “When America sneezes, Europe catches a cold” was absolutely true in the aftermath of the dramatic collapse of Lehman Brothers in the autumn of 2008. We are now seeing signs of a recovery in the United States and the United Kingdom, but are still not seeing any in the euro area. Does this worry you? What is missing? I am not sure I can agree with the last part. The euro area has, in fact, been recovering since the second quarter of 2013, when the economy returned to growth after six quarters of recession. It is true, however, that the recovery seems to have lost momentum recently: the flat GDP reading in the second quarter of 2014 was disappointing. According to the preliminary information received over the summer, economic conditions have been somewhat weaker than expected. Overall, however, we expect modest growth in the second half of the year and continue to expect euro area domestic demand to be supported by various factors. These include our accommodative monetary policy stance, favourable financing conditions and structural reforms, which should sustain private consumption and investment. At the same time, unacceptably high unemployment and continued weak credit growth are likely to curb the strength of the recovery. There are clear risks in sight: in particular, heightened geopolitical tensions could dampen business and consumer confidence. Furthermore, the risk of insufficient structural reforms could weigh on the business environment. How can this uncomfortable cocktail of high unemployment (11.5% this July) and ultra-low inflation in the euro area (0.3% in August, i.e. far below the ECB’s target of below, but close to, 2%) be overcome? How, if at all, can Europe avoid a stagnation scenario such as that faced by the Japanese economy for decades? We do not see Japanese-style deflation in the euro area, as a number of factors differ distinctly from Japan in the 1990s. Firstly, we, the ECB, took decisive action at a very early stage in the crisis, and have continued to do so. Most recently, against the backdrop of a persistently weak inflation outlook, slowing growth momentum and subdued monetary and credit dynamics, we decided in early September to adopt a number of additional monetary policy initiatives which will complete and complement the measures already announced in June. On the basis of our current information, we expect inflation to remain at low levels, before gradually increasing during 2015 and 2016. Furthermore, while inflation expectations have declined, particularly at shorter maturities, our measures will underpin the firm anchoring of inflation expectations in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. Additionally, our Comprehensive Assessment and stress tests have been rigorous and thorough; this means that banks’ balance sheet problems are being dealt with and that the necessary transparency will be provided on the health of European banks. This is in contrast to the pronounced balance sheet problems of Japan in the 1990s. Finally, a number of euro area countries have implemented structural reforms to increase their competitiveness. Clearly, these efforts now need to gain momentum to achieve higher sustainable growth and employment in the euro area. In this context, it is also essential that governments conduct fiscal adjustment that is growth-friendly. Economists and politicians in Lithuania sometimes voice concerns that the economic benefits of being part of the euro area are offset by the rising costs of having the euro, e.g. with the implementation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, contributions by Member States to the European Stability Mechanism, etc. What would your response 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  be to these concerns? Why does Lithuania need to be part of the euro area despite those costs? Joining the euro area is not a free lunch: it entails significant obligations, but many benefits at the same time. The obligations are stated very clearly in the Treaty and in EU regulations. In this respect, compared with those countries that joined in the first wave of entry, Lithuania has the advantage of joining a stronger euro area. The euro area has painfully recognised the flaws in its original design and taken major steps to repair them. There are tougher rules for fiscal policies, stronger oversight of macroeconomic imbalances, a lender of last resort for sovereigns in the form of the European Stability Mechanism, and there will soon be a sounder and more integrated banking sector thanks to the creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. The euro area has gone through its difficult initial learning phase, and new members will reap the benefits, which certainly outweigh the costs associated with the existence of these institutions. Joining a stronger euro area will increase the long-term prosperity of its members and their resilience to adverse shocks. But there are also other concrete benefits stemming from trade and foreign direct investment, which will be bolstered, especially given Lithuania’s strong trade ties with its two Baltic neighbours in the euro area, Estonia and Latvia. Moreover, Lithuania will be an equal partner at the Governing Council table and will fully participate in deciding monetary policy for the whole monetary union. Do you share the view that being a member of the euro area is an additional safeguard for countries such as the Baltic states or Finland against the spillover effects of geopolitical tensions in Europe (or even an insurance policy against Russian aggression), such as those that we have recently witnessed in Ukraine? Does the euro make us safer and, if so, how? While we currently consider geopolitical developments as a downside risk to growth, I will refrain from commenting on the political aspects of these tensions, as these issues fall outside the mandate of the ECB. As regards the economic effects, the recent crisis concerning Ukraine and the consequent imposition of sanctions on and by Russia has so far had limited spillover effects on the euro area economy, either via trade or financial links. However, the Baltic states and Finland are more likely to feel any negative effects than other euro area economies owing to the strong trade ties they have with their eastern neighbours. But on the economic risks, I would like to add that the European “family” provides safety nets to partly offset the negative effects of geopolitical tensions related to Russia and Ukraine. For instance, the European Commission announced support measures to protect food producers affected by Russia’s food embargo. The euro area is a large market that can help Lithuanian producers to make up for losses from the Russian market. Finally, euro area countries can use the emergency liquidity lines provided in euro by their national central banks, which in turn would receive euro liquidity from the Eurosystem, in the event of significant turbulences in the financial sector. Why is lending to the real economy in the euro area sluggish? What else needs to be done in addition to the mix of different measures that the ECB is applying, such as low interest rates (or negative interest rates for bank deposits at the ECB) and the planned asset-backed securities programme? It is true that credit dynamics remain weak. At the same time, recent trends show some positive changes. Among other things, in our own bank lending survey, banks have been reporting an increase in loan demand for all loan categories for two successive quarters, as well as an easing in credit standards for loans to enterprises. However, we should not forget that credit standards overall remain rather tight from a historical perspective. As mentioned before, it was exactly against the backdrop of weak credit dynamics contributing to a subdued inflation outlook that we decided in early September to adopt a number of additional monetary policy measures, specifically designed to support the 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  extension of credit to the real economy. As they work through the economy, these measures will help inflation rates return to below, but close to, 2%. What else is needed: well, it is now in the hands of governments to act decisively on further structural reforms that will ensure higher sustainable growth and employment in the euro area. Also, on the fiscal policy side, governments should not unravel the progress made in fiscal consolidation, but use any leeway to make fiscal policies more growth-friendly. As regards monetary policy, we remain fully determined to counter risks to the medium-term outlook for inflation. As I said in the European Parliament last Monday, we stand ready to use additional unconventional instruments within our mandate, and alter the size or composition of our unconventional interventions should it become necessary to further address risks of a too prolonged period of low inflation. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Ignazio Visco: Accounting for the long-term costs of the recession Remarks by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the IEA-ISI Strategic Forum 2014, Final Roundtable “Accounting for the long-term costs of the recession”, Rome, 23 September 2014. *      *      * 1. The legacies of the Great Recession are many and multifaceted; they not only affect current cyclical developments, but may also have permanent bearings on our economies. However, today’s difficulties and opportunities, as well as tomorrow’s prospects, are the result of deep underlying forces that were already reshaping the functioning of the world economy well before the Great Recession began. A. Crisis legacies for economic growth 2. In advanced countries such as the US and the UK, GDP (imperfect an indicator as it may be, especially in the face of the increasing role of digitisation) has now overtaken its pre-crisis level: however, the growth rate remains lower than before 2008. In the euro area as a whole, current GDP still remains below its pre-crisis level, to which it might return late next year. It should also be underlined that the weak recovery is no longer confined exclusively to stressed countries of the area. 3. What is more worrying is that the crisis may have left lasting scars. The high correlation between the increase in estimated output gaps since 2007 and the fall in the (estimated) growth rates of potential output suggests that lower investment and higher unemployment (or under-employment) may have had an impact extending well beyond the current cycle. 4. This is particularly worrisome for countries with high public debts, whose sustainability requires a return to steady economic growth, and which may also suffer, as is presently the case in the euro area, from excessive disinflation. And this is why structural reforms and accommodative monetary policy are so much in demand these days. 5. That the legacies of the crisis go well beyond the short term is best epitomized by ongoing talks about risks of hysteresis (the extent to which cyclical developments affect an economy’s longer-term dynamics) and the revival (by Larry Summers) of Alvin Hansen’s 1930s hypothesis of secular stagnation. In essence, this hypothesis relates to factors that generate permanently higher savings and lower investment, in a context where monetary policy is unable to reduce the real interest rate to the required (negative) equilibrium level because of the zero lower bound. 6. A second version of the secular stagnation hypothesis, more than focussing on the demand side, contends that the most productivity-boosting innovations have already been invented. Critics of this version reply by underlining that the digital revolution has yet to deploy its effects on productivity or that the potential from frontier research fields such as robotics and genomics is powerful. B. Technological progress and the labour market 7. This brings us to the role of technology, and to the other major structural forces that were changing the world economy well before the Great Recession: globalisation and demographic trends. 8. The labour market is where we can best see the intertwining between structural changes and effects of the crisis. The latter has resulted in a dramatic increase in unemployment: although in the US and the UK the labour market has recovered, with unemployment rates back to around 6 percent, in the euro area unemployment remains only slightly below its peak levels, at 11.5 percent in July 2014. In Italy the unemployment rate has more than 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  doubled from 6 to over 12 percent since 2007. Youth unemployment has shot up from 20 to over 40 percent. 9. Furthermore, there is also a broader tendency in advanced countries of employment rates to decrease. Between 2007 and 2013 employment has fallen in the US from 72 to 67 percent of the working age population; in Italy from 59 to 56 percent (from 25 to 16 percent among the youth). 10. The critical point, from a policy perspective, is to what extent the rise in unemployment is structural rather than cyclical. In principle, fighting the former is more difficult than sustaining aggregate demand, as it normally implies the reallocation of labour across sectors (and countries): many displaced workers may find that their skills are no longer in demand in the aftermath of the crisis. Long-term unemployment in the euro area doubled from the pre-crisis level, to over 6 percent of the workforce. Globalisation and technological progress are eroding labour demand in Europe. 11. In the last two centuries, technological progress has generated widespread wealth and new employment opportunities. Product innovations and automation may have caused job losses in the innovative sectors in the short term, but quickly created new employment opportunities for the economy as a whole, in a virtuous sequence of cost reductions and productivity increases, income growth, increased demand for new goods and services. 12. Today, however, while recognizing the great benefits for society as a whole that technological progress generates in the longer term, a distinctive property of the innovations triggered by the digital revolution is being emphasized: the high speed with which new technologies tend to reduce the use of labour, with a major impact, both qualitative and quantitative, on employment. In other words, “technological unemployment” is placed among the various driving forces behind the currently high unemployment rates and sluggish wage and income developments. 13. New information and communication technologies are complementary to managerial and intellectual jobs but provide a substitute for more routine jobs. The ICT revolution has resulted, in the US and in other countries, in a polarisation of professions, with job increases concentrated either in the low-paying service sector or in the high-paying, highly educated job positions, at the expense of the middle-skilled jobs. Furthermore, there are expectations that automation in the future will lead to a new wave of technological revolution not only from areas such as robotics or genomics but also from artificial intelligence developments that may further challenge the demand for both lower- and higher-skilled jobs. 14. Given the country’s specialisation in traditional products, Italy has so far suffered the most from the impact of globalisation, and the ensuing surge of competition from emerging markets, rather than from technology. But Italy is of course not immune to the challenges posed by technology. A frequently cited 2013 study by Oxford University economists, Carl Frey and Michael Osborne, estimates that 47 percent of current jobs in the US would be at risk of being automated possibly in a decade or two. By applying the risks of computerisation generated by this work to data on European employment, estimates have been recently extended to European countries in a recent paper by Bruegel’s fellow Jeremy Bowles. With all the caveats that such suggestive exercise necessarily requires, Italy finds itself among the countries where a larger number of jobs would be vulnerable to computerisation: 56 percent versus 51 percent for Germany, 50 for France, 47 for the UK. We may not yet have seen the full impact of technological innovation. C.  Investment 15. This consideration must be seen against the substantial slowdown in the accumulation of capital since the crisis erupted. Public and private real investment fell in Italy by over 30 and 25 percent, respectively, between 2007 and 2013, well above the already high average of 20 percent recorded for the euro area as a whole. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  16. Despite the low interest rates allowed by the accommodative monetary policy, widespread uncertainty about prospective demand growth and the deleveraging by over-indebted firms have held back private investment. In stressed euro-area countries, these difficulties have been compounded by limited access to credit, because of balance sheet repair in the banking sector, and the increased cost of capital, owing to financial fragmentation. Fiscal consolidation has often implied massive cuts in public investment, which may cast a shadow on potential future output. 17. Investment is the linkage between today’s demand and tomorrow’s supply. Reviving investment – public and private, national and European – would thus go a long way towards addressing both cyclical weaknesses and structural challenges to future potential growth. Indeed, as it has been suggested inter alia by Barry Eichengreen, lack of investment in infrastructure, education and training is another possible source of secular stagnation. D.  Concluding remarks 18. In many respects, we are travelling through unchartered territories. Refocusing economic policies on sustaining aggregate demand, in particular stimulating investment, is a necessity. On the other hand, the forces of technological progress imply that much of capital accumulation may further save on labour inputs. Be it the legacy of the Great Recession or the outcome of more engrained trends, some of our traditional policy tools appear to be increasingly ineffective. 19. Central banking has devised new innovative ways to respond to the crisis. Much closer attention is now being paid to the responsibilities of monetary policy for financial stability and, more generally, to interactions and possible conflicts between policies that foster price and financial stability. Macro-prudential policies now feature highly on the agenda of financial authorities. With policy rates in major advanced economies virtually at the zero lower bound, unconventional monetary policies are increasingly considered. 20. Yet, the main challenge is posed by the developments in the real economy. It is here that we must exercise our ingenuity. The business environment must be made more conducive to private investment. And investment in infrastructures has to return to be high in the policy agenda. In the euro area, policies should aim at keeping the cost of capital low, developing capital market sources of finance to complement bank loans, implementing structural reforms to improve expectations of more favourable aggregate demand going forward, reducing policy uncertainty. 21. In Italy, the most urgent interventions are those which safeguard legality and efficiency in public administration. To repeat what I said last May in my concluding remarks to the Bank of Italy’s meeting of shareholders: “Corruption, criminal activity and tax evasion not only undermine the community but also distort the behaviour of economic agents and market prices, reduce the effectiveness of government action, increase the tax burden on those who do their duty, and restrict productive investment and job creation. Well-functioning public administration improves the operation of markets and competition, reduces firms’ costs, and is reflected in the quality and cost of public services and thus on the tax burden. The efficacy of the reforms depends on it.” 22. These policy actions should not be eluded. For them to be effective, they must be seen as a part of a fully-fledged strategic reasoning on the prospective functioning of our economies. More generally, while we try to better understand the challenges posed by structural and technological change, there are questions that it is fundamental to address. Among them: How should the education system adapt to enable the teaching of those skills essential to keep up with new technologies? How can we enable displaced workers to acquire skills which will not become, or are less likely to become, redundant through computerisation? How can public policy smooth the social impact of technological progress and allow a wider distribution of its fruits?  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mario Draghi: Interview with Europe 1 Interview with Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, with Europe 1, conducted by Mr Jean-Pierre Elkabbach on 23 September 2014, aired on 24 September 2014. *      *      * Europe 1: You have already acted decisively in June and September. If unemployment continues to grow, can the ECB continue to stimulate the economy? Monetary policy will stay accommodative for a long time and I can say that the Governing Council is unanimous in its commitment to use the available instruments within its mandate to bring inflation back to close but below 2%. Interest rates will stay at the present level for an extended period of time because they can’t go much lower than that. In Europe, is there a risk today of deflation or even of recession? For the euro area as a whole we don’t see risk of deflation. We see risk of too low inflation for too long a time and for the euro area as a whole, as I’ve said many times our recovery is modest, weak, uneven, and fragile, but it’s not recession. Do you have a lot of liquidity at the ECB? Yes, we’ve shown that we have a lot of liquidity in the ECB. And could you show it again? And we’re certainly, as I said before, we’re certainly ready to use all the instruments within our mandate to make sure that… To obtain more of growth by 2017, 2018: what needs to be done? One talks about developing infrastructure and about investing. How? Where to invest? I said before that monetary policy can’t be the only thing producing growth. There must be two other components. One is structural reforms. We can provide as much credit as we can to the private sector. But, if for a young entrepreneur it takes months in some countries before he can have the permits, the authorisations, to open a new shop he will not ask for this credit. So let’s abolish bureaucracy. Yes, indeed and if this young entrepreneur would like to open a new shop and finally has the permit but he is overburdened by taxation, he will not apply for credit. So credit is the necessary but not sufficient condition to have growth. In your building, at the ECB, when one thinks about France, does one say that France is the sick man of Europe? Well, frankly, I must say I hate this expression of the sick man of Europe. We all need a strong France. We need a competitive France and we need a France where competition lives together with solidarity. Europe needs a strong France. In the euro area, growth forecasts are discouraging. The Italy of Matteo Renzi is in recession. France is around 0.4%. What do you tell French people who are worried about the future? The ECB will continue to have a very expansionary monetary policy for an extended period of time until we see the rate of inflation going close to 2% and that’s something that should be counted upon. But, at the same time, as I said before, proper structural policies and fiscal policies have to be in place. In France, a question comes back often: the mythical 3% of deficit which was fixed in Maastricht 22 years ago. This was in very different universe and Europe. There were 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  not 28 member states, didn’t go through a worldwide crisis with as much unemployment, the French people were not 65 million. Will the time come for the Europeans to re-evaluate, to revise the Maastricht criteria that strangle them? Well, I don’t think it would be proper for me to discuss changes in the treaty. That’s the task of our European legislators. But, for the ECB, it’s important to remind to all of us that rules are there to be respected and that’s the ground for trust amongst member states. These rules have been broken in the past and the result of it was not exceptional. Many of our countries arrived in the financial crisis completely unprepared. What is the main danger, the main enemy of Europe? Well, the main enemy for Europe is unemployment: youth unemployment and unemployment in general. But this is caused by a broader sentiment of lack of confidence in the future and lack of trust between member states, and we have to fight this. Who? You or we? Yes, for all of us. All of us have to fight against this lack of confidence, against this lack of trust. Are there three or four words that symbolize your ambition for Europe? First is investment. Private investment, but also public investment. Did you say it to Ms Merkel? I did say so in Jackson Hole. Not to her, but to every country that has fiscal space. But the other thing that we have to remember is – and I did say this before – we have to restore confidence. Investors, entrepreneurs have to go back being confident in the future and in the resilience and robustness of Europe. And you say it for all countries. Some people wonder if we are assured about the survival of the euro. What answer do you expect from someone who said that we will do whatever it takes to preserve the euro within our mandate? So you still say it. The euro is irreversible. The euro is irreversible and we will do whatever it takes within our mandate to make sure it will happen. Not a too strong euro. The euro started to weaken, will it continue in this path? Well, you know we never comment specifically on exchange rates. I’ve said many times that the exchange rate as such is not a policy target, but it’s very important for price stability and for growth. At the present time, the exchange rate movement reflects the different path of monetary policies in Europe versus the monetary policies in other important countries. Our monetary policy will stay accommodative through time for an extended period of time while other countries’ monetary policies may gradually acknowledge that recovery is taking place in their countries. You were speaking about structural reforms. In France, they’re starting. You don’t speak about government policies. But what do you say? Should the reforms happen? Should they still be implemented even if not all people agree with them? Otherwise, there are risks. Yes, there is a sentence in the Jackson Hole speech where I said that the risks of doing too little are bigger than the risks of doing too much and this applies to structural reforms as well. Many countries, most countries in the euro area have planned these reforms for a long time, have designed these reforms. What is needed now is action. They have to implement these reforms and each country has its own specific agenda. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Otherwise you see anti-Europe political parties rise: in Germany, in Greece and even in France with Marine Le Pen that argues for the return to national currency. It seems that you are worried, what is the best answer to this? The best answer to this, but also to the sense of lack of hope that the millions of unemployed people have in the euro area – the best answer is to do the reforms, implement the appropriate policies and monetary policy will do its task. You have the reputation to have an independent character. Do you think that you make the ECB move forward with the Council, despite some people maybe not agreeing or not happy? Let me tell you, we have a mandate and we have to comply with this and this mandate does require the ECB to bring inflation back below 2%. Close, but below 2% and we’ll do everything that is needed within our mandate to comply with this. So: more Europe, more Europe, more Europe? [In French] More Europe, more Europe, more Europe. The audio and video of the interview in French can be found here: http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x26ijk8_mario-draghi-l-europe-a-besoin-d-une-france-forte_news  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Narayana Kocherlakota: On the objectives of monetary policy Speech by Mr Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, to the Economic Club of Marquette County, Marquette, Michigan, 22 September 2014. *      *      * Thanks to David Fettig, Terry Fitzgerald and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl for their assistance with these remarks. Introduction Thank you for that generous introduction, and thank you for the invitation to join you here today. This is my second trip to Marquette since becoming president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis five years ago, and I’m glad to be back. I’m planning to spend most of my time today talking about the objectives of monetary policy. As you will hear, the FOMC has made great progress in formulating, and communicating, the objectives of monetary policy to the public. I will discuss some of that progress and then move on to some ideas about how the Committee can make further improvements along these lines. I look forward to your questions, as well – I always learn a lot from Q&A sessions. Before I start, though, I must remind you that the views I express today are my own and not necessarily those of my Federal Reserve colleagues. Federal Reserve System basics Let me begin with some basics about the Federal Reserve System. I like to tell people that the Fed is a uniquely American institution. What do I mean by that? Well, relative to its counterparts around the world, the U.S. central bank is highly decentralized. The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is one of 12 regional Reserve Banks that, along with the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., make up the Federal Reserve System. Our bank represents the ninth of the 12 Federal Reserve districts and includes Montana, the Dakotas, Minnesota, northwestern Wisconsin and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. Eight times per year, the Federal Open Market Committee – the FOMC – meets to make monetary policy. All 12 presidents of the regional Federal Reserve banks – including me – and the governors of the Federal Reserve Board contribute to these deliberations. However, the Committee itself consists only of the governors, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and a rotating group of four other presidents. I’m one of those four presidents this year. In this way, the structure of the FOMC mirrors the federalist structure of our government, because representatives from different regions of the country – the various presidents – have input into FOMC deliberations. This basic federalist structure has a long history. In fact, this year is the centennial of the opening of the 12 Reserve Banks and the start of the work undertaken by the Federal Reserve System. It’s been a fascinating hundred years, with many twists and turns along the way. I’m sure that many of you have questions about that journey. The answers to all of your questions – and probably more – are on a website that the Fed has created at federalreservehistory.org. I encourage you to visit this site to learn more about the people, places and events that have shaped Federal Reserve history. I won’t say too much more about Fed history – perhaps to the relief of some of you! – but I do want to draw your attention to one of the things that I think has changed the most over the Federal Reserve’s history: our communication with the public. A hundred years ago, Congress created a system that was designed specifically so that the residents of Main Street would have a voice in monetary policy. Technology has changed a lot since 1914 – I’m told that they didn’t even have smartphones back then – and so the ways that we gather 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  information from Main Street have changed. But this fact-finding is still an important part of the making of monetary policy. Indeed, tomorrow, I will meet with Upper Peninsula business leaders to gather exactly this kind of information. Communication is a two-way street, however. During the past century, the Federal Reserve’s communications to the public about its monetary policy actions have also evolved greatly. The pace of change was especially rapid in the eight years under Chairman Bernanke’s leadership. So, as the Federal Reserve System plans for its second century, I would say that the importance of two-way communication is a key lesson from the System’s first century. In order for the Fed to continue to be effective, it needs to communicate its policy decisions transparently to the public. Conversely, it also needs the public’s input on how those policies are affecting them. Events like the one today, and my meeting with business leaders tomorrow, are a key part of fostering that two-way communication. With that background in mind, let me turn back to the FOMC and the making of monetary policy. I mentioned that the FOMC meets eight times per year. At those meetings, we decide on the level of monetary stimulus for the economy. I won’t get into too many details of what that term “monetary stimulus” means, although I’m more than happy to take questions about it later. For now, I’ll just note that when the FOMC changes the level of stimulus, our actions tend to push inflation – that is, the rate of growth of prices – and employment in the same direction. Raising the level of stimulus puts upward pressure on both inflation and employment. Lowering the level of stimulus puts downward pressure on both inflation and employment. I can now turn to the main theme of the remainder of my speech: the goals that the FOMC seeks to achieve by varying the level of monetary stimulus. Congressional mandates The natural starting point for our discussion of monetary policy goals is the Federal Reserve Act, the law in which Congress created the Fed and defined its purposes. Through the Federal Reserve Act, Congress requires the Federal Reserve to make monetary policy so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices and moderate long-term interest rates. Most economists believe that if the Fed achieved the first two mandates (maximum employment and stable prices), it would automatically achieve the third (moderate long-term interest rates). Hence, monetary policymakers in the United States are usually described as having a dual mandate: to promote price stability and maximum employment. Congress’ short, overarching description of Federal Reserve objectives is the foundation for current monetary policymaking, but it does not address many specifics. In January 2012, in a key milestone in the evolution of the Fed’s communications, the FOMC adopted a longer and more precise description of its long-run goals. I’ll call this short but pathbreaking document the “framework statement”. It contains a number of important ideas – and indeed I encourage all Americans to read the entire statement – but I’ll stress three main elements. The first element is that the framework statement explicitly translates the words “price stability” into a longer-run goal of a 2 percent annual inflation rate. Here, the term “inflation rate” refers specifically to the personal consumption expenditures (or PCE) inflation rate. This is a measure of the rate of increase in the prices of all goods and services, including those related to food and energy. The adoption of this explicit 2 percent target means that the American public need guess no longer about the Federal Reserve’s inflation intentions – either on the upside or on the downside: 2 percent is our goal. Second, the framework statement discusses the challenges in providing a similar fixed goal for employment. It quite rightly emphasizes that monetary policy is not a prime determinant of maximum employment, even in the long run. The Committee’s policy stance is based on an ever-evolving assessment of the maximum level of employment in both the medium and the long term. My own assessment of the long-run unemployment rate, consistent with 2 percent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  inflation, is currently 5 percent – and that assessment has fallen greatly over the past 18 months. Finally, the framework statement describes how the Committee weighs the two mandates – promoting maximum employment and promoting price stability – against one another. Importantly, it stresses that, from the point of view of monetary policy, the two mandates are typically complementary. As I noted earlier, monetary policy pushes employment and inflation in the same direction. But, as it turns out, most shocks that push employment down also tend to push inflation down over the medium run. Hence, monetary stimulus designed to raise employment will also help the FOMC pursue its inflation objective. I think that this point is often underemphasized in popular discussions of monetary policy. The statement notes that there may be cases in which the mandates are not complementary – meaning that inflation is expected to be above target when the unemployment rate is expected to be unduly high. The framework statement explains that, in these circumstances, the FOMC will use a balanced approach to the two mandates when formulating monetary policy. In earlier speeches, I’ve discussed this language in some detail. In my view, this language implies that the FOMC is willing to allow inflation to run above 2 percent for some time to facilitate a faster decline in the unemployment rate. Possible improvements in the FOMC’s framework statement The framework statement was adopted by the FOMC in January 2012. It has been reaffirmed, with only minor wording changes, in January 2013 and again in January 2014. However, the minutes for the January 2014 meeting note that FOMC participants saw the coming year as an appropriate time to consider whether the statement could be improved in any way. I concur: The time is right to consider sharpening the FOMC’s statement of its objectives in several ways. The minutes note two possible changes along these lines. I’d like to explain, and express support for, both of these. First, I believe the FOMC should be clear that its inflation objective is symmetric. Many observers emphasize the need to keep inflation from rising above 2 percent. But in my view, inflation below 2 percent is just as much of a problem as inflation above 2 percent. The central bank of Canada also has a 2 percent inflation target. Its language about symmetry is pretty clear, at least as central banking communications go: “the Bank is equally concerned about inflation rising above or falling below the target and will act ... in order to bring inflation down, or to push it back up, to 2 percent.”1 In my view, the FOMC should use similar language to characterize its inflation objective. Why do I see symmetry as important? Without symmetry, inflation might spend considerably more time below 2 percent than above 2 percent. Inflation persistently below the 2 percent target could create doubts in households and businesses about whether the FOMC is truly aiming for 2 percent inflation, or some lower number. This kind of unmooring of inflation expectations would reduce the effectiveness of monetary policy as a mitigant against adverse macroeconomic shocks. Another way to improve the FOMC’s framework statement would be to describe more clearly how the mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability are linked with financial stability considerations. Many observers, including FOMC participants, have noted that the stance of monetary policy could affect the buildup of risks and risk sensitivities in the financial system. For example, it is sometimes argued that the current low interest rate policies designed to stimulate economic activity will also encourage households and corporations to                                                 1 “Monetary Policy”, Bank of Canada, May 29, 2012. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  accumulate large amounts of debt. We saw in 2007 that this kind of leverage, if undertaken in sufficient magnitudes, has the potential to create risks to employment and inflation. Two other possible improvements The two issues I’ve just mentioned – symmetry of the inflation objective and the role of financial stability – have been noted as under discussion in previous FOMC minutes. In my view, there are two other possible improvements to the FOMC’s statement of its long-run goals that have not yet been mentioned in the minutes but deserve further Committee study. First, I believe that the FOMC should consider articulating a benchmark two-year time horizon for returning inflation to the 2 percent goal. (Two years is a good choice for a benchmark because monetary policy is generally thought to affect inflation with about a two-year lag.) Right now, although the FOMC has a 2 percent inflation objective over the long run, it has not specified any time frame for achieving that objective. This lack of specificity suggests that appropriate monetary policy might engender inflation that is far from the 2 percent target for years at a time and thereby creates undue inflation (and related employment) uncertainty. Relatedly, the lack of a public timeline for a goal can sometimes lead to a lack of urgency in the pursuit of that goal. I believe that, if the FOMC publicly articulated a reasonable time benchmark for achieving the inflation goal, the Committee would be led to pursue its inflation target with even more alacrity. Some might argue that this kind of time horizon is impractical. In fact, many central banks incorporate a similar timing benchmark. For example, the Bank of Canada typically makes its monetary policy choices so that the inflation rate is projected to return to 2 percent within two years. I say “typically” – there are certainly situations in which the Bank of Canada chooses policy so that inflation is projected to return to target more slowly (sometimes taking as long as three years) or more rapidly (sometimes as quickly as 18 months). But it continues to treat two years as a benchmark, in the sense that it feels compelled to explain why it is choosing a different time horizon. The second possible change in the framework statement that deserves further study is to consider targeting the price level, as opposed to the inflation rate. I’ve discussed the benefits of price level targeting, relative to inflation targeting, at some length in prior speeches. The relevant issues are somewhat technical, and so I don’t plan to talk about them today. However, I’m certainly happy to talk about the two kinds of targeting during the Q&A period if anyone is interested. Conclusions The Federal Reserve has existed for over a hundred years. No organization lasts for so long without an ability to evolve in response to changes in conditions. The Federal Reserve is no exception. The changes in our public communications about monetary policy are especially notable. The release of our framework statement for monetary policymaking in January 2012 was a key milestone in the evolution of our communications. But I am glad that, as we indicated in January 2014, we are willing to consider amending the statement in possibly substantial ways. We are always learning how to communicate about policy in better ways. Thanks for listening. I look forward to taking your questions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Encik Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya: Continuing efforts to combat money laundering and terrorism financing in Malaysia Keynote address by Mr Encik Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) Compliance Conference 2014, Sesana Kijang, Kuala Lumpur, 17 September 2014. *      *      * It is my great pleasure and honour to welcome all of you today to our annual Anti-Money Laundering and Counter Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) Conference. Today’s line up of programme and most importantly, your presence here today underscores our continuing efforts to combat money laundering and terrorism financing in Malaysia and the critical importance of the role that financial services industry contributes in supporting regulators, government and law enforcement to tackle and mitigate the threats. I am pleased to note that today we have close to 350 participants representing banking, insurance, takaful, investment and securities industries in Malaysia. I also would like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation to all the speakers and moderators for your willingness to share knowledge and views for the two concurrent sessions that we will be having later this morning. Money laundering is a serious global problem Money laundering is a serious global problem. At the global level, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) estimated the extent of money laundering to be at 2% to 5% of global GDP. According to the United Nation Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), that translated to 800 billion to 2 trillion US dollars in current GDP. UNODC acknowledged that the margin between those figures is huge but we will agree that even the lower estimate underlines the seriousness of the problem. Money laundering is directly linked with crimes as crimes are largely motivated by money. In Malaysia, for the period between 2011 and 2012 alone, total amount investigated for serious crimes by our law enforcement authorities stood at RM13.1 billion. This is the amount that has the potential to be laundered through our system. We recognize that the actual extent of money laundering is difficult to measure. Certain type of crime may not be even reported, let alone investigated. For example, in the case of corruption, if both the giver and taker are willing giver and willing taker, the case will not be reported unless there is report from third party. It also acknowledged by the international convention, that for every 10 crimes committed, only one will get reported. Crimes and money laundering jeopardized socio-economic development of the country Crimes and money laundering would jeopardize socio-economic development our country. Serious crimes such as drug trafficking, corruption, tax evasion are intrinsically damaging to the country as they can weaken the economy. Not taking sufficient enforcement measures on the proceeds of crimes will perpetuate more crimes in the country as the benefits from the proceeds would incentivize perpetration of more and bigger crimes. Crimes also reduce productivity and increase leakages in the economy as resources and manpower need to be channeled towards combating crimes instead of more productive utilization of resources. From the reputational perspective, Malaysia cannot afford to be seen as a weak link in the chain of international efforts to combat money laundering and terrorism financing. Although in the previous Mutual Evaluation in 2007, we received commendable ratings, the coming Mutual Evaluation in November this year will be based on a more holistic methodology where 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  greater focus will be on the effectiveness of our implementation. If we did not attain good rating, the consequences could be high. We do not want our country to be listed in the FATF Public Statement as country with significant deficiency in AML/CFT. As you are aware, compliance with FATF Standards helps maintain our country’s reputation and the reputation of our businesses, including financial institutions, on the world stage. Globally, a country’s rating on compliance with FATF Standards on AML/CFT is often considered as a key measure of the robustness of the country’s AML/CFT regime. Unfavourable rating would mean that Malaysian businesses, including financial institutions, would face greater scrutiny, higher costs of doing business, delays and other time consuming and unnecessary barriers when doing business with overseas counterparts. The impact of money laundering and terrorism financing risks to the financial institutions and financial system is no less severe. We all understand that financial institutions operate on the basic tenets of public confidence and integrity. In the short term, a financial institution that is seen condoning money laundering and terrorism activities will lose public confidence and the confidence of their depositors. The institution will also face higher liquidity risks as funds derived from illegal activities tend to be less stable. Ultimately, in the long term, coupled with higher cost of doing business, the institution’s ability to perform its important economic intermediation process will also be affected. Understanding of money laundering and terrorism financing risks is key for an effective AML/CFT measures For an AML/CFT measure to be effective, we need to understand our money laundering and terrorism financing risks and vulnerabilities. Understanding of the risks will facilitate our efforts in channeling our resources and priority towards areas that would pose the greatest risks to the country and the institutions. Recognising these needs and in line with the requirements of the FATF Standards, at the country level, we had conducted a national risk assessment (or the NRA) to identify, assess and understand specific money laundering and terrorism financing threats in the country, in particular the scale, sources and methods of those threats, as well as the vulnerabilities and risks across various sectors. We will share with you shortly the result of the NRA so that you will have better understanding of the risks at the country’s level. Subsequently, the results of this NRA needs to be translated into your institution’s own policies, procedures and risk controls. Effective AML/CFT regime is important. It prevents criminals benefiting from crime proceeds and reduces crime pervasiveness With the negative impact of money laundering and terrorism financing in mind, we all have a strong incentive to ensure that our AML/CFT regime is effective. There is no other option. Financial institutions, being one of our most important partners in combating money laundering and terrorism financing risks, play an important role of deterring and detecting money laundering and terrorism financing activities. As we know that criminals are generally motivated by money, access to legitimate financial services is a key mechanism by which criminals can realise the benefits of their crimes. And if we worked together, we can do a great deal to help make Malaysia to be a hostile place for criminals and terrorist financiers. But we know that this is not easy. Whilst large majority of those who use financial services do so for entirely legitimate purposes, criminals and terrorist financiers also need access to financial services. And the challenge for you, and for all of us, is how we can prevent and detect that abuse. The good news about the industry efforts to comply with AML/CFT law and regulations is that the vast majority of our institutions are doing a good job, with comprehensive compliance programme in place and most importantly, suspicious transactions (or the STRs) are being diligently reported. Financial institutions (particularly banking institutions) are consistently the top contributors for STRs submitted to Bank Negara Malaysia. The STRs submitted are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  valuable to us and to law enforcement agencies. Based on the feedback that we received from the law enforcement agencies, the STRs submitted have provided leads to their investigation and have resulted in the number of joint initiatives. More than 70% of the STRs disclosed to the enforcement agencies have resulted in the opening-up of Enquiry Papers or Investigation Papers. The remaining of the information disclosed will be is used as part of the database for future investigation. Compliance with AML/CFT law and regulations in the financial institutions require high commitment from all level of staff, particularly the front-liners. Non-compliances will be seriously dealt with. At the international level, we have witnessed banks been penalised to the tune of billion of dollars for failure to comply with AML/CFT law and regulations. In Malaysia, we have also taken and will continue to take strong actions on banks that failed to comply and implement AML/CFT law and regulations. With the implementation of the Financial Services Act, there are various forms of enforcement actions that can be taken by Bank Negara Malaysia including private and public reprimand. In terms of the penalties, the amendment to the Anti-Money Laundering, Anti-Terrorism Financing and Proceeds of Unlawful Activities Act 2001 (AMLATFA) that came into force on 1 September 2014 had increased the penalty amount. For instance, maximum penalties under general offence that normally applies for non-compliances with requirements under Part IV of the AMLATFA (that is on reporting obligations by the reporting institutions) have been increased from RM250,000 to RM1 million. Cooperation and collaboration among regulators, supervisors, law enforcement authorities and reporting institutions are vital for an AML/CFT regime to be effective Needless to say, preventing and deterring money laundering and terrorism financing is only possible if there is a working partnership between all the law enforcement authorities, regulators, supervisors and the private sector. Without that, our efforts will be futile. Hence, for an AML/CFT regime to be sound, cooperation and collaboration is not an option but a vital requirement. Having said that, it is important for me to stress that having a comprehensive AML/CFT framework alone is not enough. What is more important is how effective are our implementation and its impact in reducing money laundering and criminal activities. At the end of the day, the test is on how good we are in achieving the ultimate objective of an effective AML/CFT regime, that is to ensure that the financial system and the broader economy are protected from threats of money laundering and the financing of terrorism, thereby strengthening financial sector integrity that contributes to the safety and security of the country. Before I end my speech, let me recap the following key points: i. Crimes and money laundering could pose significant threat to our financial system, economy and society; ii. Understanding of risks is key in ensuring that our AML/CFT measures are commensurate with the risks, in order for us to protect the financial institutions and the integrity of our financial system; iii. Non-compliances will be viewed very seriously and strong regulatory and supervisory actions are to be expected; iv. Cooperation and collaboration between financial institutions and LEAs are vital for an effective AML/CFT regime; and v. Legal, regulatory and operational frameworks alone are not sufficient without effective execution and overall implementation. Results would need to be measured based on the outcome and impact. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  In relations to the Mutual Evaluation that will be undertaken from 13 to 25 November this year, I wish inform that some financial institutions will be called to meet the assessors during the on-site assessment in November. The purpose of the meeting is for the assessors to assess how effective AML/CFT measures are being implemented by the reporting institutions. We have identified several potential institutions as per the criteria given by the assessors. If your institution is being selected, you will receive formal notification from us in due course. Nevertheless, there are also high possibilities that the assessors may request to meet institutions of their choice during the on-site assessment. On the final note, I would like to once again thank all of you here today for attending this conference and for the moderators and panellists who are willing to share their experiences for the collective benefits of everyone attending the conference today. I would also like to thank the Association of Banks, Malaysia (ABM), Association of Islamic Banking Institutions Malaysia (AIBIM), Life Insurance Association of Malaysia (LIAM), Malaysian Investment Banking Association (MIBA), Malaysian Takaful Association (MTA) and the Securities Commission Malaysia for coordinating the participation from your members. I wish all of you a successful and productive conference ahead.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Hugo Frey Jensen: Creating relations in a digital new (banking) world Speech by Mr Hugo Frey Jensen, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the Director’s Conference of the Danish Bankers Association, Copenhagen, 8 September 2014. *      *      * Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. The heading of today’s conference – “Creating relations in a digital new (banking) world” – shows that the banks now have the strength and resources to look forward after a few years in the shadow of the financial crisis. This is positive and on the whole tallies with Danmarks Nationalbank’s assessment of the economic situation and the general condition of the banking sector. The Danish economy is recovering after some difficult years. Admittedly, the most recent figures show a small decline in GDP in the 2nd quarter, but viewed in a larger context, activity has grown since the end of 2012. It is important to stay focused on the underlying trend and not to become hypnotised by quarter-on-quarter fluctuations. Decreasing North Sea oil output is reducing overall production these years. If this factor is disregarded, value added in the Danish economy is now 2 per cent higher than in 2012 – and rising. The increase in activity has also been reflected in the labour market, where employment has been picking up over the last year or so. Employment is developing at a steadier pace than production. As a result, productivity development is a little jerky, which is quite normal for the Danish economy. As the economy has improved, pressures on the Danish banks have gradually eased. But a few banks are suffering from the repercussions of the crisis and several banks are still struggling with low return on equity. The sector has ample excess liquidity cover, and for this reason Danmarks Nationalbank has phased out the temporary measures introduced to boost the banks’ liquidity. These included the option to raise 6-month loans from Danmarks Nationalbank and to pledge sector company shares and credit claims as collateral. The financial crisis is over, but it has left its mark. Above all, the crisis has reduced the number of banks in Denmark. As the chart shows, it has amplified a trend that has been evident for many years. In our Monetary Review from the 4th quarter of 2013, we examined productivity and cost efficiency in the financial sector. In terms of the cost-to-income ratio, Denmark seems to differ from comparable countries. The figures indicate that resource consumption within the sector has not yet been fully adjusted. In addition, the future slope of the graph showing the number of banks in Denmark could well depend on how the banks manage to tackle the challenges posed by today’s theme – increased digitalisation. *** Competition and cooperation in the new world of banking that awaits you and us will also affect the role of Danmarks Nationalbank. A case in point is the future participation by Danmarks Nationalbank in jointly owned infrastructure companies. I could also mention the issue of Danmarks Nationalbank’s oversight of the financial infrastructure – including in an area that is at the heart of today’s conference: competition from non-banks in the field of payments. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  In Denmark, we have a long tradition of shared solutions for leveraging economies of scale and network effects. This is reflected in e.g. joint ownership of core companies within the financial sector, often with Danmarks Nationalbank as a co- owner. This means that the users – or customers – have also been owners, and the general operation of the company has been placed in the hands of a board of directors representing the owners – typically people like you and me. When these companies were set up, this was a natural way of doing things. It ensured that the various stakeholders had a say, which was a precondition for their full support. In addition, the companies were focused primarily on servicing their Danish owners, which meant that business and competition issues were limited in scope. But over time this form of ownership has come under mounting pressure. The reasons differ from company to company, but frequent explanations include increased competition as a result of international regulation, technological advances, undesirable tying-up of capital and a need to achieve economies of scale. On balance, there can be no doubt that it has become more complex to operate such companies. This has increased the need for strong managerial skills, including the ability to secure the commercial interests of the company. An early example of a jointly owned company where it was necessary to change the ownership structure many years ago is the Copenhagen Stock Exchange. Some of you have been part of the process right back from Stock Exchange Reform II, when the CSE was converted into a limited liability company, to the merger with OMX and later with NASDAQ. I will not go into detail, but simply conclude that no-one has questioned the need for a modern, efficient stock exchange, even at a time when the possible existence of a credit crunch has been discussed. Foreign ownership without the participation of all customers and stakeholders has not prevented the Stock Exchange from raising capital – on the contrary. More recently and amid much media attention, Danish and Norwegian banks and Danmarks Nationalbank have sold their shares in Nets. This has done away with a structure in which banks were both owners and customers of and in some cases also competitors to Nets. It has eliminated a number of rather obvious opposing interests among the company’s owners and provided a more suitable framework for operating Nets on commercial terms – which will ultimately benefit the end users of payment services: citizens and firms. VP Securities is another jointly owned company that has undergone a transition from its establishment as an independent institution in 1980 over its conversion into a limited liability company in 2000 to now operating in a market where the framework conditions are changing radically. The single most important change in this area is the establishment of TARGET2 Securities – T2S – the future trans- European securities settlement platform. At the same time, the securities sector is being thoroughly harmonised. So these years European central securities depositories are changing from being national monopolies to operating on competitive terms. VP has decided to join T2S and will soon have to make a number of strategic choices as regards its position in a competitive environment. As I mentioned earlier, Danmarks Nationalbank is or has been a co-owner of several jointly owned companies. Each shareholding has its own history. However, I would like to take this opportunity to emphasise that Danmarks Nationalbank’s role is that of an authority, including in relation to oversight of the financial infrastructure. Our role is not to be a co-owner of competitive companies operating on commercial terms. For this reason we have gradually begun to withdraw from such companies. The first step was taken when we sold our shares in Nets. Since Danmarks Nationalbank had acquired those shares, PBS/Nets had developed into an international enterprise competing with other companies offering advanced payment solutions in multiple countries. It was clearly no longer a company in which a central bank should have a stake. Furthermore, we wanted to be beyond reproach in relation to performance of our oversight tasks, which also comprise Nets. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Another jointly owned company in which Danmarks Nationalbank should at some point divest its shares is BKS Cash Service. Danmarks Nationalbank and the banks established BKS in order to support a secure supply of cash. We did so in response to several serious robberies which had disclosed a need to raise the level of security in relation to cash handling. At the same time, a number of security standards were laid down, which must be observed by all cash-in-transit companies. Together we have come a long way in terms of meeting the new standards – and we will get there. When we do that, the main objective of Danmarks Nationalbank’s co-ownership of BKS will have been fulfilled. We will still consider security aspects and lay down requirements, but Danmarks Nationalbank will no longer be a natural co-owner of a company like BKS. But as with the other jointly owned companies we will not simply abandon BKS. There is still plenty of work to be done. In due course, Danmarks Nationalbank will retire from the group of owners in an orderly manner. *** Now let me turn to the potentially increased role of non- banks in the field of payments in the coming years. There is a clear trend. Danmarks Nationalbank’s payment instrument – cash – is becoming less and less important. Cash as a share of retail turnover has dived sharply over the years, and this trend is set to continue. Banks still account for the vast majority of payments, and when it comes to new payment solutions, the banks’ products – such as MobilePay and Swipp – get all the attention. But the widespread popularity of these solutions shows that this is a dynamic area which could rapidly undergo significant changes. A recent report from the Danish Payments Council makes a broad distinction between two categories of non-banks that could become significant players in the field of payments. One is firms receiving payments, who see an advantage in offering customers their own solutions. There can be several reasons why a firm chooses to launch its own payment solution, but in most cases it is a desire to provide optimum customer service, thereby boosting turnover. The other category comprises a wide range of non-bank providers of payment services. Their payment services vary considerably, but a common feature is that these services do not include deposit accounts. The providers often rely on existing account structures or payment solutions, are not in possession of the customers’ funds at any point during the payment process and primarily want to collect data – not to make a profit from the actual payment transactions. Non-banks offering payment services are currently regulated by the E-Money and Payment Services Directives. These two Directives lay down rules for e-money and payment institutions, respectively. A major objective for both types of institution is to increase competition in this area. Some years after the Directives came into force we can conclude that there are still very few payment and e-money institutions in Denmark – so you are still strongly positioned in the field of payments. Another – potentially more extensive – legislative initiative is a proposal from the European Commission to allow third- party access to execute payments via bank accounts with the approval of the customers. This proposal was presented last year and has been analysed by the Payments Council. The analysis resulted in a number of recommendations for Danish views, especially in relation to security aspects of giving third parties access to bank accounts. Precisely the issue of security and hence of user trust may be a decisive factor in determining the success of non-bank solutions. And we should not underestimate the competitive value of trust for the banks. Users typically have strong trust in the banks and 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  their solutions – believing that their funds are secure and protected, that the solutions work and that data will not be misused. A survey conducted by Danmarks Nationalbank last year, in which 1,300 Danes were asked about their views on various payment methods, etc., confirms this. One question was the extent to which respondents trusted public authorities, banks and others to treat their personal data with discretion. As you can see, the Danes seem to have greater faith in the data security of banks than of other firms. Other surveys that we and others have performed show that trust – along with price and convenience – actually determines customers’ choice of payment solution and provider of payment services. Experience also shows that trust can rapidly evaporate. One unfortunate experience – funds that are lost, a solution that does not work, or a breach of data security – could undermine it. Trust is one of the banks’ major assets and it must be cultivated – also when it comes to payments. This should be a key element of your efforts to provide competitive payment solutions that generate value for firms and consumers. *** Undoubtedly, the higher trust in banks is to some extent due to regulation and oversight of the sector by public authorities. Danmarks Nationalbank’s role in relation to oversight of the financial infrastructure is enshrined in the Danmarks Nationalbank Act, which states that its objectives are to “maintain a safe and secure currency system and to facilitate and regulate the traffic in money and the extension of credit”. Although the Act dates back to 1936 it is actually future-proof: it does not distinguish between cash payments and electronic payments, and the objective of today’s oversight is clearly defined. The objective of Danmarks Nationalbank oversight is to ensure safe and efficient settlement of payments in Denmark. In terms of audit and supervision, oversight may seem to be somewhat elastic, but that is because yesterday’s safe and efficient solutions are not necessarily safe and efficient today. It is important that the infrastructure – the “tracks” – is always prepared for the needs of citizens and firms for convenient, fast and safe payments. Examples of this are the Intradagclearing and the forthcoming Straksclearing. In my opinion, the banks and Danmarks Nationalbank have shown due diligence by “straightening the tracks” so that the trains can run faster. On top of that, the new, automated liquidity tools provide enhanced security. This supports new payment options, such as Swipp and MobilePay. Without the new systems, I think it would have been increasingly difficult to explain to users why it may take several days to settle payments. For retailers, the Straksclearing offers settlement finality for credit transfers, unlike e.g. Dankort payments, for which retailers only have a guarantee that they will receive the first 4,000 kr. So the Straksclearing paves the way for digital development in the field of payments. For the economy it is extremely important that electronic payments can be effected in a safe and efficient manner, and that people have faith in them. Like other central banks, including the ECB, Danmarks Nationalbank intends to strengthen its oversight of payment solutions. Oversight will be targeted at systemically important payment solutions in Denmark, currently the Dankort, Betalingsservice and credit transfers. This will support safe and efficient payments – in shops, online and when transferring funds between accounts. Since Nets and the Danish Bankers Association are responsible for the payment solutions, you will be receiving a letter about the enhanced oversight. As usual, it will be based on good and close cooperation. Although oversight is resource-intensive for all parties, including Danmarks Nationalbank, I am convinced that Danmarks Nationalbank’s oversight of the payments infrastructure boosts one of your key assets when it comes to payments – trust. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  But how about the “third parties”? Can they fly below Danmarks Nationalbank’s radar and simply get a free ride on the safe and efficient payments infrastructure? No. If these payment services acquire a certain size, they will be subject to oversight by Danmarks Nationalbank. That also applies if the services are offered from other countries, as central banks have a long tradition of cooperation when it comes to oversight. *** Danmarks Nationalbank has decided to set up a credit register in cooperation with the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority. A register of individual credits with information about the debtor, collateral, etc. will improve the basis for Danmarks Nationalbank’s oversight of financial stability and for the supervisory activities of the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority. We are aware that the credit register will involve a lot of work for the sector in terms of establishing the reporting system and regularly reporting information. But not only do we see the credit register as a prerequisite for Danmarks Nationalbank’s and the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority’s work to ensure financial stability, the establishment of the register will also help to ensure that Denmark’s supervisory and oversight instruments are at least as good as those applied elsewhere in Europe. The euro area has decided to establish a similar register from the end of 2016. Obviously, the credit register will not relieve the individual bank of its responsibility for pursuing prudent credit policies, and in a market economy banks will differ – also in terms of credit policies. However, we would like to engage in a dialogue with you about the design of the standardised reporting, so that you have a useful tool for comparing your credits with those of the financial sector as a whole. We hope you will support this work. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Peter Pang: Promoting the prudent development of m-payment in Hong Kong Speech by Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the “Tapping the potential of mobile commerce with innovation” Conference, Hong Kong, 18 September 2014. *      *      * Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 1. I would like to thank the South China Morning Post for inviting me to talk about the exciting topic of mobile commerce. I.  Prelude – a quick recap of the technology evolution (a)  The past 2. Mobile technology has come a long way over the past two decades. I recently came across an article that indicates that in an upcoming technology exhibition in London, a futuristic smartphone will be put on show. It offers a wide range of computing features, and has a stylish screen. If you carry it on the street today, I am quite sure it will have a “wow effect” no less than any other new model that is on offer right now. 3. Don’t get me wrong – I am not talking about any latest phone models. I am talking about the first “smart-phone” in the world, the IBM Simon, which went on sale in the summer of 1994, and would be put on display in London’s Science Museum in October this year.1 4. The model disappeared from the market around two years after its launch. With a limited battery life of an hour and weighing more than a pound, that might not be entirely surprising. But another key reason was probably this – there was no m-commerce at that time. (b)  The present – opportunities offered by m-commerce/m-payment 5. Let’s fast-forward to 20 years later after the birth of the first smart-phone, and get back to the present. We are all witnessing the sea change in the landscape of e-commerce, and are enjoying its huge benefits. 6. Most smartphones are much lighter now and have much longer battery life. But more importantly, what was once known as “e-commerce” is expanded by what we now call “m-commerce”. It is the name of the game. 7. People are no longer satisfied with buying or selling things online using their desktop or notebook computers. They want to do these in both the virtual and the real world anywhere, anytime, using their mobile devices like smartphones or tablet computers. 8. Let’s face it: businesses can take place in the virtual marketplace, but people don’t live there. Books can be made digital, but coffee cannot. We still enjoy – and need – physical goods and services. That’s why “m-commerce” is becoming the “game changer”, as it fills the gaps of “e-commerce” by making it portable and connecting the virtual world with the real world. 9. Furthermore, the penetration power of m-commerce has been significantly boosted by new marketing tools made possible by combining mobile technology with Big Data analytics. Location-based “push” marketing and mobile coupons are helping companies to attract new                                                 1  BBC: World’s first “smartphone” turns 20, Aug 15, 2014 (http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-28802053). 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  customers and encourage existing ones to spend more. And all sorts of creative “apps” are making the “matching” process between buyers and sellers much more fun and efficient. That is the beauty of the “online-to-offline”, or “O2O” value chain, an increasingly vital element of m-commerce. II.  The HKMA’s policy objectives towards electronic payments 10. The benefits of m-commerce are not confined to individual companies. From a macro perspective, m-commerce and m-payment will, no doubt, help to enhance economic efficiency by cutting costs of businesses, make the payment process safer, facilitate price discovery of goods and services, and contribute directly to price stability and increased competition. 11. A study conducted by Moody’s Analytics last year estimated that the greater use of electronic payments added nearly US$1 trillion in global economic growth over a five-year span between 2008 and 2012. That growth in GDP was equivalent to creating 1.9 million jobs. 12. In view of the importance of electronic payment, the HKMA has carefully considered the approach that it should adopt in view of its dual role both as a regulator and a facilitator to promote a healthy development of electronic payments. 13. In short, we are adopting a three-pronged approach. i)  First, we have made it a priority to promote the further adoption of electronic payment means. This is achieved through projects such as the e-bill platform, which was launched last year, and the e-cheque initiative, which is scheduled to be launched next year; ii)  Second, we will take proactive steps to facilitate the development of mobile payment services, and iii)  Third, we will put in place a robust legal and regulatory framework to manage the risks that may arise from these new technologies. Let me elaborate below on the second and third components of this strategy. III.  Embracing the m-commerce opportunities in HK 14. Talking about m-commerce, I believe that, if there is an “app” that would guide market players to search for a place to launch their m-payment business with any of these key words – “market readiness”, “policy support”, or “sound regulatory framework”, the choices to pop up on your app screen would likely include Hong Kong. Let me explain. (a)  Market readiness 15. In terms of market readiness, the relevant statistics clearly indicate that Hong Kong is ready and willing to embrace m-commerce. According to some research, the market size of Hong Kong’s mobile commerce exceeded HK$6 billion in 2012, and is expected to reach near HK$18 billion by 2015.2 16. These online shoppers are well-equipped for mobile payment. The mobile subscriber penetration rate in Hong Kong, which stood at 237% as of May 2014, is one of the highest in the world. Moreover, many of the new smartphones shipped to Hong Kong are NFC-enabled. 17. Thanks to the promotional efforts of various payment service providers, people in Hong Kong are very used to making contactless payment. Some statistics show that among non-                                                2  Sources: PayPal Consumer Online and Mobile Shopping Insights 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  cash transactions, the portion of contact-less transactions amounts to about 85%.3 With such a technology-savvy population, there is a huge market that m-commerce merchants can tap into. (b)  Policy support 18. Now, let me turn to “policy support”. Development of the policy framework for mobile payment services started a few years back. In 2012, the HKMA commissioned a consultant to examine how our city should best embrace the m-payment technology, and promote creativity through competition, while ensuring sufficient protection of the users in terms of prepaid stored value and data security. The consultant made two recommendations. “Soft” infrastructure – best practices 19. The first one focused on building the critical “soft” infrastructure. The consultant suggested that the HKMA should work with the industry to develop a set of standards to ensure inter-operability and system security. We agreed on this point, and worked proactively with the banking industry to produce the Best Practices for the NFC Mobile Payment, which was released in 2013. 20. This common set of technical standards has laid the foundation for achieving security and interoperability among different m-payment services. In concrete terms: i)  Consumers can use a smartphone to download not just one payment service, but different payment services of their choice; ii)  Consumers can switch to a new network or change to a new smartphone without disrupting the continuity of the existing m-payment services; and iii)  All m-payment service providers are required to comply with common security and data protection measures that are in conformity with international standards. “Hard” infrastructure – market-driven approach 21. The second recommendation of the consultant was about the “hard” infrastructure. The consultant recommended that the HKMA should, based on the agreed standards, encourage and facilitate the market to develop a robust infrastructure to drive its growth. 22. International experience indicates that the hard infrastructure to support NFC mobile payment can be achieved through a market-driven approach or a government-led approach. After careful consideration, we decided to adopt a market-driven approach, for several compelling reasons. i)  First, emerging payment technologies are fast-evolving. Payment service providers are closer to the market and are therefore able to make fast business decisions to develop infrastructure and services that would respond to the market needs in a timely manner. ii)  Second, the success of new retail payment products and services hinges on personal experience of the individual user. Here, again, market players, who know better than anyone else the tastes of their customers, are in a good position to develop payment products and services that truly fit their customers’ needs and therefore have better chance of success. iii)  Third, a domestic card association had indicated early on that it would build a shared NFC platform for its member banks, which is able to support over 20 banks                                                 3  Based on statistics from Octopus, HKICL, HKMA. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  to provide NFC payment services. The project would to a large extent achieve the objective of having a piece of interoperable infrastructure. 23. So far, the market-driven approach has served us well. One stored value card company has launched such services, so have four other banks, in partnership with two major card associations. By the end of this year, the shared NFC payment platform I mentioned should be ready for operation. IV.  Sound regulatory framework 24. While Hong Kong is well-positioned to capture business opportunities brought by m-commerce, we need a legal and regulatory framework to address the related risks. With that in mind, the HKMA and the Financial Services and the Treasury Bureau are jointly proposing a regulatory regime for stored value facilities and retail payment systems in Hong Kong. 25. Under the new framework, multi-purpose stored value facilities would need to be licenced and observe a set of regulatory requirements. For instance, it must have a physical presence in Hong Kong and must be a body corporate under Hong Kong law. The issuer must meet a minimum ongoing capital requirement of HK$25 million. There are also “fit and proper” requirements on management and ownership. 26. Of particular importance is the need for adequate consumer protection. To protect the money in the stored value facilities, we propose that such float must be kept separate from the licensee’s other funds, and the float must be adequately protected by safeguarding measures, such as a bank guarantee or a trust account. 27. The proposed legal framework will also empower the Monetary Authority to designate major retail payment systems, such as global credit card schemes, to be put under its supervision. The designated systems would be subject to requirements such as risk management and control procedures relating to their operations, and measures to ensure the safety and integrity of customer data held in the system. 28. We believe the proposed legal and regulatory regime will foster the healthy development of m-commerce in Hong Kong. Results of public consultation conducted last year indicate that there is general support of the proposed regime by the key stakeholders. We aim to introduce the relevant bill into the Legislative Council in the next legislative session. V.  Conclusion 29. As the theme of today’s event suggests, the potential of m-commerce is there for all to tap with innovation, and I am sure there is plenty to tap by users and service providers. 30. The HKMA will continue to monitor market developments and, when appropriate, facilitate the industry efforts in harmonising the technical and safety standards. We will also ensure that the regulatory framework is effective in protecting consumer interests and maintaining financial stability. 31. We believe that these efforts will help maintain and booster public confidence in m-commerce and provide a conducive environment to attract important industry players to extend their m-commerce services in Hong Kong. 32. It takes only 20 years to make the world’s first smart-phone look like something out of the Stone Age. So, I won’t be surprised if today’s latest models would also end up in some exhibition cases, to be surveyed with great amusement, in a not-so-distant future. In the history of the human race, mobile commerce will certainly form one of those exciting chapters which are about how we innovate to make our lives simpler yet merrier. With our concerted efforts, I believe that we will be able to contribute to this new chapter, and people who have read it will come to the conclusion that, for mobile payment in Hong Kong, innovation and safety always move one way – forward. 33. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Haruhiko Kuroda: Japan’s economy and monetary policy Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Osaka, 16 September 2014. *      *      * Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. Introduction It is my great pleasure to have the opportunity today to exchange views with a distinguished gathering of business leaders in Osaka. I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the Bank of Japan’s branches in Osaka, Kobe, and Kyoto. In April last year, the Bank introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. When I spoke to you last November, I said that under QQE there was a positive turnaround in areas such as economic activity, financial markets, and people’s sentiment and expectations. Since then, QQE has continued to steadily exert its intended effects. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI, excluding fresh food) was minus 0.4 percent in April last year when QQE was introduced, but it has improved since then, recently registering 1.3 percent excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike. Japan’s economy has thus been on a path suggesting that the 2 percent price stability target will be achieved as expected, although we are only halfway there. Today, before exchanging views with you, I would like to explain the Bank’s view on the current situation of and outlook for economic activity and prices as well as the Bank’s monetary policy management. I.  Economic activity in Japan and abroad Current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy Let me start by discussing the current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economic activity. Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately as a trend, although a decline has been observed in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike. The GDP statistics (second preliminary estimates) released last week showed that real GDP in the April-June quarter of 2014 fell substantially at a rate of 7.1 percent on an annualized quarter-on-quarter basis (Chart 1). However, this decline followed the front-loading of demand in the January-March quarter, in which real GDP had grown significantly at a rate of 6.0 percent. To exclude such fluctuations, when we compare real GDP in the January-June period this year with that in the July-December period last year, the annualized growth rate was 1.0 percent. Therefore, on average, Japan’s economy has continued to grow at a pace above its potential. More specifically, the employment and income situation has continued to improve steadily, and household sentiment has been improving, although the decline following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike is still observed, and exports as well as industrial production have shown some weakness. Moreover, firms have maintained a proactive stance on investment due mainly to their favorable business performance. In this way, a virtuous cycle from income to spending has been operating steadily in both the household and corporate sectors. With this mechanism intact, Japan’s economy is expected to continue its moderate recovery trend, and the effects of the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase are expected to wane gradually. Next I will discuss the household and corporate sectors, respectively. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Household sector: resilient private consumption In the household sector, private consumption has remained resilient as a trend with the employment and income situation improving steadily. With regard to durable goods such as automobiles and household electrical appliances, the recovery from the decline has dragged on reflecting the large degree of front-loading of purchases. On the other hand, sales at department stores and supermarkets have followed a recovery trend on average. Moreover, consumption of services has been resilient, as seen for example in food service and outlays for travel, where the effects of the consumption tax hike have been limited. Although developments in consumption after the consumption tax hike vary by item and bad weather may have adversely affected developments in some regions, the effects of the decline in demand following the tax hike have gradually begun to wane on the whole. Looking ahead, with the employment and income situation continuing to improve steadily, private consumption is expected to remain resilient. With regard to the household sector, it is claimed that wage increases have failed to keep pace with inflation and real wages have declined, putting downward pressure on private consumption. On this point, it is important to distinguish between an increase in the inflation rate resulting from the consumption tax hike and trend inflation. With the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI since April this year having been pushed up temporarily due to the consumption tax hike, the year-on-year rate of increase in nominal wages has been lower than that in the CPI. However, the consumption tax hike was scheduled in advance, and it is not an additional factor putting downward pressure on economic activity and prices. Even since before the tax hike in April this year, the Bank’s outlook for economic activity and prices has factored in the two rounds of consumption tax hikes. While the hikes will adversely affect real income, such effects on households’ spending behavior might be mitigated to some extent as confidence is enhanced in the sustainability in the government’s fiscal conditions and the social security system. Looking at the recent income situation of households, employee income has been increasing about 2 percent year on year, exceeding the inflation rate, which is hovering at around 1¼ percent excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike (Chart 2). Specifically, the year-on-year rate of change in scheduled cash earnings turned positive reflecting a rise in base pay by many firms – the first increase in many years. In addition, special cash earnings have clearly risen due mainly to an increase in summer bonuses. Furthermore, the number of employees has been growing. Looking ahead, with the economy recovering moderately, the employment situation is expected to maintain its improving trend, exerting further upward pressure on wages, and therefore employee income is likely to continue increasing moderately. Underpinned by this improvement in the employment and income situation, private consumption is expected to remain resilient, and the effects of the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase are expected to wane further. Corporate sector: moderate increase in business fixed investment Turning to the corporate sector, industrial production has recently shown some weakness, particularly in durable goods, such as automobiles, and construction goods, both of which have been significantly affected by the decline following the front-loading of purchases. Exports have been lacking momentum due mainly to a delay in the recovery of overseas economies, as I will explain later in more detail. Even in this situation, corporate profits and business sentiment have been favorable, and firms have maintained their proactive stance on business fixed investment. In fact, the corporate profits of listed companies for the April-June quarter appear to have surpassed projections. Surveys point to favorable business sentiment, and firms are planning to increase their business fixed investment – mainly investment in Japan – from the previous year. While it is claimed that growth in business fixed investment can no longer be expected due to Japanese firms’ accelerated relocation of production overseas, I hold the view that we are now in an environment supporting an increase in such investment (Chart 3). The reasons are 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  as follows. First, as a result of restrained investment for some years, capital stock has become outdated and this has hampered smooth production in some cases, prompting increasing demand for renewal investment. Second, wages have risen due to the labor shortage while interest rates for borrowing to finance business fixed investment have been at low levels. Therefore, it might have become more advantageous for some firms to invest in labor-saving machinery and equipment than to hire new employees. Third, nearly two years have passed since the correction of the excessive yen appreciation, and it appears that Japanese firms have started again to invest in improving the domestic bases of their businesses, particularly for research and development. Against this backdrop, as corporate profits are expected to continue improving on the whole, the virtuous cycle from income to spending is likely to operate steadily, and business fixed investment is expected to continue its moderate increasing trend. Exports and overseas economies As I just mentioned, domestic demand is expected to remain firm. On the other hand, external demand has continued to lack momentum (Chart 4). This is due not only to cyclical factors including sluggishness in global economies such as emerging economies, but also to structural factors such as the accelerated relocation of production overseas by Japanese manufacturing firms. Nevertheless, as the cyclical factors are expected to become favorable – particularly with the accelerating growth of overseas economies (mainly advanced economies) – exports are expected to head for a moderate increase, especially those of high-value-added products. In fact, there are signs of a pick-up in exports, with an uptrend in external demand for machinery orders – a leading indicator of exports of capital goods and parts – and an improving trend in the forecast diffusion index of overseas supply and demand conditions for products as shown in the Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan). Of course, such an outlook for exports is based on the assumption that overseas economies will continue to recover. While there are concerns including geopolitical risks in some parts of the world, the global economy is likely to continue recovering, led by advanced economies, since economic recovery in the United States has become increasingly evident. In the World Economic Outlook Update published in July by the International Monetary Fund, annual global economic growth – which slowed to 3.2 percent in 2013 – is projected to accelerate gradually to 3.4 percent in 2014 and 4.0 percent in 2015 (Chart 5). Looking at individual countries or regions, in the U.S. economy, firmness in the household sector has been spreading to the corporate sector and a pick-up in business fixed investment recently became evident. These developments are likely to lead to an increase in demand for some capital goods and parts – in which Japan enjoys a competitive advantage – and therefore deserve attention when we consider the outlook for Japan’s exports. In the euro area economy, a disinflationary trend – as seen in the decline in the year-on-year growth rate in consumer prices to 0.3 percent – is a matter of concern. However, international markets’ views on the European debt problem remain stable and the European Central Bank implemented a series of additional monetary easing measures in June and September. This background supports the view that the euro area economy will basically continue to recover, albeit moderately. In China, the economy is expected to maintain stable growth at around the current pace, since the government plans to give due attention to the economic recovery, such as by providing economic stimulus measures both on the monetary and fiscal fronts, although an adjustment in the real estate market has persisted. While other emerging economies and commodity-exporting countries have continued to lack growth momentum as a whole, positive effects of the recovery in advanced economies are expected to spread gradually. In the meantime, some geopolitical risks, including those in Ukraine and Iraq, still warrant attention. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Therefore, the Bank’s baseline scenario is that overseas economies – mainly advanced economies – are likely to continue to recover, and Japan’s exports are expected to head for a moderate increase. II.  Price developments in Japan Let me turn now to price developments in Japan. As I mentioned at the outset, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh food) – which was minus 0.4 percent in April last year when QQE was introduced – subsequently turned positive and increased further to around 1¼ percent recently (Chart 6). These developments reflect an improvement in the output gap and a rise in inflation expectations. The output gap has been improving at around 0 percent – the long-term average – with Japan’s economy continuing to grow at a pace above its potential as a trend, although the effects of the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the consumption tax hike have been observed. Inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole, albeit with monthly fluctuations. With the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh food) continuing to exceed 1 percent, a shift is observed in firms’ price-setting strategy, from a low-price strategy to one of raising sales prices while increasing value-added. As for wage setting, as seen in annual wage negotiations this spring, the rise in inflation is increasingly being taken into account in wage negotiations between management and labor. This improvement in the output gap and the rise in inflation expectations are expected to continue. Therefore, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI, which is likely to be around 1¼ percent for some time, is expected to subsequently follow an uptrend again from the second half of this fiscal year and reach about 2 percent – the price stability target – around the middle of the current projection period from fiscal 2014 through 2016. III.  Monetary policy management toward achieving the price stability target of 2 percent Finally, let me discuss the Bank’s monetary policy management. The Bank has been pursuing QQE, aiming to achieve a state in which the 2 percent inflation rate is maintained in a stable manner. In this state, the inflation rate will be around 2 percent when the economy is at a normal level. That is, firms will be able to base decisions on an assumption of about 2 percent inflation when they consider how to set prices and when management and labor negotiate wages. If such an economy is achieved, economic entities will act based on an expectation that inflation will return to about 2 percent sooner or later – even if the economy faces temporary downward pressure on prices and wages due to, for example, a downturn in economic activity. Therefore, the risk of falling into deflation, where prices and wages continue to decline, will be lowered. As I mentioned, Japan’s economy has been on a path suggesting that the price stability target of 2 percent will be achieved as expected. We are only halfway there, however, and the Bank will continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. If the outlook changes due to the manifestation of risk factors and it is judged necessary for achieving the price stability target, the Bank will make adjustments without hesitation. I would like to conclude my speech today by assuring you that, through the Bank’s monetary policy management, the prolonged deflation will be overcome and an economy based on a moderate inflation rate of 2 percent will be achieved. Thank you.   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5    
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Stephen S Poloz: Float of the loonie Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Société de développement économique de Drummondville, Drummondville, Quebec, 16 September 2014. *      *      * Introduction Thank you for inviting me to be here with you today. It’s great to be back, but I guess you know I have changed jobs since I last saw you. Companies in this region have gone through very difficult times in the wake of the global financial crisis – as have many across Canada. We’re in a better place now, but our economy is still not back to normal. So I appreciate the opportunity to come and meet with you to understand your situation better and share with you what’s on my mind. As entrepreneurs, I’m sure you know that global trade has recovered only partially, as the world economy is still working through the fallout from the crisis. Compounding the issue for exporters, of course, has been the relative strength of the loonie. While it has come down in the past several months, it is still more than 40 per cent higher than it was in the early 2000s. Many people in this room may be wondering why the Bank of Canada did not do more to limit the appreciation of the loonie, or to weaken it after it rose. After all, we have said time and again that stronger exports are needed to bring our economy home. In my remarks today, I will do my best to answer that question. If I do my job well, you will leave with an understanding of why it’s a bad idea to try to manipulate exchange rates. I’ll give you some context and explain the role of the exchange rate in the Bank’s inflation-targeting framework. And I will talk about what we believe is needed to help our economy eventually return home, to balanced and sustainable growth. Targeting inflation: the Bank’s best contribution to Canada’s economic well-being The Bank of Canada’s mandate is to promote Canada’s economic and financial welfare. We do that by targeting inflation, as measured by the consumer price index. Our target range is 1 to 3 per cent, with the Bank’s monetary policy aimed at keeping inflation at the 2 per cent target midpoint. In pursuing this target, we set in place the necessary conditions for strong, sustainable economic growth. A low and stable inflation rate allows businesses and consumers to make financial decisions with confidence that the value of their money won’t be eroded by inflation. Parents can put money away to help their children with their education or for their own retirement without worrying that inflation will erase the real value of their savings. Businesses can plan expansions with reasonable forecasts of how inflation will affect what they will need for wages and investment. The benefits of inflation control are confirmed by history. Since the adoption of the inflation-targeting regime in 1991, inflation has averaged very close to target, economic growth has been more stable, and unemployment has been lower and less variable. And, at the height of the crisis, our inflation-targeting regime and the credibility we have garnered over the years helped us weather the storm. Riding the tides of the global economy Canada’s flexible exchange rate is an essential element of this monetary policy framework, as it helps us ride the tides of the global economy. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Our economy is open to the rest of the world. It must be, for we depend on sales to other countries to support our standard of living. We have a diversified export sector, but we depend more on exports of resources than most other advanced countries. For that reason, our currency tends to move with commodity prices, which in turn move with rising or falling global demand. Indeed, we benefit from having a currency that rides the rising and falling tides of the global economy. It acts as a buffer. When the world economy is strong, commodity prices rise and our currency tends to float up to facilitate the adjustment of our economy. Similarly, when the world economy is weak, commodity prices fall, and our currency tends to float down. It’s like a floating breakwater across the mouth of a harbour that rises and falls with the tides, but absorbs the waves to help keep the water in the harbour calm. Without a freely floating currency, prices, wages and unemployment could fluctuate markedly, and that would create havoc for people and businesses. A flexible exchange rate is essential for us to be able to pursue an independent monetary policy in the interests of Canada. Let me illustrate with a “what-if?” scenario. Back in 2002, the Canadian dollar was worth around 65 cents U.S. By early 2008, it had risen to around parity. The world price of oil was about $25 per barrel in 2002, but by early 2008, that price had risen to well over $100. It would be hard to imagine the Canadian dollar staying in the mid-60-cent range, given the rise in oil prices. As I’ve said before, there is a loose but predictable relationship between oil prices and our currency – like a dog and its master, when connected by one of those leashes that stretch and rewind. But let’s just suppose we had tried to stop the Canadian dollar from rising once it reached around 85 cents, sometime in 2005. The obvious way to limit the rise in the dollar would have been for the Bank to cut interest rates. Given the underlying upward pressure on the dollar coming from rising oil prices, we estimate that holding the loonie at around 85 cents back in 2005 would have required cutting interest rates from 4 per cent to almost zero. As you would expect, the economy would then have two sources of stimulus – higher prices for oil exports and ultra-low interest rates, which would have boosted borrowing and spending. This combination would have overheated our economy during 2006–08, and inflation would have begun to rise above our target. We estimate that inflation would have been approaching 4 per cent by 2008. As an aside, let’s talk about what actually happened in 2008 – the global financial crisis. While it’s tricky to introduce a slice of reality into a hypothetical scenario, it is worth noting that if our interest rates were already near zero, we clearly would have had no room to manoeuvre. But let’s set aside that complication, and finish our “what-if?” scenario. By 2008, inflation would have been approaching 4 per cent and still be rising. Your companies’ costs of production would have been rising by 4 per cent or more, and export competitiveness would be eroding steadily, even though we would be holding the exchange rate steady at 85 cents. And that would not be the end of the story. With its anti-inflationary credibility increasingly at risk, the Bank would be forced into action – it would abandon its hypothetical attempt to control the dollar, interest rates would rise significantly to slow the excessive growth in the economy, unemployment would increase and inflation would eventually make its way back down to target. The exchange rate would have to find its own level at that point, because the Bank could not both target inflation and hold the exchange rate constant at the same time. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Although this is just a counterfactual thought experiment, it is informed by hard analysis. Trying to hold the dollar constant would give us larger fluctuations in unemployment, output and inflation, and in the end would not help us maintain our international competitiveness. It would also mean that we would have less policy credibility when it came time to take action during the financial crisis. In short, by targeting the exchange rate, we would lose our ability to pursue an independent monetary policy in the interests of Canada. By the same token, we can imagine a scenario where the U.S. economy was picking up speed and our economy was lagging. In such a situation, U.S. interest rates might rise at a time when maintaining our inflation target would require that Canadian interest rates remain unchanged. If we were trying to hold the exchange rate unchanged instead of targeting inflation, we would probably need to match U.S. interest rate increases in lockstep; but doing so would risk pushing our inflation rate back below our target. Again, attempting to control the exchange rate would mean giving up our independent monetary policy. Now, none of this means that we are indifferent to exchange rate movements. In fact, we closely analyze the effects of exchange rate movements on the economy. Our aim, however, is not to achieve a specific value for the dollar. It is to achieve our inflation target. The best place for the exchange rate to be determined is in the markets. The markets trade the Canadian dollar toward a value consistent with the relative fundamentals of our economy and those of our trading partners. This trading happens around the clock, and new information is instantly taken into account by a multitude of participants. Markets are not perfect – they can overreact, or can break down in times of stress – but they are our best bet. Some have argued that the Bank can have it both ways: it can use interest rates to pursue its inflation target, but independently intervene in the foreign exchange market to achieve a more desirable level for the dollar. This means buying and selling Canadian dollars in exchange for U.S. dollars in the open marketplace. But, given the depth of the global market, the Bank would need to undertake truly massive transactions to have even small effects on the exchange rate. Those effects would be very short-lived and, in the attempt, thwart the good work that markets do for us every day. The only time when such direct intervention in markets might be practised would be in the case of a breakdown in the market, in which case the Bank could offer to transact on either side until normal trading resumed – in short, an emergency situation where the market fails for some reason. Still others have suggested that the Bank could offer the exchange market verbal guidance about what the value of the dollar should be. Behind this suggestion is a presumption that the Bank has a better understanding of the macroeconomic fundamentals driving the dollar than the market. This is a difficult claim to defend. Our exchange rate depends on a host of domestic and foreign fundamentals, many of which are beyond the Bank’s influence. Better that these myriad effects be weighed, debated and wrestled with in a deep marketplace than in a simple statistical model developed by the central bank. In short, I believe in markets. Manipulating or trying to guide them is just not in our game plan. What the Bank has done and will continue to do is be as clear as possible about how it sees the forces at play in the economy, and where the major sources of uncertainty and risks lie. To bring this uncertainty more into the policy dialogue, we have made some changes in the past year to how we analyze and talk about monetary policy. Our efforts reflect the fact that the business of central banking is being adapted in real time to the changing environment. We have begun putting our growth and inflation forecasts in the form of ranges rather than points, and have given even more prominence to uncertainty and risks in the Monetary Policy Report. We have refined our analysis of financial stability risks and raised the profile of our Financial System Review. And, we have begun to offer a more fulsome description of how those risks are entering our policy deliberations. These changes have brought more 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  transparency to policy decision making, and our policy narrative has shifted from one traditionally seen almost as “mechanical engineering” to one now characterized as “risk management.” Getting home – a natural sequence Let’s talk about that policy narrative now. In the aftermath of the financial crisis, our export sector contracted significantly. The household sector picked up much of the slack in response to record-low interest rates, especially by investing in housing. But we cannot rely on policy-induced growth to maintain our living standards forever. The Canadian economy requires a major rotation toward a more sustainable growth track. First, we need a substantial recovery in exports, Canada’s natural engine of economic growth. From that will follow more investment spending by companies, accompanied by more employment growth. All of this will help absorb our spare capacity, bringing inflation sustainably to our target of 2 per cent. And along the way, there will be a gradual reduction in our financial stability risks, such as household imbalances. This is a natural sequence that we will monitor carefully. Its starting point, and the most critical ingredient, is a substantial recovery in exports. Where will that critical revival of exports come from? Well, energy exports are already leading the way. This is the main source of natural growth in our economy today – new energy exports, new investment, new jobs. Furthermore, higher oil prices are boosting incomes across the entire country, and that creates jobs, too. But growth in energy exports alone cannot make up for the loss of exports we have experienced since the crisis. Non-energy exports also will contribute, but they have been very sluggish for several years, at least until recently. After a weak start to the year, there has been a surge in non-energy exports in the past few months. About half of this rebound was weather-related, as exports were delayed during the winter. But underneath these fluctuations we are starting to see some early signs of recovery. The fact is, though, that the global economy remains an uncertain place and, as forecasters, we are wary of the serial disappointment it has delivered us in recent years. Europe is obviously the biggest question mark. Nonetheless, the U.S. economy appears to be back on track and is now showing signs of higher investment spending, which is usually associated with stronger exports of Canadian machinery and equipment, packaging materials, industrial materials, and business services. Many of these sectors are also sensitive to exchange rate fluctuations, so the lower dollar is providing an additional boost to foreign sales. Certainly, we should expect to see our forecast coming true right here in Drummondville, as this has always been an export-intensive part of the country. Companies here are investing to diversify their product lines and their customer bases and are positioning themselves for new growth. We now see the region’s traditional focus on textiles and furniture giving way to a broad range of technical, value-added manufacturing in machinery and equipment, building and packaging materials, and plastic and rubber products – some of the very sectors we expect to see leading our export recovery. Nevertheless, some other export sectors have been struggling since well before the financial crisis. For them, the restructuring road is proving long and difficult, so some of the lost ground may only be made up over an extended period of time. We can also expect to see brand-new export activity from newly created exporting firms. I’m sure I don’t have to remind this audience that many firms were wiped out in the crisis. Normally, as the economy gets back to full capacity, the overall population of businesses picks up and more firms enter the export markets, creating new products, new services and, most importantly, new jobs. Unfortunately, company population growth has been very 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  sluggish since 2008, and preliminary data indicate this population did not increase at all in 2013.The ingredients are in place, however, so we remain hopeful that this process will resume in 2014–15. All things considered, then, we are cautiously optimistic about our exporting future. It will take more than a few months to establish a trend, and then still longer for it to translate into more investment and hiring by companies, but it looks like the natural sequence we’ve been hoping for is getting under way. Conclusion Let me sum up. It is simply not possible to have a fulsome discussion of the outlook for Canada’s inflation rate and our monetary policy without an understanding of the effects the exchange rate is having on the economy. But trying to control the loonie is off the table, as far as we are concerned at the Bank of Canada. A floating loon is a thing of beauty, and so is a floating loonie, at least from this economist’s perspective. Our job is to understand the context, and adjust short-term interest rates to meet our inflation target. That job is tough enough. It is the job of the market to watch the economic data unfold and grind out the implications for other financial markets, including the exchange rate, on a daily basis. That, too, is a tough job, but it is not ours. The fact is, the Bank can’t do its job well unless the market does its job well, and vice versa. And the Bank has been working to bring more transparency to the various elements of uncertainty that have been making its job more difficult, and this additional transparency is helping the market do a better job. And all that is more than just talk – it means that business people like you can do a good job, too. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mario Draghi: Keynote speech at the Eurofi Financial Forum Keynote speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Eurofi Financial Forum, Milan, 11 September 2014. *      *      * Summary We are facing a set of conditions – low growth and low inflation, high debt and high unemployment – that can only be addressed by concerted action on both the demand and supply sides of the economy. This requires that all actors – both at national and European levels – play their parts in line with their respective mandate as laid down in the EU Treaties. No monetary or fiscal stimulus can be successful if not accompanied by the right structural policies – policies that foster potential growth and instil confidence. Investment has been one of the great casualties of the crisis. From peak to trough business investment in the euro area decreased by around 20% since 2008, against 15% in the 1992 recession. We will not see a sustainable recovery unless this changes. A decisive rise in investment is essential to bring inflation where we would want to see it, to kick-start the economy and to bring down unemployment. There are two key areas where national and European level government action can help revive investment. First, the regulatory environment should be made more favourable to economic growth. Second, companies need to have access to more diversified sources of financing: the launch of a capital markets union could contribute to achieving this. It is an idea that the ECB fully supports. The development of the market for simple and transparent Asset Backed Securities deserves particular support. Member States should consider the provision of public guarantees to support lending to small and medium sized enterprises. There also needs to be a consistent and credible application of the Stability and Growth Pact across time and across countries. Within the existing framework, countries should explore how to support productive investment. In monetary policy, we have deployed a number of non-standard tools to ensure our very accommodative monetary policy stance is transmitted to the real economy. Last week, the Governing Council decided to start the purchase of certain high-quality asset-backed securities and covered bonds in October. Senior tranches of such ABS have proven to be high quality assets. Alongside our Targeted Longer Term Refinancing Operations, we expect these measures will enhance the functioning of monetary policy transmission, provide further accommodation now that we are at the lower bound, and have a sizeable impact on our balance sheet. *** Ladies and gentlemen, It is a pleasure to be here tonight with you in Milan. In a recent speech in Jackson Hole, I spoke about the need for a policy mix involving monetary, fiscal and structural policies to jump-start the economic recovery in the euro area. We are currently facing a set of conditions – low growth and low inflation, high debt and high unemployment – that can only be addressed by concerted action on both the demand and supply sides of the economy. This requires all actors – both at national and European level – to play their parts in line with their respective mandates as laid down in the EU Treaties. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  No monetary stimulus, indeed no fiscal stimulus, can be successful unless accompanied by the right structural policies – policies that foster potential growth and instil confidence. I would like to illustrate this argument by focusing on investment, which will also be discussed at the informal ECOFIN this weekend. Investment has been one of the great casualties of this crisis. The downturn in business investment in the euro area since 2008 has been much more severe than in earlier business cycles. From peak to trough, business investment decreased by around 20%, against 15% in the 1992 recession. The level of business investment in the euro area has only slightly improved since 2008, whereas in the US it is above its pre-crisis level. We will not see a sustainable recovery unless this changes. A decisive rise in investment is essential to bring inflation closer to where we would want to see it, to stimulate the economy, and to bring down unemployment. So what can we policy-makers do to revive investment? My main message today is that only if structural, fiscal and monetary policies go hand in hand will the euro area see investment return. Let me focus in particular on the decisive contribution which structural policies can make. A policy mix to revive investment I see two key areas where government action both at national and European level should help to revive business investment. First, the regulatory environment should be made more favourable to economic growth. Second, companies need to have access to more diversified sources of financing: the launch of a capital markets union could contribute to achieving this and, at the same time, help overcome the remaining fragmentation of financial markets. Let me briefly elaborate on each of these points. Improving the regulatory environment Business activity would greatly benefit from an improvement in the regulatory environment, in particular as regards product and labour markets. The differences between Member States are quite striking in respect of wage differentiation (across workers and between sectors), employment adjustment rigidities, barriers to entry in product markets and the ease of opening and running businesses. For example, in some Member States contractual disputes between firms take on average little more than a year to resolve, while in other countries they take more than three years. Start-ups in the latter countries have to deal with more red tape than their counterparts elsewhere. Another telling example relates to the regulated professions whose number varies considerably across euro area Member States [from 45 in Estonia, 170 in Italy, 219 in France to 304 in Slovakia, according to European Commission figures]. Such barriers to entry limit competition and employment, creating undue rents for a select few to the detriment of customers. These are just a few examples. In many cases, these obstacles sap entrepreneurial spirits, especially of young, innovative firms that create most of the new jobs and that are highly sensitive to changes in investment opportunities. These examples show how converging towards best practice in the euro area would mean radical improvements in the business environment. Spain provides an encouraging example in this regard. Among the large euro area countries, investment in Spain is projected to rebound strongly over the coming two years, notably due to the combination of business-friendly reforms and lower personal and corporate taxes. More recently, other countries have also committed to improve the business environment. A forceful and swift implementation of the necessary reforms is now key in order to reap the benefits as quickly as possible. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Strengthening the financing side A second area of key relevance for investment and also of direct interest to the Eurofi community here tonight is the need to diversify sources of financing and to overcome financial fragmentation. Until now, banks have been the main source of lending to companies. The crisis has shown the drawbacks of over-reliance on a bank-centred lending model. So we also need to develop reliable sources of non-bank lending, such as equity and bond markets, securitisation, lending from insurance companies and asset managers, venture capital and crowdfunding. This is why the ECB fully supports the intention of the incoming President of the European Commission to create a capital markets union. Such a step would be a natural development of the Single Market and would benefit all EU Member States. We believe that one area that deserves particular attention is the development of a well-functioning market for simple, transparent and real asset-backed securities (ABS). This would allow banks to still originate loans – notably to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) – while preserving their balance sheet capacity. In order to achieve a well-functioning ABS market, it is important that the regulatory treatment of securitisation is proportional to the risk of ABS. In this respect, the ECB welcomes efforts to have a differentiated regulatory treatment of simple, transparent ABS built on real assets. Moreover, the provision of public guarantees should be considered to support lending to SMEs, as other countries do, such as the US. A further integration of corporate bond and equities markets is also essential to overcome the present fragmentation in the euro area and to ensure more robust cross-border lending and investment flows. To achieve this, we will have to streamline differences between countries, for instance, in the legal protection of borrowers’ and lenders’ rights as well as in national taxation and insolvency procedures. To sum up, structural policies are more multifaceted than they are often perceived to be in the political debate and can have a very significant impact on investment in a variety of ways. Growth-friendly fiscal policy Yet this is not the only area where governments can make a difference. They have at their disposal a second policy lever of direct relevance for investment, namely fiscal policy. Companies will only invest in the future when there is confidence and certainty about the future, about the medium-term fiscal path, and ultimately about taxes. We need a consistent and credible application of the Stability and Growth Pact across time and across countries. Within the existing framework, governments can find space to support productive investment, and achieve a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies by lowering the tax burden and reducing unproductive current expenditures. In parallel, it may be useful to have a discussion on the overall fiscal stance of the euro area with the view to raising public investment where there is fiscal space to do so. In this regard, there is also a complementary role to play at European level in supporting the rebound in private investment. I therefore welcome the €300 billion package announced by the incoming Commission President two months ago. The role of monetary policy Let me finally say a few words on the contribution of monetary policy. We successfully fought the confidence crisis in the euro that raised interest rates to abnormal levels. We provided the euro area banking system with unprecedented funding. We have continuously lowered our policy rates. Now we have reached the lower bound. To ensure that this very accommodative monetary policy stance is transmitted to the real economy across the euro area in an equal manner, we have also deployed a number of non-standard tools. Increasingly our focus here has shifted towards the financing of small and medium-sized 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  enterprises, which heavily rely on bank financing and in many cases are struggling to retain access to credit. These companies may be small, but when they face a funding problem, it is a big problem for all of us, given that they employ around three-quarters of the euro area’s workforce. In June, we decided to launch a series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations  – TLTROs – to ensure that banks have sufficient liquidity to lend to the real economy. The TLTROs have been designed to encourage banks to increase their lending to the non-financial corporate sector. In addition, we have also taken measures to underpin specific market segments that play a key role in the financing of the economy. Last week, the Governing Council decided to start buying high-quality asset-backed securities and covered bonds in October. We will purchase both existing and newly issued ABS, which are simple, transparent and real in the sense that the underlying assets consist of loans to the euro area non-financial private sector. Let me respond to the concerns recently expressed about the risks posed to the integrity of our balance sheet. It is worth recalling that senior tranches of ABS have proven to be high-quality assets. According to the Association of Financial Markets in Europe, only 0.12% of European residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) outstanding in mid-2007 have defaulted since then – compared with 22.05% for US RMBS. Default rates for consumer finance ABS and SME collateralised loan obligations have also remained low, well below 1%, throughout the worst financial and economic crisis we have experienced. As regards covered bonds, credit quality is ensured by a double recourse (on the underlying assets and on the issuer), which is in fact comparable with the double protection that exists in our standard repo operations. Overall, the decisions announced last week were taken with a view to underpinning the firm anchoring of medium to long-term inflation expectations, in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. We expect the two purchase programmes to effectively complement the TLTROs in enhancing the functioning of the monetary policy transmission and in providing further monetary accommodation given that we have now reached the lower bound. The newly decided measures, together with the TLTROs, will have a sizeable impact on our balance sheet, which is expected to move towards the dimensions it used to have at the beginning of 2012, and the Governing Council stands ready to take further action if needed, in compliance with its mandate to maintain price stability. Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen, it is time for me to conclude. My bottom line is also my starting line. Investment is rightly said to be today’s demand and tomorrow’s supply. Yet investment in Europe is falling short. If we don’t manage to get investment going again, we will weaken the economy in the short run and undermine its prospects in the long run. Our efforts should therefore be focused on jump-starting investment. However, and this was really the crux of my argument, we will only manage to stimulate investment if structural, fiscal and monetary policies mutually reinforce each other. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Vítor Constâncio: “We are certainly not almighty”– interview with Börsen-Zeitung Interview by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, with Börsen-Zeitung, conducted by Mr Mark Schrös, published on 11 September 2014. *      *      * The ECB’s Vice President talks about the power and the limits of the central bank, the risks of very low inflation and the strong criticism in Germany BZ: Mr Constâncio, many politicians and observers view the power and the instruments of the ECB in its fight against low inflation and a weak recovery as almost unlimited, but others say the ECB is already reaching its limits. Do you feel almighty or powerless? Constâncio: This is indeed a really interesting question. But I would say it is neither one nor the other: We are certainly not almighty, but we are also not powerless. What we do has an effect on the economy and so it is very important. But expectations or hopes that the ECB might change tack alone are overblown, yes? If one is talking about the perspectives of growth it is true that monetary policy cannot do it alone. It’s mostly up to governments, especially structural reforms. But if one is talking about inflation it is different: It is the responsibility of monetary policy to reach the inflation goal – that is the fundamental creed of monetary theory and of central banks. We cannot shift this responsibility to others, but if others can help, it is even better. ECB President Mario Draghi has said that it might be difficult to reach the target of below but close to 2% without some fiscal stimulus and structural reforms. But you would say that when the inflation goal is at risk, the ECB has to act, regardless of what others do? Right, this is how I see it with regards to inflation. However, Mr Draghi was also referring to growth in his speech, and as I just said, that is different. Naturally, at the moment it would help enormously if politicians would also deliver. If they would generate more growth this would reduce the slack in the economy. This would help against the very dangerous situation of low inflation. But you have to be increasingly frustrated because the ECB always delivers but politicians do not, don’t you? Yes, absolutely. But it is important to acknowledge that the stressed countries have done a lot of structural reforms, and have started to grow again. But at the moment the problem children are France or Italy, they refuse to make reforms. Of course there are some countries in which structural reforms are urgently needed. If you look at OECD 2013 report about the responsiveness to their recommendations for structural reforms, the stressed countries are at the top and other euro area countries are below the euro average: France, the Netherlands, also Germany. Recently there has been a lot of talking about a “grand bargain”, meaning a kind of deal between fiscal, structural and monetary policy to overcome the crisis in the euro area. Draghi has said that there is no such bargain. But would you say this is something that is needed at the moment – like in Japan? I think we need the three pillars. But at the same time we are much more concerned about the independence of the central bank in Europe. So this kind of coordination would not be 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  appropriate. This is why we have decided what had to be decided on our part, and president Draghi has mentioned what the others should do. Only three months after a historical package the ECB has again loosened its monetary policy significantly. Does that mean that there is an increasing worry about stagnation or even deflation? Two things happened since June: On the one hand, the decline in inflation expectations across the whole spectrum. It would be extremely dangerous to let inflation expectations de-anchor… … That means letting them fall significantly below the target of 2%... … Right. Not under any circumstances we should let that happen. If that happens it would be extremely difficult to regain control of inflation expectations. They are a main factor for future inflation. On the other hand, the final results for the second quarter have been very disappointing. This increases the slack in the economy with downward pressure on inflation. What really matters are medium- to longer-term inflation expectations. Are they still “anchored”? They are starting to get de-anchored for horizons up to 4 years. These figures declined significantly during the past two months. Now it is also starting to attain the inflation expectations in five years for the following five years. Furthermore, the influence of short-term expectations on longer-term expectation is increasing. This is a bad signal and a big concern for us. The risk that the longer-term expectations get de-anchored has definitely increased enormously. And that also means the risk of deflation in the euro area has increased? I don’t see a risk of an actual deflation in the sense of a broad-based decline in prices. But the big problem at the moment is a prolonged period of low nominal growth, so low inflation and low growth. This creates debt sustainability problems – both for private households and governments. Furthermore, increasing real interest rates have negative effects on the economic recovery. But the new ECB projections for growth and inflation have been revised only marginally. Why did the Governing Council nevertheless decide to take quite far-reaching decisions? These are not the Governing Council’s projections –this is very important. These are the ECB’s staff projections and in that sense they are just one element for the Governing Council’s decision. The risks to the downside for growth and inflation were seen as more important by the Governing Council. So it would be fair to say it was some kind of insurance policy against the downside risks? When we deal with risk management we always have to be as preemptive as possible. This is particularly the case if there is a risk to inflation expectations. We simply had to do more right now. With the recent decisions the Governing Council explicitly aims at a significant increase in the ECB’s balance sheet. This is a major shift in the ECB’s policy, bringing it even closer to other central banks. With the recent interest rate cut we are now at the zero lower bound. So if we believe that we need an even more expansionary monetary policy, we have to find different channels. An increase in the balance sheet is one option. On the one hand, it influences the inflation expectations for the future, and on the other hand, it triggers shifts in investors’ decisions. This will spill over to other asset markets and also have an impact on the exchange rate. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  According to many observers the effects could be even bigger if the ECB would give a precise figure for the two purchases programs of Asset Backed Securities (ABS) and Covered Bonds. I understand the argument. But from our perspective it is difficult and it would not be appropriate to commit to a certain number. We have decided not to do so. So even when we get more details at the beginning of October we will not get a precise figure for the planned purchases? At the moment we are not intending to give a concrete number. But Draghi has signaled that – including the new TLTROs – the aim is to increase the balance sheet by €750 billion to €1 trillion. Many observers doubt that this is possible, especially within a short period of time. We are convinced that the three components will have a sizeable effect on our balance sheet – with the consequences I have described. We expect the most significant effect to come from the TLTROs. This is also why we again cut interest rates. There had been rumors that banks might not come to the first TLTROs because they were speculating that interest rates could be cut later. This is now off the table. Does that also mean the smaller the TLTROs uptake, the bigger the purchase programs will be? This is not necessarily the case. But again: We believe that this new facility is very attractive. So banks are well advised not to miss this opportunity. And if everything else fails the ECB will start buying government bonds? This option of a broad based Quantitative Easing (QE) was already discussed in the Governing Council, but it did not happen already this time. Does that mean there is no “comfortable majority” for this step – like for the others which were announced last week? There was no proposal for doing QE at this meeting. QE was discussed, but it was not on the table for a decision. So I don’t think you could draw this conclusion. So QE, including the purchase of government bonds, would be the next logical step for the Governing Council? We are convinced that we are allowed to buy government bonds in the secondary market, if it is justified by monetary policy considerations. But we also know what it means and this is certainly something we would prefer not to be forced to do. We hope that the recent package will be enough. But in view of our responsibility and our mandate, buying government bonds certainly is something we cannot exclude. But this would lead to even more dissent within the Governing Council. Last week’s decision was not unanimous – although it is always stressed that the Governing Council is unanimous in its commitment to do what is necessary against the risks of low inflation. This phrase does not mean that in a particular moment everybody has to agree to a concrete package. The most significant thing about this phrase – which was decided upon unanimously – is that no unconventional instrument is a priori excluded. But calibration and timing can occasionally be a source of discussion. But with the most recent decision the consensus decision-making is ultimately history now? Since 2010, we have had some decisions which were not taken unanimously. In such difficult times, there are different views. I would not qualify this as surprising or even negative as 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  such. In the future, we will also always try to reach consensus. But sometimes we have to take decisions. You have mentioned the impact the ECB’s policy has on the euro. Your colleague Ewald Nowotny made even more blunt comments by saying the aim was to weaken the currency. Is the ECB also in this respect becoming more like other central banks, which implicitly use the exchange rate as an instrument? Don’t you fear counter-measures by others? I have to contradict you: We have not taken a single decision which was aimed directly to the exchange rate. No one can say that. Our monetary policy is targeted to domestic objectives. We are justified to do so because of the difficult situation of low inflation we are in. Of course everybody knows that unavoidably there are consequences for the exchange rate. The devaluation of the euro is a collateral consequence of our policy. But what really matters is the domestic objective. Not a goal for the exchange rate. We have not changed our policy in that respect. This reminds me of Japan. In 2013 Japanese leaders also said that the ultra-expansionary monetary policy was aimed at domestic targets and not to weaken the Yen. At that time also European policymakers and central bankers doubted and criticized that. If you read the IMF or the G20 statements, the Japanese policy was always considered acceptable because it was directed towards understandable domestic targets. Now the same applies to the euro area, although in a different scale: We are not in deflation and we will not be in deflation. In Germany the ECB’s policy is heavily criticized. This will increase with the planned asset purchases. One concern is that the ECB takes risks on its own balance sheet which could at the end cause some problems for taxpayers again. Isn’t it a big risk that the support in Germany for the ECB could be get lost completely? This is of course a concern to us. We don’t live in an ivory tower. But we have a mandate and this mandate is for the 18 euro area countries as a whole. But I also think there are a lot of misunderstandings and unjustified fears in Germany. Just to give one example: When we started buying some government bonds for the first time in 2010, everybody was writing in Germany about the forthcoming hyperinflation. This did not happen and there is no reason to believe that it will happen now. And also in 2010 there had been fears about potential losses. If anything, the Eurosystem made a very significant profit with these acquisitions. But the feeling is that the ECB is more and more deviating from the stability-oriented monetary policy of the Bundesbank in its former days. This feeling even increases if Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann is opposing ECB decisions. I find it difficult to say that the ECB is deviating from a stability-oriented policy when inflation rates are at 0.3%. You could say so if inflation was at 3% or 4%. Our primary mandate is price stability and we will not embark in policies that may create dangers to the upside in this regard. Another big fear is new bubbles in the financial system. Our mandate is price stability regarding products and services, not the level of asset prices. This is the mandate politicians have given to us in the Treaty. If we are talking about asset prices we need macroprudential instruments, not the use of the interest rates. Some instruments were given to the ECB in the SSM regulation – a limited set. I would like to have more instruments of that nature. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  For example? In the UK, the government recently gave to the Bank of England the instrument of loan-to-value- and debt-to-income-ratios, especially to prevent bubbles in the housing and real estate market. In the US, the Fed can declare non-banks systematically important and then have the supervision over them. These are some good ideas. In the euro area the situation of the banks is still a big concern. They are still seen as undercapitalized. What do you think, especially after the ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment comes close to its conclusion? First of all: Since last year banks have already frontloaded a lot of decisions in anticipation of the Comprehensive Assessment. They have raised new capital and increased provisions. All in all since June 2013 the 128 banks that will be under ECB supervision in the future have strengthened their balance sheets by €197 billion. This also means that the ECB’s check is already a big success. So the fears are unjustified? Such concerns were in general based on the assumption that some assets in the banks’ balance sheets were wrongly valued. This is exactly where the Asset Quality Review comes into play. We are confident that we can dispel such concerns once and for all. The behavior of stock prices also shows that investors have started to again put money in European banks. A study by advisers to the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) recently called the European banking system bloated and highly risky. Do you agree and is there a role to play for the ECB as the new supervisor? While not denying that some parts of Europe are “overbanked”, I would qualify this statement a little bit. The European banking sector looks much bigger than the US one compared to GDP, but in the US most mortgages are not in the banks’ balance sheets. That is an important difference. The shadow banking system is also much bigger in the US. The banking union will provide an environment in which we will see a concentration in the banking system. But this should be left to the markets and not be achieved directly by policies. I also believe that the importance of capital market financing will become more important also in Europe. Banks are going to see their role shrink. Let’s get back to monetary policy. There is an intense debate about a “new normal”, for example in the sense that unconventional instruments are becoming normal and that interest rates are going to be lower than in the past. Do you also see such a “new normal”? I think there is a “new normal”. The first element is the introduction of macroprudential policies. The financial crisis has shown that price stability does not automatically lead to financial stability and that financial crashes can be a risk to price stability. Therefore central banks need new instruments. It is dangerous and not very effective to try to prevent or prick bubbles via the interest rates. Another element is the necessity of unconventional measures. It is a fact that the environment is such that the neutral real interest rate… …that means the interest at which real GDP is growing at its trend rate and inflation is stable… … That this rate is negative at the moment and that it will be very low or even negative for quite a while. This rate has a lot to do with the potential growth rate of an economy and this potential growth rate is decreasing in many countries for some time now, because of demographics but also because of other factors. On top of that, the planned savings structurally are ahead of the investment opportunities. This is why I’m convinced that unconventional monetary policies will be normal for some time to come. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Does that also mean that you fear a “secular stagnation”, a long period without growth? I’m not sure and I think nobody can be sure. Certainly there is a trend to a continuous decrease of real interest rates that has been visible in the advanced economies in the past decades. In this context, it is very important to increase potential growth. Therefore a lot of different policies are needed. We must hope that this period will not last too long and that we will be able to increase potential growth in our economies again. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Christopher Kent: Non-mining business investment – where to from here? Address by Mr Christopher Kent, Assistant Governor (Economic) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Bloomberg Economic Summit, Sydney, 16 September 2014. *      *      * I thank Lara Bui, Natasha Cassidy, Bernadette Donovan, Stephen Elias, Craig Evans, Gianni La Cava, Kevin Lane and Tom Rosewall for help in preparing these remarks. Accompanying graphs can be found at the end of the speech. Introduction I’d like to thank Bloomberg for the opportunity to talk to you today. I discussed this topic at this same venue 18 months ago. The outlook for non-mining business investment is an important element of our forecasts. It depends on a range of forces acting on the economy, including the stimulus currently being provided by the very low level of interest rates. But, forecasting economic activity is hard. Understanding and forecasting business investment is arguably harder still. When I was here in April of last year, I’d suggested that: • mining investment would be likely to peak in 2013; • non-mining investment would be likely to pick up, but only gradually; and • growth for the economy as a whole would be a little below trend in 2013 and then pick up gradually through 2014. It now looks like mining investment peaked in late 2012 (Graph 1). Despite a substantial decline in mining investment since then, growth of the economy overall picked up to a pace that was around trend over the course of the past year. Much of that improvement has owed to a sharp rise in resource exports. At the same time, there has also been an improvement in the growth rate of economic activity in the non-mining sectors, even though non-mining business investment has remained subdued. This better growth of non-mining activity often gets missed given all the focus on the resources boom. While this improvement is welcome, a key question is how durable the improvement will be? It might even gather a bit more steam, thereby helping to drive overall growth to an above-trend pace at some point. Such developments are possible but by no means certain. They depend in part on non-mining business investment, which is the motivation for my talk today. Recent past Over recent years, non-mining business investment has been subdued. After recovering from the decline that followed the global financial crisis, non-mining business investment in real terms has been little changed over the past three years or so (Graph 2). In nominal terms, non-mining business investment is at a very low level as a share of GDP relative to its history.1                                                 1  It is worth noting that the period of weak non-mining investment up to 2012, and non-mining activity more generally, allowed for the unprecedented mining investment boom without leading to excess aggregate demand and all of the problems associated with that. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Non-mining business investment should depend, in large part, on the strength of expected demand in the non-mining sectors of the economy (over the life of that investment). Current demand conditions, however, may have a strong influence on investment for two reasons. First, firms tend to draw on recent experience when assessing prospects for future demand. Second, stronger sales today will boost current cash flows, which will assist firms facing financial constraints. Hence, the gradual pick-up in the growth of non-mining economic activity over the past year augurs well for investment. Low interest rates and robust population growth are underpinning strong demand in the housing market, with house prices rising rapidly and dwelling investment picking up strongly. Low interest rates are also supporting growth of consumption at a time when subdued conditions in the labour market are weighing on the growth of incomes. These developments, as well as growth in export industries such as tourism and education, are consistent with a pick-up in business conditions across a range of industries. Despite these gains, survey measures of non-mining capacity utilisation have not improved much over the past year. A measure derived from the NAB survey (based on weighting industries according to their contribution to investment) implies that capacity utilisation remains a bit below average (Graph 3). By itself, this suggests that demand in the non-mining sector will need to rise a little further before businesses feel the need to undertake substantial investment in new capacity. Our forecasts for the economy suggest that this will occur in time, but the extent and timing of new investment remains uncertain. It’s not just output/demand that matters In addition to the strength of demand, a range of other factors also influence investment decisions. In particular, investment depends on whether the expected return to new capital outweighs the cost of installing it. In other words, a firm should invest whenever the market value of its existing capital is greater than its book value. This is known, in academic circles, as Tobin’s Q theory of investment, where Q is the ratio of the market value to the book value of capital. It turns out that empirical support for the relationship between investment and the Q-ratio is weak for the economy as a whole.2 However, it is possible to show that such a relationship exists at the level of individual firms (Graph 4). Estimates from Tobin’s Q type models based on Australian firm-level data indicate that non-mining investment has been unusually weak by historical standards in recent years. This is true after controlling for many other factors typically included in such models, such as sales growth and cash flows. For firms in the Bank’s liaison program, it also appears that investment has been weaker than the recent growth in sales would suggest. With that in mind, let’s consider some possible explanations for the weakness in non-mining business investment, and what that might imply for the outlook.                                                 2  The poor performance of Tobin’s Q models is quite common in the literature. For a discussion of some of the problems, see Chirinko R (1993), “Business Fixed Investment Spending: Modeling Strategies, Empirical Results and Policy Implications”, Journal of Economic Literature, 31(4), pp 1875–1911. For a more recent discussion, see Roberts M and T Whited (2013), “Endogeneity in Empirical Corporate Finance”, Chapter 7 in the Handbook of Economics of Finance, 2A, pp 493–572. The results of estimating these types of models on aggregate Australian data have been generally disappointing (for instance, see Cockerell L and S Pennings (2007), “Private Business Investment in Australia”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2007–09). Some studies that use firm-level data have had some success in modelling investment using the Q ratio, but even these results are sensitive to certain modelling choices (see, for example, La Cava G (2005), “Financial Constraints, the User Cost of Capital and Corporate Investment in Australia”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2005–12). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  The cost of borrowing remains too high and external finance is difficult to access? My discussion so far has ignored the fact that firms face financing constraints of varying degrees and certain types of finance are more costly to obtain than others. In particular, the cost of external equity finance is typically greater than the cost of external debt which, in turn, is greater than the cost of internal funding. Financial constraints certainly became more pervasive for many firms as the global financial crisis unfolded. However, those constraints have eased over time. More recently, external financing has become widely available at very favourable cost. Primarily, this reflects the stance of monetary policy (both in Australia and abroad), which is delivering historically low levels of interest rates, ample liquidity and has helped to push up equity prices. Indeed, a common refrain of firms in the course of our business liaison has been that neither the cost nor the availability of external finance have been factors limiting investment of late. Moreover, (non-financial) corporate balance sheet data indicate that many Australian companies currently hold relatively high levels of cash, suggesting that they have access to resources to finance investment when the time comes. The exchange rate is too high? The exchange rate has declined somewhat relative to its peak in the first half of 2013. But it remains high, especially given the sizeable decline in commodity prices this year. The implications of this vary across traded and non-traded sectors. A further decline in the exchange rate would provide additional support to demand for domestic firms producing tradable goods and services. At the same time, however, the high exchange rate also means that imported capital goods are currently relatively cheap. Hence, the still-high level of the exchange rate may be a net positive factor for the investment plans of some firms in non-tradable industries. For firms in tradable industries, on the other hand, the low cost of imported capital is offset by the effect of the high exchange rate on the demand for the goods and services they produce. In short, the high exchange rate might be playing a part in restraining investment in some sectors of the economy, but it’s unlikely to be the full story. Animal spirits are too weak? What is often referred to as “animal spirits” consists of three key elements.3 First, there is uncertainty, which describes the range of possible outcomes, let’s say for demand, but other things like costs matter too. Second, there is the expected or most likely outcome. Together, these describe the distribution of possible outcomes. But firms’ willingness to invest also depends on the third element, which is their appetite for risk. I’ll consider each of these elements in turn. The outlook is too uncertain? On the surface, uncertainty seems like an appealing explanation for subdued investment. However, we should remember that firms always have to make investment decisions in an environment of uncertainty, not just about the prospects for the macroeconomy but also for their industry. Rather, the question we need to ask is whether uncertainty in recent years has been elevated?                                                 3  For a detailed discussion of the difference between these concepts, see Haddow A, C Hare, J Hooley and T Shakir (2013), “Macroeconomic Uncertainty: What is It, How Can We Measure It and Why Does it Matter?”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 53(2), pp 100–109. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  There are a number of ways that we might try to measure the extent of uncertainty. One measure is the volatility of firms’ share prices (Graph 5).4 Another is the dispersion of analysts’ forecasts of firms’ earnings (per share). A third can be constructed by looking at the proportion of news stories that mention uncertainty.5 These measures all increased at the time of the global financial crisis. All of the measures have since declined to be around the levels seen prior to the financial crisis, when non-mining business investment had been growing strongly.6 Expectations regarding demand are too weak? Even if uncertainty about the range of possible demand outcomes is not too different from the past, the most likely outcome – the mean of the distribution – might still be too weak to lead to significant new investment projects. Business surveys ask firms what they expect conditions will be like in the near future; the results are described as “business confidence”. The long-running NAB survey suggests that business confidence was in decline and below its long-run average up to the middle of last year (Graph 6). Since then, it has picked up noticeably. This improvement was shortly followed by a broad-based pick-up in the survey’s measure of actual business conditions (that is, trading conditions, profits and employment). According to the NAB survey, and a number of other business surveys, business confidence and conditions are now above average. However, our liaison program suggests that businesses generally remain reluctant to take on significant new investment projects until they can be confident of a more sustained improvement in demand conditions. How long do conditions need to hold at above average levels before the improvement is considered to be sustainable? We don’t know the answer to this. In part, this is because animal spirits are by no means mechanistic or predictable. What matters for your investment plans is not just what you think about the future, but what you think your competitors think about the future. In part, this is because if your competitors are less than enthused about investing, the pressure for you to invest to avoid being left behind is lessened, and vice versa. Elevated risk aversion? Even though measures of uncertainty appear to have declined, and firms’ confidence about future business conditions is above average, firms’ investment plans may sit idle if they are more risk averse than in the past. (By firms, I mean both managers and shareholders alike.) It’s clear that firms became more risk averse at the onset of the global financial crisis. It seems that they remain affected by that experience. While the direct effects of the crisis on the Australian economy were generally short-lived and relatively minor compared with the experience of many economies, the events of that time led many Australian businesses and households to re-evaluate their appetites for risk. The household sector increased its saving rate noticeably at the time of the crisis and it remains around the more prudent levels that                                                 4  The measure in the top panel of Graph 5 is the S&P-ASX “VIX Index”, which is based on option pricing data and measures expected levels of near-term volatility in the Australian equity market; it includes mining sector stocks. 5  For details of the methodology, see Baker S, N Bloom and S Davis (2013), “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty”, unpublished manuscript, available at <policyuncertainty.com>. 6  One thing that businesses often cite as a concern is uncertainty about various policies affecting different industries. It’s hard to judge, though, the extent to which that source of uncertainty is greater today, if at all, than it was in the past. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  had been the norm in earlier decades.7 Also, businesses deleveraged and have built up their levels of cash holdings. One measure of firms’ appetite for risk is their “hurdle” rates of return. These serve as rules of thumb for firms to evaluate whether or not to proceed with a particular project. The higher the hurdle, the less likely any given project will be given the go ahead. There is no evidence that hurdle rates of return have increased over recent years. But neither is there evidence that they have declined even though the average cost of capital for firms has fallen.8 This larger gap between the hurdle rates and the average cost of capital implies a reduction in firms’ appetite for risk. This result, which is consistent with information from our liaison program, appears to be a global phenomenon. Our liaison provides other evidence of a more cautious approach to investment over recent years. In particular, many firms now require investment projects to satisfy shorter payback periods and be approved at higher levels of management than was typical in the past.9 Other longer-term determinants? The current weakness in non-mining business investment may reflect the effect of some longer-run determinants of investment. One such candidate is (multifactor) productivity growth. Relatively weak growth of productivity over much of the past decade would have weighed on the return to capital and reduced the incentives to add to the capital stock in non-mining industries (Graph 7). (In principle, this effect should already be reflected in levels of Tobin’s Q.) If productivity growth were to remain relatively low, that would weigh on overall growth of the economy. Low growth of investment would naturally follow from low productivity growth, but it would not be the cause of weak growth of the overall economy. In any case, it’s hard to know exactly what productivity growth is likely to do in the future. More recently, multifactor productivity growth appears to have increased a little. It is currently not far from growth rates seen prior to the mid 1990s, which was a period of especially rapid growth. In summary, some of these explanations have more merit than others. External finance is generally readily available and at very low cost, so this can’t explain the weakness in non-mining business investment. Looking at the available data, it’s hard to argue that heightened uncertainty is playing much, if any, role. Rather, some combination of relatively low growth in domestic demand, the effects of the high exchange rate, a lack of confidence and a lower appetite for risk (than in the past) appears plausible. There are some metrics consistent with this, and it aligns too with what businesses say is holding them back. What do the data suggest about the future? The Australian Bureau of Statistics capital expenditure (“Capex”) survey provides a measure of firms’ investment plans for up to 18 months ahead.10                                                 7  The saving rate has drifted down a little over the past couple of years, and the stronger growth of household credit of late suggests that there has been some pick-up in the appetite for risk among households. 8  For a discussion of the experience of US firms, see Sharpe A and G Suarez (2014), “The Insensitivity of Investment to Interest Rates: Evidence from a Survey of CFOs”, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Working Paper 2014–02. 9  In a related vein, there is evidence that Australian listed companies have more risk-related meetings now than in the early 2000s. It’s possible that this is a response to an increased compliance burden, though such a change may have reduced firms’ appetites for risk nonetheless. (Special thanks to Gianni La Cava for suggesting this measure and to Lara Bui who painstakingly constructed it.) 10  The survey needs to be adjusted for the fact that realised investment tends to vary predictably from what is initially expected by firms. There are various ways to do this. For forecasting purposes, the most reliable method is to adjust investment expectations by the average “realisation” ratio over the full history of the 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The most recent survey implies a modest increase in nominal non-mining business investment in 2014/15, in the order of 4½ per cent. The survey suggests that investment is likely to rise for a number of industries, including: rental hiring and real estate; information media and technology; retail; and construction. This picture is consistent with the ongoing recovery in household expenditure, including on dwelling investment, and in non-residential building construction. Investment is expected to decline in the manufacturing sector and for utilities. Given that firms adapt their plans as events unfold, the early readings on investment intentions for a given year often turn out to be wrong. We can see the extent of this by comparing the early estimates for a given year with the final (seventh) estimates in the Capex data. This is shown here based on the third estimate, which is what we currently have to hand for this financial year (Graph 8). We can see that even over the course of just a few quarters, business investment can turn out to be quite a bit higher, or quite a bit lower, than the most recent reading from the survey suggests. For example, investment covered by the Capex survey was much weaker than had been expected initially through the 1990s recession and early 2000s slowdown. But it was stronger than initially expected through the mid 2000s and a bit stronger than expected last financial year. In short, if firms decide to undertake more investment than they had earlier anticipated, that investment can come about relatively quickly. Conclusions In conclusion, non-mining business investment has been subdued and measures of capacity utilisation remain a bit below average levels. Meanwhile, over the past year or so there has been a gradual increase in the pace of growth of economic activity outside of the mining sector, owing in part to the very low level of interest rates. Subdued investment (outside the mining sector) has been consistent with a period of greater uncertainty and below-average confidence. However, a number of indicators suggest that uncertainty has declined to levels seen prior to the global financial crisis. Also, measures of business confidence have picked up over the course of the past year to be a bit above long-run average levels. While this is a welcome development, it may not be sufficient to spur investment if businesses’ appetite for risk remains relatively low. Moreover, the still-high level of the exchange rate may be weighing on investment of firms in the traded sector. Nevertheless, there are tangible indications that non-mining business investment will grow at a modest pace this financial year. And if firms’ willingness to take on risks improves, investment could easily be stronger still. It’s always hard to know if and when such a change in sentiment might occur. But it is more likely to do so when the fundamental determinants of investment are in place. The ready availability of internal and external finance, at very low cost, is one element of that. The stronger growth of demand across the non-mining parts of the economy over the past year or so is another. If history is any guide, eventually the period of elevated risk aversion is likely to give way to a concern among businesses, not of losses, but of lost opportunities and a loss of market share.                                                                                                                                                      survey; for details, see Berkelmans L and G Spence (2013), “Realisation Ratios in the Capital Expenditure Survey”, RBA Bulletin, December, pp 1–6. It is also worth noting that the Capex survey provides only a partial read on non-mining business investment because it excludes firms from a number of key industries, including agriculture, health care and education (which accounted for about 16 per cent of private non-mining business investment in 2012/13) and it excludes investment in intangible assets (which accounts for about 15 per cent of total private business investment). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  Graph 1    Graph 2    
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Graph 3    Graph 4    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  Graph 5    Graph 6    
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Graph 7    Graph 8  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Benoît Cœuré: Life below zero – learning about negative interest rates Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the annual dinner of the ECB’s Money Market Contact Group, Frankfurt am Main, 9 September 2014. *      *      * Accompanying slides can be found here: http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2014/html/sp140909.en.pdf I would like to thank Florian Heider for his contribution to this presentation. All opinions expressed remain mine. Ladies and Gentlemen (Slide 1), It is a pleasure to be here with you tonight. The Money Market Contact Group plays a key role in informing the ECB’s decision making process. As a tribute to your collective foresight, I would like to recall that in your meeting on 25 June 2012, you were among the first to discuss the operational consequences of lowering the ECB’s Deposit Facility Rate (DFR) to zero or below zero. This will be the topic of my remarks tonight.1  A few months ago, on 5 June, the ECB lowered the main refinancing rate to 0.15%, the marginal lending rate to 0.40%, and – maybe most noteworthy – the Deposit Facility Rate to minus 0.10%. Last week, on 4 September, these rates were cut to 0.05%, 0.30% and –0.20% respectively, and it was stated that the lower bound had now been reached. The ECB also decided in June to remunerate current account balances in excess of the minimum reserve requirements at the deposit facility rate as opposed to zero as was the case previously. With these measures, we entered practically uncharted territory. When Gregory Mankiw in 2009 stated in the New York Times that “it may be time […] to go negative”, he revived an idea that may seem odd at first. If lowering interest rates stimulates the economy and policy rates are already very low or even zero, then why not keep cutting rates and have negative interest rates? The idea of negative rates, that is, lending 100 and getting back say 95, may seem absurd “but remember this: Early mathematicians thought the idea of a negative number was absurd [too]”.2  In fact, the idea of negative interest rates, or “taxing money”, goes back to the late nineteenth century, to Silvio Gesell, the German founder of “Freiwirtschaft”. The historic academic opinion on Gesell is divided. Irving Fisher supported him and John Maynard Keynes called him “a strange, unduly neglected prophet”, others a “typical monetary crank”.3  So where do we stand in the euro area? I would like to answer this question today by addressing the following points: • What does it mean to have one of our policy rates, the deposit facility rate, below zero? • Why did we go negative?                                                 1 ECB DG Market Operations, 2012, Summary of the discussion of the Money Market Contact Group, 25 June 2012, available on the ECB website. For an early discussion, see also Cœuré, B., 2012. “Central banks and the challenges of the lower bound”. Intervention at the Meeting on the Financial Crisis hosted by the Initiative on Global Markets, at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Miami, 19 February.  2 Mankiw, G., 2009, “It may be time for the Fed to go negative”, New York Time (April 19). See also W. Buiter, 2009. “Negative interest rates: when are they coming to a central bank near you?”, May 2009. 3 See Ilgmann, C. and M. Menner, 2011, “Negative nominal rates: history and current proposals”, International Economics and Economic Policy, 8, 383–405. See also Gesell, S., 1958. The Natural Economic Order. London: Peter Owen Ltd., and Fisher, I., 1933. Stamp Script. New York: Adelphi.  
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  • What are in principle the benefits and costs of such a move? • And, with the benefit of some hindsight since June, what is the initial assessment? To begin with, it is important to point out that the deposit facility rate has a specific, narrow meaning: under a negative DFR, banks that have more funds in their account with the ECB than what they need to fulfil their reserve requirement lose some money. Suppose, for instance, that a bank has €100 million of excess reserves continuously for one year, then at an interest rate of –0.20% it receives back € 99.8 million, so the cost of depositing funds with the ECB for a full year is € 200,000. Why do banks accept such a cost of depositing excess reserves with the central bank? The answer is that the alternatives to depositing excess reserves are also costly. In fact, the cost of using alternatives to central bank deposits determines to what extent the rate on excess reserves can go negative in practice. Banks can always choose to hold physical currency instead of electronic money in their accounts with the ECB. Since physical currency has a zero nominal rate of return, there is what I would call an “economic lower bound” for the rate on excess reserves. It is difficult to identify but it is not zero because the effective rate of return on currency is negative. One does not even need to impose a demurrage rate or regular stamping on banknotes, as Irving Fischer has proposed based on Gesell’s ideas.4 There is a cost of storing, holding, and more importantly, using physical currency.5 This involves the cost of renting, maintaining and securing storage facilities such as vaults as well as the cost of shipping currency around in a safe and timely manner. A recent ECB study estimated the private cost of cash payments to be 1.1% of GDP on average in the participating countries.6 The unit social cost was estimated at 2.3 cents per euro of transaction. This is substantially higher than the unit social cost of a credit transfer or other non-cash means of payments per euro of transaction. Because the overnight unsecured money market alone currently involves hundreds of banks with an aggregate transaction volume of around € 40–50 billion every day, replicating this scale of transacting with physical money would be a formidable and costly task, both privately and socially. I would not go as far as Kenneth Rogoff and conclude that having only electronic money, by pushing down the economic lower bound, would recreate room for manoeuvre for central banks in a protractedly low inflation environment.7 The ECB is committed to bringing euro area inflation back at a level below but close to 2%, in line with its mandate.  But what is then the rationale for a negative rate on the deposit facility? Why impose a cost on banks’ excess reserves?  One should view the negative rate in the context of the ECB’s aim to provide further monetary policy accommodation inter alia by lowering policy rates without impairing market intermediation.8 There are a number of reasons why it is desirable to keep a certain distance                                                 4 Stamping of banknotes was famously tried in the city of Wörgl, Austria, in 1932. Bills were introduced with a devaluation rate of 1% per month unless holders would buy stamps to extend their nominal value. See Champ, B., 2008. Stamp script: Money people paid to use. Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, April.  5 Beyond the direct opportunity cost, moving the deposit rate into deeply negative territory may involve indirect costs, depending on the ability of banks to pass it to their customers, in particular retail ones.  6 Schmiedel, H., Kostova, G., and W. Ruttenberg, 2012. “The social and private costs of retail payment instruments. A European perspective”, ECB Occasional Papers Series , No. 137.  7 Rogoff, K., 2014, “Costs and benefits to phasing out paper currency”, NBER Working Paper 20126 8 For an early explicit analysis of this rationale in a New-Keynesian model, see Buiter, W. and N. Panigirtzoglou, 2003, “Overcoming the zero bound on nominal interest rates with negative interest on currency: Gesell’s solution”, The Economic Journal, 113, 723–746.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  between the main refinancing and the deposit rates. The relative difference between the cost of borrowing from the ECB and the benefit of depositing with the ECB determines the incentive to lend in the interbank market. Having an active interbank market is important to obtain price signals about the transmission of policy rates into the economy. It is also important to reduce bank excessive reliance on central bank money, which has been a key factor of resilience in the post-crisis environment. In the words of Michael Woodford, “the demand for [overnight funds] is a function of the location of the overnight rate relative to the lending rate and the deposit rate, but independent of the absolute level of any of these interest rates.”9  To see the role of the relative difference, consider the following thought experiment. For the sake of the argument, let me abstract from credit risk in the overnight market and assume that there is enough eligible collateral to borrow from the ECB. Hence, there would be no material difference between very short-term secured and unsecured borrowing and lending. Banks with excess reserves would only lend in the interbank market at a rate that is above the deposit rate. Banks with a shortage of reserves would only borrow in the interbank market at a rate that is below the main refinancing rate. Suppose now the main refinancing rate is equal to the deposit rate. Then there is no rate at which trade is possible. Hence, it is important to keep a spread between the main refinancing and the deposit rate in order to support market activity. Another benefit of lowering the deposit rate together with the main refinancing rate is that in the current situation with excess liquidity, short-term interest rates such as EONIA track the deposit rate more closely than the main refinancing rate.10 The banking system as a whole has excess liquidity, which currently stands at around € 130 billion. When the excess liquidity increases, rates fall since less must be borrowed in the interbank market (the demand curve shifts down). In order to make sure that the monetary policy accommodation is passed on to the interbank market under fixed-rate full allotment and excess liquidity, it is therefore not enough to lower just the main refinancing rate. In fact, the deposit rate may be the most important policy rate of a central bank in an environment of excess liquidity. The decision to lower rates, which was accompanied by a number of other measures to stimulate credit to the economy such as “targeted” long-term operations (to induce banks to lend more to the real sector) and an announcement of purchases of asset-backed securities and covered bonds based on claims on the euro area real economy, is also fully in line with the ECB’s forward guidance. Forward guidance implies that interest rates remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time conditional on an assessment of the economic outlook. Following the June decision, the lower policy rates were transmitted well to the money market and, in line with forward guidance, market uncertainty about the expected path of policy rates fell. EONIA forwards curves flattened and shifted down (Slide 2). In addition, the volatility of EONIA rates as well as the option-implied volatility of short-term interest rates dropped. The lower policy rates were also transmitted to longer maturities and to market segments other than the unsecured money market. EURIBOR rates and rates implied by EURIBOR futures fell after the June decision and again after the September decision (Slide 3 and 4). Unsecured money market interest rates are now negative for a maturity of up two weeks. Besides, the General Collateral (GC) pooling repo curve as well as yields on euro area Treasury bills and notes have further adjusted.                                                 9 Woodford, M., 2001, “Monetary policy in the information economy”, Paper presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium at Jackson Hole (30 August–1 September). 10 For a review of the impact of non-standard monetary policy on money market functioning, see Monnet, C. and M. Bech, 2013, “The impact of unconventional monetary policy on the overnight interbank market”, Reserve Bank of Australia 2013 Annual Conference Volume on “Liquidity and Funding Markets”.  
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The EONIA has regularly been set in negative territory since 28 August together with stable trading volumes (the average daily EONIA volume from January to June 2014 was € 26.1 billion and was € 28.9 billion since June) (Slide 5) and homogenous transmission to closely substitutable market segments, such as GC pooling repo, are evidence that a large fraction of unsecured money market transactions can take place at negative rates without hampering market functioning. This reflects an effective and well-coordinated preparation of market participants since the ECB first mentioned the possibility of bringing the DFR below zero. The fact that money market trading volumes did not fall (they actually rose) is remarkable given the fears some observers had expressed, informed by the Japanese experience of the 1990s, on the potential impact on market functioning of a negative DFR and of very low policy rates more generally. Will the transmission of lower short-term rates to a lower cost of credit for the real economy be as smooth? While bank lending rates have come down in the past in line with lower policy rates, there is a limit to how cheap bank lending can be. The mark-up that banks add to the cost of obtaining funding from the central bank compensates for credit risk, term premia and the cost of originating, screening and monitoring loans. The need for such compensation does not necessarily fall when policy rates are lowered. If anything, a central bank lowers rates when the economy needs stimulus, which is precisely when it is difficult for banks to find good loan making opportunities. It remains to be seen whether and to what extent the recent monetary policy accommodation translates into cheaper bank lending.11  Another concern with lowering rates is that it may contribute to the instability of the financial sector. While this can be a valid concern, in practice, a causal chain is difficult to establish. Do low rates really lead to instability (e.g., though an excess search for yield) or are rates low because there has been instability in the financial system and the economy is in need of stimulus?12 That said, reducing excessive risk aversion in financial markets has been a welcome (side) effect of central bank policies during the crisis. The question is whether risk-taking in the financial sector has now already gone too far, contributing to growing financial imbalances, frothy asset price valuations and too loose credit standards. Irrespective of the answer to this question, given the low inflation environment, it is clear that monetary policy cannot currently assume the role of addressing such concerns for the euro area. It is therefore the task of macro-prudential policies to deal with potential financial imbalances. The supervisory set-up in Europe has undergone significant improvements that will help to ensure the soundness of the financial system. As we enter an extended period of low interest rates, we must stand ready to use to their full extent the new macro-prudential instruments that the national competent authorities and the ECB are now entrusted with.  An important aspect of lowering policy rates was that it also reaffirmed our forward guidance and helped to clarify the ECB’s commitment to ensure that the monetary policy stance remains appropriate to the needs of the euro area economy. This is reflected in the EONIA-OIS curve being now flat and in negative territory for a maturity of up to three years, reflecting market expectations of negative EONIA fixings well into 2017 (Slide 6), and in a widening gap between the expected path of US and euro area interest rates. (Slide 7). A negative deposit rate can, however, also have adverse consequences. For a start, it imposes a cost on banks with excess reserves and could therefore reduce their profitability.                                                 11 For a recent review of the bank lending channel of monetary policy transmission with a special focus on the crisis experience, see Gambacorta, L. and D. Marques-Ibanez, 2011, “The bank lending channel: Lessons from the crisis”, BIS Working Paper No. 345. 12 For causal evidence that lower interest rates lead to more risk-taking by banks, see Jimenez, G., Peydro, J., Ongena, S. and J. Saurina, 2012, “Hazardous time for monetary policy: What do 23 million loans say about the impact of monetary policy on credit risk-taking?”, Econometrica, forthcoming.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Note, however, that this applies to any reduction of the deposit rate and not just to those that make the rate negative. For sure, lower bank profitability could hamper economic recovery, especially in times when banks have to deleverage owning to stricter regulation and enhanced market scrutiny. But whether bank profitability really falls when policy rates are lowered depends more generally on the slope of the yield curve (as banks’ funding costs may also fall), on banks’ investment policies (as there is scope for them to diversify their cash investment both along the curve and across the credit universe) and on factors driving non-interest income.13 More fundamentally, banks are profitable in a healthy economy where households and companies strive to finance their projects, which is what our accommodative monetary policy aims to achieve in the first place. In fact, both ensuring a smooth transmission of our low policy rates to the cost of credit to the economy and supporting the profitability of banks will ultimately depend on whether economic policies at the euro area and at the country level are successful in putting euro area economies back on a path of strong and stable growth, by mobilising both supply-side and, where available, demand-side instruments. A prudent, well-capitalised banking system is needed in any case, and the ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment together with the start of the Single Supervisory Mechanism are key in this respect. In order to avoid the cost of excess reserves, banks may also, decide to borrow less from the ECB. This would reduce excess liquidity in the banking system and put upward pressure on interest rates in the interbank and bond market, which could counteract the reduction of policy rates. But this is not what we have seen so far. Despite the discussion on the adverse consequences of a negative deposit rate, there was no significant impact on the functioning of money markets. I already mentioned the smooth transmission of rates and the stable trading volume in EONIA. Similarly, the level of excess liquidity or the amount of deposits with the ECB (Slide 8) has been largely unaffected. However, one possible reason for the stable level of the money market function could be the declining, but still existing fragmentation of the money markets. While a lot has been achieved, for example TARGET2 imbalances have fallen by nearly half since their peak in mid-2012 (at € 572bn on 3 September, € 541bn below their peak level reached in July 2012), market fragmentation in the euro area is still present.14  If banks with excess reserves are predominately highly profitable banks located in non-stressed countries, then a potential adverse effect on bank profitability may be less of a concern from the financial stability perspective. Similarly, if banks have good reason to borrow from the ECB, for instance when other sources of funding are not available, and if those banks that borrow are not necessarily the same as those that deposit with the ECB, then excess liquidity in the banking system may not fall. What about the impact of negative rates on market fragmentation in the euro area? Evidence from actual money market transactions shows that fragmentation still significantly hampers the smooth transmission of lower rates across the euro area. Banks located in non-stressed countries can now borrow in the overnight unsecured market at negative rates. Rates for borrowers located in stressed countries are mostly positive and the distribution of rates is wide, ranging from slightly negative to slightly above the main refinancing rate. That said, there is some evidence that lower rates have reduced fragmentation in secured markets. The search for yield in the low rate environment has increased the demand for                                                 13 There is evidence that the lower interest rate environment in the United States adversely affects money market funds, see Kacperczyk, M. and M Di Maggio, 2014, “The unintended consequences of the zero lower bound policy”, Working Paper, Columbia Business School. This is, however, less of a concern in Europe where money market funds are not central to the financial system.  14 For more information, see the ECB Report “Financial Integration in Europe” (April 2014). 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  higher yielding, but still safe products such as repo or sovereign bonds, including those of non-core countries.15 The higher demand has pushed down and thus compressed interest rates in secured markets. Let me conclude. Given the theoretical arguments for and against lowering some policy rates into negative territory, and given the practical experience so far, what is the verdict? Or, coming back to the opinions on Gesell: should he be considered a prophet or monetary crank? While the final verdict is certainly still out, based on the presented evidence so far, it seems fair to say that the lowering of policy rates, with the deposit rate moving into negative territory, has provided an appropriate monetary policy stimulus to the euro area economy, comforted the forward guidance of the ECB, and contributed to some reduction in market fragmentation, without having an adverse impact on the functioning of money markets. As the money market settles in negative territory, and other market segments start experiencing negative yields, we now have to make sure that the broader market community is prepared to cope with this new environment. Thank you for your attention.                                                  15 According to the latest ICMA survey of 4 September, the repo market size increased by 3.3% during the last 6 months from EUR 5,499 billion to EUR 5,782 billion.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Sabine Lautenschläger: Banking supervision – a challenge Speech Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the Deutsches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung, Hamburg, 8 September 2014. *      *      * Summary The effectiveness of monetary policy will be bolstered when the European Central Bank (ECB) assumes its banking supervision responsibilities under the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), believes Sabine Lautenschläger, member of the ECB’s Executive Board. Bringing together the supervision of individual banks, the macro-prudential supervision of the financial system and monetary policy under one roof will help to ensure that monetary policy can focus entirely on safeguarding price stability, Lautenschläger said in a speech at the Annual Conference of the Verein für Socialpolitik in Hamburg. The interaction between the three policy areas of the central bank will reduce the risk of financial dominance, strengthen the transmission of monetary policy and improve the management of the financial system. “Both areas have a very strong interest in sound banks with viable business models that can provide credit to the real economy”, said Lautenschläger. Given that banks have already been preparing over recent months for the requirements that will apply following the imminent launch of the SSM and have strengthened their capital bases, their capacity to provide credit to the economy has increased even before the official start of the SSM. This strengthens the transmission of monetary policy. For the central bank, which provides financing for commercial banks, it is very important – particularly in times of crisis – to make a clear distinction between sound banks that are solvent but suffering from liquidity shortages and insolvent banks that will not be able to survive in the long run. A strong European supervisor would be able to dispel some of the uncertainty attached to solvency assessments. This will help the ECB to fulfil its tasks, because it will be able to provide liquidity support without fear of exceeding its mandate, said Lautenschläger. However, reliable solvency information would only be able to help reduce financial dominance if there is a credible regime for resolving banks. This requires a common regulatory framework and a resolution fund with ample resources. In addition, stricter rules regarding the granting of emergency liquidity assistance to commercial banks by Eurosystem national central banks could reduce potential conflicts of interest. Particularly in times of economic growth, the ECB’s new tasks could permit an appropriate reaction to potential excesses in asset markets, for example. Using interest rates to counter such developments is not appropriate, warned Lautenschläger, because it could jeopardise the primary objective of price stability. It is thus all the more important that the ECB’s Governing Council should have more tools at its disposal to counter imbalances. *      *      * My speech today is devoted to a relationship – to be precise, a triangular relationship. It’s about what makes a complex, yet successful relationship which does justice to the common and different goals and interests of the three parties. Starting this year, a triangular relationship, and in particular the workflows and decision-making processes within it, is playing a specific role for the ECB, because in less than two months the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) officially begins its operations – and then three policy areas will come under the umbrella of the ECB. Monetary policy will remain, of course, our main task. The ECB will additionally take on responsibility for banking supervision in the euro area. And we will play an important role in calibrating and implementing macro-prudential supervision, even though national authorities will continue to be primarily responsible. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Each of these policy areas has its mandate, goal and instruments. The task of monetary policy is to ensure price stability. In this respect, interest rate policy is the standard instrument (although there are now quite a number of measures that are non-standard). The supervisory objectives are to ensure the safety and stability of the banking system as a whole. The supervisory authorities have had, since the crisis, a veritable arsenal of instruments which mainly concern the risk-bearing capacity of individual banks. The objective of macro-prudential policy is the stability of the financial system as a whole. Even though the ECB has of course exerted influence on financial stability via its monetary policy, starting in November it will additionally use capital-based and liquidity-based instruments – in respect of the institutions it directly or indirectly supervises. Despite their differences, the three policy areas of monetary policy, banking supervision and financial stability plus macro-prudential supervision are closely linked. One could even argue they are in a triangular relationship: they influence comparable variables (such as consumption and investment) and operate via the same transmission channels (such as bank lending). Instruments which are used in one of the three policy areas inevitably affect the other two; that makes it essential to clearly specify the objectives of each activity and to clearly adjudicate on conflicting goals. As is often the case in complex relationships, we could spend the whole day studying each side of this relationship. Today I would like to specifically address the question of how the new framework, how the two new banking supervision and macro-prudential supervision tasks, will help the ECB to abide by its price stability mandate, as a kind of side effect. To come straight to the point, I’ll be talking about financial dominance, monetary policy transmission and the financial cycle. Reducing financial dominance The classic function of a central bank is to provide liquidity to solvent banks. And the ECB has unquestionably fulfilled this role even during the crisis. Our lending to banks rose by more than €800 billion from 2008 to the height of the crisis in 2012. If the ECB had not provided liquidity, there would have been bailouts, abrupt debt reduction and thus a deepening of the recession – and this would have made our mandate of ensuring price stability much more difficult. However, there is no doubt that this lending entails risks for the central bank. It could fall into the trap of financial dominance: the central bank could finance banks which are not suffering merely from a temporary liquidity crunch, but which are permanently incapable of surviving, which are insolvent. Financial dominance is accompanied by the risks of moral hazard and market distortion and – worst of all – by the risk of monetary financing. But how can a central bank become exposed to these risks? No doubt, it is a consequence of the information asymmetry between a non-supervisory central bank on the one hand and the banks and national supervisors on the other. Assessing the solvency of a bank often takes more than the equity ratio. Having comprehensive knowledge of the capital situation and the risk profile of the bank is a real benefit for such an assessment. This is particularly true in financial crises, in the course of which an assessment of the solvency and risk-bearing capacity of a bank depends on many quantitative and qualitative parameters; we should recall the often difficult valuation of assets that came under pressure in the crisis or those that were not marketable. For the ECB this aspect is more important than for many other central banks. Our monetary policy works via the bank transmission channel, so it is bank-based. Thus, for our open market operations almost 1,800 business partners are currently registered. By way of comparison, the Federal Reserve has only 21 primary dealers. 72% of our business is conducted via direct (and, of course, secured) loans to banks, a type of lending unknown to the Fed. For this kind of monetary policy, information on the financial soundness of our monetary policy counterparties is vital. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  The creation of the SSM represents an important complement to monetary policy. A well-established European supervisory body that is capable of acting can recognise emerging internal risks in banks and strengthen their resilience and risk-bearing capacity. In addition, in the event of a crisis the ECB will be able to resort to the sound judgement of the SSM. This is especially true for the emergency liquidity assistance, which the national central banks are responsible for granting. In this respect, the Governing Council, for its decision, will be able to rely, among other things, on the SSM’s expertise to judge whether it wants to raise objections to the national emergency liquidity assistance.1 Now I don’t want to sing the praises of synergy effects without pointing to some problems. First, financial dominance may arise not only if the ECB, due to lack of sufficient information, provides liquidity to non-viable banks. Financial dominance may also arise if the public gains the impression that our interest rate decisions are influenced by concerns about their effects on the institutions, in other words if we fall prey to a conflict of interests. Our credibility would then be at stake. That’s why, in the workflows and decision-making processes, we attach great importance to the separation of monetary policy decisions and supervisory decisions. That’s why the functional separation below the Governing Council level will be strictly observed and monetary policy decision documents will be submitted to the Governing Council without any inflow of supervisory analysis, and vice versa. Only at Governing Council level will the draft decisions meet one and the same decision-making body. For example, if supervisory measures are taken in respect of certain banks the Supervisory Board will forward the draft of the final decision to the Governing Council under an implicit approval process – the process ensures that the members of the Governing Council do not change the decision, but can only turn it down. This principle of a clear separation between our different roles will also be carefully monitored by the European Parliament. To effectively counter any possible impression of fiscal dominance, systemically important banks must be resolved without any risks to financial stability. Currently, a Europe-wide framework for bank resolution is being set up, a Single Resolution Mechanism with a resolution fund. We have thus taken a big step towards solving the too-big-to-fail problem. The resolution mechanism will also serve to protect the central bank, because it makes possible a Europe-wide, orderly winding-up of a systemically important institution, without the Governing Council having to worry about the side effects on financial stability of a short-term withdrawal of liquidity. Effective supervision and the orderly resolution of banks thus also support the ECB’s monetary policy mandate. It helps the central bank to carry out its task, that is, to provide liquidity assistance, without it having to worry about overstepping its mandate. Improving the monetary policy transmission The Eurosystem offers liquidity to banks to maintain financial intermediation in the money market and to improve the transmission of monetary policy. For this transmission to work optimally, a stable financial sector is needed. For banks are the most important channel via which our monetary stimulus is passed on to businesses and households. And only healthy banks can perform their role as lenders. So monetary policy-makers and banking supervisors                                                 1  However, Article 14.4 of the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank (Statute of the ESCB) assigns the Governing Council of the ECB responsibility for restricting ELA operations if it considers that these operations interfere with the objectives and tasks of the Eurosystem. Such decisions are taken by the Governing Council with a majority of two-thirds of the votes cast. For further information, please see: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/201402_elaprocedures.de.pdf? e716d1d560392b10142724f50c6bf66a. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  are very interested in having sound banks with viable business models that can lend money to the real economy. But how does the Single Supervisory Mechanism support the monetary policy transmission? First, the comprehensive assessment, i.e. the health check of the banks, plays an essential role. The assessment of bank balance sheets aims to uncover bad debts and to place all banks with a solid capital base under the supervision of the SSM. And this assessment can have a catalytic effect. Prior to the health check, most banks accelerated their deleveraging or built up their equity. The sum of bank balance sheets declined in 2013 alone by around 20 percentage points of GDP. Since July 2013, the nearly 130 banks have built up capital amounting to approximately €140 billion.2 As a result of the health check, one or the other institution will make further provisions or raise capital. A lengthy period of balance sheet restructuring will thus be significantly shortened. In lending, we are already seeing the first positive signals. The decline in lending to companies and households has stabilised. And our latest Bank Lending Survey suggests that in the second quarter of 2014 lending standards eased for all categories of loans on a net basis. The Single Supervisory Mechanism can make a further significant contribution in support of monetary policy; set up properly, it could, at best, enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy during the next credit cycle. At this point, the interaction of micro-prudential and macro-prudential policy, the second side of the triangular relationship, comes into play. As I said earlier, many banks in the euro area had to deleverage significantly during the crisis; they were not resilient enough. Some banks found it difficult to refinance because their equity ratios were too low. So they had to increase their capital ratio during the downturn, and this curbed new lending. This cyclical behaviour cannot perhaps be eliminated with instruments from micro- and macro-prudential supervision, but it certainly can be attenuated. Supervision in Europe will take a preventive, risk-based approach. We will be pushing for more than compliance with the minimum capital and liquidity ratios under the supervisory regulation. We will above all check whether the business models of banks we directly supervise are sustainable, whether bank-internal control structures and governance are set up in an appropriate way and whether the institutions could survive crises. If during an upturn a bank’s resilience is increased, then there’s less need to raise capital during a downturn to boost market confidence. Under such circumstances, it should then be possible to use macro-prudential instruments that support lending, such as the releasing of countercyclical capital buffers. This would help monetary policy to achieve more predictable effects throughout the economic cycle. But the interests of the banking supervisors and of those responsible for macro-prudential supervision do not always have to be aligned. I can easily imagine situations in which the supervisor feels there is more capital and liquidity than necessary or that the increase in margin requirements is more than necessary, while from a systemic perspective cyclical behaviour is perceived to be crisis-intensifying. The link between the two areas of responsibility at the ECB may also prove to be helpful here, by internally resolving potential conflicts. The advantage of having the Governing Council as a decision-making body for all three policy areas is that it can get a                                                 2  These figures are based solely on publicly available data; retained earnings and other categories were not taken into account in the calculations. The actual figures should be correspondingly higher. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  comprehensive picture of the systemic risks and thus weigh up the micro and macro considerations and can find a balance that should be beneficial to monetary policy. But this is not the only advantage for monetary policy. By combining the functions within the ECB synergies may arise, at best, in the choice of instruments to curb threats to financial stability. For some monetary policy instruments, such as adjustments to haircuts or to the minimum requirements for collateral, overlap with macro-prudential measures aimed at liquidity and margin requirements. The interplay between micro- and macro-prudence can therefore support monetary policy not only during the cycle. It can also ensure that monetary policy does not have to deal with problems that may lie on the periphery of its mandate. At the same time, the combination of functions within the central bank also brings great advantages for micro-prudential supervision. For monetary policy decisions, extensive economic analyses are made to which the supervisors may resort in order to obtain additional information about the environment and the conditions under which the banks conduct their business. The ECB has extensive knowledge of the market and provides, among other things, real-time insights into the general refinancing situation of the banks. In short, the exchange of know-how and information creates synergies and leads to better informed supervisory decisions and outcomes. Steering the financial cycle So far I have talked about the interaction between the areas of responsibility in the downturn phase of the cycle. But what about the upturn? In recent years there has been much discussion about the extent to which central banks should play a role in steering the financial cycle – whether they should “lean against the wind”. Before the crisis, many opinion leaders believed that, given the difficulty of identifying latent bubbles, it was the task of the central bank to make good the damage once the bubble had burst. As a result of the crisis, however, when a long financial boom had a major impact on price stability, many economists have changed their minds and are demanding that central banks should take into account risks to financial stability in their decisions. The ECB has always included financial stability considerations in its monetary policy decisions. In our two-pillar strategy financial imbalances are an important element in deciding what measures are necessary, even when it is a matter of inflation that is too low. In particular, the monetary pillar captures the relationship between excessive credit and liquidity creation, and potential risks to future price developments, including that of a destabilising asset price boom. Our actions have a deliberate medium-term orientation. This gives us a sufficiently long horizon to take account of financial imbalances in our strategy. Elements of a “leaning-against-the-wind” approach are therefore implicitly included. However, should there be signs of financial imbalances emerging, we need to carefully consider whether the use of standard monetary policy instruments is appropriate as a response. There are two reasons for this. First, it could conflict with our mandate to preserve price stability. The BIS estimates that the financial cycle typically lasts around 16 years, compared with eight years for the business cycle. This asynchrony can lead to periods in which inflation makes a rate cut necessary, while the financial data favour the opposite. If we take only the financial cycle into account, we may be forced, even with our medium-term orientation, to make compromises in terms of our price stability objective. According to our hierarchy of goals, which gives priority to monetary policy, this would not be permissible. In addition, there is also the question of which interest rate path should be followed to counter excessive credit growth. Some studies conclude that in a highly leveraged boom 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  even small changes in interest rates can have a strong impact.3 Other studies suggest, however, that rather large interest rate movements would be required to counteract the financial cycle, but these in turn would cause collateral damage to the economy and price stability.4 Using monetary policy instruments to strengthen financial stability seems to be too crude an approach in view of the heterogeneity in the euro area. So, for example, lending in the period before 2008 was ten percentage points higher in some subsequent crisis countries than in the non-crisis countries. A rate hike by the ECB, which always applies to the entire euro area, would have had too great an impact on those regions that were not affected by excessive lending. But if monetary policy instruments cannot always simultaneously satisfy financial stability aspects, then there is only one conclusion: we must consistently apply the Tinbergen Rule; we need at least as many instruments as we have goals to achieve. A different goal requires an additional tool that is appropriate and proportionate. This is where the SSM comes into play – more specifically, the relationship between macro-prudential policy and monetary policy, the third side of the triangle. In principle, it should be easier, by expanding the toolkit which is available to the ECB, with the SSM to establish a clear separation of functions between the two policy areas. Monetary policy should concentrate on price stability, which is an important variable throughout the euro area. The focus of macro-prudential policy should be on financial stability. Particular emphasis could be put on specific regional or sectoral imbalances. However, there may be circumstances under which a clear separation is not so simple. This is the case when the financial cycle extends across sectors and countries and represents a threat to future price stability. A combination of monetary and macro-prudential measures could then be the right answer. Particularly for the macro-prudential measures, there are many different questions and uncertainties about unintended spillover effects of regionally limited measures on other countries or the entire euro area. Under such conditions, the fact that the ECB is also responsible for banking supervision will benefit monetary policy. Because for all of these issues, the decision-making is concentrated in the Governing Council. The Council’s role is to ensure an optimal policy mix. As for macro-prudential policy, the national authorities, as I have already said, still play an important shaping role. They have extensive knowledge of the national economic and financial systems. The governors of most of the national central banks are involved in national macro-prudential tasks. This will make the exchange of views and voting in the Governing Council in respect of national and European macro-prudential policies considerably easier. Should opinions diverge – for example, in relation to the systemic consequences of a specific measure – the ECB is authorised under EU legislation to improve existing macro-prudential measures which have been implemented by national authorities or to make recommendations for new measures. Summary Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to summarise.                                                 3  See Adrian, T. und H.-Y. Shin (2010), “The Changing Nature of Financial Intermediation and the Financial Crisis of 2007–09”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No 439, March 2010. 4  See, for example, Bean, C., M. Paustian, A. Penalver and T. Taylor, “Monetary Policy after the Fall”, 28 August 2010. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  My intention today has been to give you an understanding of the future tasks of the ECB, the future triangular relationship. The Single Supervisory Mechanism and the new role in macro-prudential supervision will not, when properly set up, dilute the objective of the central bank, but instead may contribute, as a side effect, to a strengthening of our monetary policy mandate. And monetary policy can focus on its task of maintaining price stability. Banking supervision will ensure that banks become more resilient; macro-prudential instruments should have a dampening effect on asset price bubbles and cyclical behaviours. The completion of the banking union will also contribute significantly to safeguarding financial stability in the future. Nevertheless, we must not succumb to hubris – we must not succumb to the notion that all problems are solved thanks to the SSM. The health of individual banks depends not only on supervision, but also on the overall economy and the structure of the banking system; and the ECB’s influence on that is limited. And we should not forget that irrational exuberance, as can be found ex post in many a “bubble”, is simply part of human nature. That’s another lesson the crisis should teach us. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Benoît Coeuré: Credit and investment in the European recovery Speech by Mr Benoît Coeuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the IMF/Bank of Slovenia high-level seminar on “Reinvigorating Credit Growth in Central, Eastern and Southern European Economies”, Portoroz, 26 September 2014. *      *      * Summary To revive the euro area economy recapitalisation not only in the banking sector but also a repairing of private sector balance sheets is needed. The banking sector is undergoing a necessary process of structural reforms. With concluding the Comprehensive assessment there is potential to ensure that credit supply constraints diminish and the cycle turns. For a stronger rebound in investment the private non-financial sector needs to raise equity. One instrument especially for smaller and medium size enterprises is to allow EU investment funds to be distributed in the form of equity and not only in the form of debt, as the European Bank for Reconstruction and development (EBRD) and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) already do in many countries. Also the fragmentation in venture capital markets should be reduced. For smaller firms with the need of deleveraging debt-for-equity-swaps, possibly fostered by tax incentives, could facilitate private debt workouts. What is also needed is to raise productivity. An “upward shock” to total factor productivity is needed but only possible in highly competitive markets. *** Introduction Across Europe credit growth is weak. In most central and eastern European countries credit is either stagnant or growing at low rates. In many countries of the euro area1 credit to the private sector is even in negative territory. The reasons for this are several, but at the heart is a vicious circle of low growth, low investment and low credit. And the challenge facing policymakers today is how to break it. The current policy debate is largely focused on the credit dimension. And indeed, there is evidence that creditless recoveries, while not as rare as sometimes contemplated, are much less common in high income, financially developed economies than in low income countries.2 As European economies heavily depend on bank loans, it stands to reason that the recent weak credit performance of Europe is contributing low economic growth rates. It is nevertheless important that reinvigorating credit growth is not seen as an end in itself. Research based on international evidence suggests that a fast-growing banking sector can be detrimental to aggregate productivity growth.3 And we have seen in the euro area that                                                 1  In Q2 2014, the annual growth rates of MFI loans to the private sector were negative in Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Latvia, Malta, Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia, and Spain. 2  See for example Darvas, Zsolt, (2013), “Can Europe recover without credit?” Using Data from 135 countries, covering five decades, the study suggests that creditless recoveries, in which the stock of real credit does not return to the pre-crisis level for three years after the GDP trough, are not rare and can be characterised by remarkable real GDP growth rates. However, the study finds that the implications of these historical episodes for the current European situation are limited, as creditless recoveries are much less common in high-income countries, and such recoveries were associated with significant real exchange rate depreciation. 3  Cecchetti, Stephan G and Enisse Kharroubi (2012), “Reassessing the impact of finance on growth”, BIS Working Papers No 381. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  credit growth that leads to the wrong type of investment creates financial imbalances eventually leading to crises, while doing little to support long-term economic performance. Indeed, the 1999–2007 period saw a positive correlation between the initial level of GDP per capita and average total factor productivity (TFP) growth rates: the highest TFP growth rates were found in Germany, Austria, Netherlands and Finland, while in the “catching-up” economies (Spain, Greece, Portugal, Ireland) TFP actually declined. An important explanation for this is that capital in the latter economies flowed disproportionately into the non-tradable/services sector, which in general has lower productivity growth. Investment was highest in the construction and real estate sectors, closely followed by retail, transport and leisure.4 This experience shows us that the quality of credit matters as much as the quantity, and it implies that policymakers should focus on a broader question than just reviving credit – namely, “how can we channel savings towards productive investment?”. This focus on investment is warranted because, in the short run, it is key to boosting demand and creating a self-sustaining recovery. And over the longer run, ensuring that investment is efficiently allocated helps create a virtuous circle between productivity and credit, thus avoiding mistakes of the past. Achieving this requires a policy agenda that encompasses both credit supply and demand factors. It requires that we unclog and diversify the channels of financial intermediation in the euro area; that we recapitalise the economy through both reducing debt and raising equity; and that we have a policy mix that makes borrowing to invest worthwhile. In other words, it requires a comprehensive approach. And what I would like to do this afternoon is sketch out for you what such a comprehensive approach could look like, drawing on the lessons learnt from the crisis and the post-crisis adjustment. Fixing the credit channel The starting point is logically the financial sector, and here we are confronting a changing landscape: the European banking sector is undergoing a necessary and largely unavoidable process of structural change. Banks are adopting less risky business models, moving to more deposit-based funding strategies and strengthening their equity capital. As a result, there is a clear trend towards an overall smaller and less leveraged banking industry. While there are several benefits to this process5, it also presents an important question, which is how we can have more credit for productive firms, but less leveraged banks. The medium-term solution is for both banks and capital markets to adapt to the new environment. For banks this means refocusing their business models and taking advantage information technology developments to improve risk management and lower operating costs. We will always need strong banks in the euro area, as they play an essential role in situations where information cannot be standardised or where state verification is costly, for example lending to small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).6 The main challenge in capital markets is to expand market access for firms across the euro area. This is to some extent already happening organically, as firms that can issue diversify their funding sources, but it is uneven: bond issuance is strongly concentrated in countries                                                 4  European Commission, 2013, “Catching-up processes in the euro area”, in Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, Vol. 12, Issue 1, March 2013. 5  See speech by Benoît Cœuré, “On the optimal size of the financial sector”, Frankfurt, 2 September 2014. 6  See for a discussion Levine, Ross (1997). “Financial development and economic growth: views and agenda”. Journal of Economic Literature 35, 688–726 or more recently Jayaraman, Sudarshan. and Anjan V. Thakor, 2014, “Who Monitors the Monitor? Bank Capital Structure and Borrower Monitoring”, mimeo. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  and among firms where bank lending constraints are lowest. As the ECB has argued on several occasions7, this is one reason why we need to urgently focus on creating the legal and regulatory framework for a genuine single market in capital in Europe. Essentially, what we are aiming for is a more balanced financing mix where firms have a greater ability to substitute bank and market finance, and hence intermediation becomes more contestable and resilient. I would however emphasise that balance is key; we should not view market finance as a cure-all. Indeed, there is some research to suggest that too much substitution towards market finance may lead to less total borrowing, as firms that replace bank loans with bond issuance internalise the fact that this type of borrowing will be harder to restructure in bad times.8 Besides, Europe does not have a set of institutions consistent with a fully market-based allocation of savings, such as funded pension schemes. In any event, a more diversified financing mix is realistically a project for tomorrow. We are now seeing signs that credit demand is picking up, making it imperative that nascent demand is not choked off by credit supply constraints. Our focus today therefore has to be on bank finance, namely ensuring that it can continue to fund the real economy even as banks downsize and restructure. And this is where two current policy initiatives come in. The first is the comprehensive assessment of bank balance sheets, which has the potential to ensure that supply constraints diminish as the cycle turns this year. One purpose of the assessment is to steer the deleveraging process towards a “good” form – i.e. banks quickly carving out non-performing assets and raising equity – which international experience suggests leads to a faster rebound in credit to viable firms. Indeed, empirical research suggests that the oft-heard view that higher bank capital leads to lower loan supply is not accurate. Long-run evidence for Germany, for example, finds that higher bank capital tends to be associated with higher business loan volume, with no evidence of a negative effect.9  While the exercise will only conclude next month, we can already see signs that it has affected both the speed and quality of deleveraging. Whereas from 2011 to 2012 asset deleveraging accounted for only 0.1 percentage point of 1.3 percent increase in banks’ Core Tier 1 ratios, from 2012 to 2013 (i.e. after the assessment was launched) it accounted for 1.0 percentage point of the overall increase of 1.2 percent. Capital increases accounted for about half the increase over the 2 years.10 This acceleration of the process suggests that, once the final results are known and residual uncertainty is removed, banks will be in a stronger position to resume new lending. The second on-going initiative is the full rollout of the ECB’s credit easing package, which aims to encourage banks to use their new balance sheet space for lending to the real economy. The Targeted Long-Term Refinancing Operations (TLTRO) have a built-in incentive mechanism to encourage loans to firms and households, and we expect a stronger take up from banks in the December operation and in the six subsequent instalments until June 2016. And our programmes to purchase outright high quality asset-backed securities (ABS) and covered bonds complement this by providing market incentives for banks to originate more saleable securities, and thus more loans to collateralise them.                                                 7  See speech by Benoît Cœuré, “Completing the single market in capital”, ICMA Capital Market Lecture Series 2014, Paris, 19 May 2014. 8  Crouzet, Nicolas (2013), “Corporate debt structure and the macroeconomy”, mimeo. 9  Buch, Claudia and Esteben Prieto (2014), “Do better capitalized banks lend less? Long-run panel evidence from Germany”, International Finance 17:1. 10  See ECB Financial Stability Review, May 2014. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  In short, the combination of these two initiatives results in a confluence of factors – improved incentives and higher capital – that should allow loan supply to expand elastically to meet loan demand. And to the extent that credit supply and demand are endogenous, for instance through the effect of supply constraints on macroeconomic risk, we could see the beginnings of a self-sustaining credit recovery. I would nonetheless question whether a credit recovery is enough to achieve an investment recovery, and hence a sustained recovery for the economy. If we look at the breakdown of credit demand components in the survey data, fixed investment is only having a mildly positive effect on demand after 11 quarters of negative effects.11 And this demand may well be “backward-looking” – that is, delayed projects coming back online. From a “forward-looking” perspective, there are reasons to cautious about the degree of pent-up investment demand. Principal among these is that, while banks might have deleveraged, not all of their customers have. In several euro area countries firms still face a debt overhang that affects the economics of taking on new credit. Real interest rates in the euro area are expected to decrease, as nominal interest rates will remain low for a long period while inflation is expected to gradually rise back towards 2%. But the issue for over-indebted firms is that long-term real interest rates probably cannot go low enough to make new investment attractive: any profits generated will be absorbed by servicing existing debt. Indeed, we see a clear negative correlation – with a coefficient of –0.48 – between corporate debt-to-GDP levels in different countries at the beginning of the crisis and the evolution of non-residential investment since. Repairing private sector balance sheets If we want to see a stronger rebound in investment across the euro area, the next step therefore has to be repairing non-financial private sector balance sheets. And as this process will take place against the backdrop of low inflation and, in the most affected countries, limited fiscal space, it will have to involve reductions in nominal debt. The rebooting of the financial sector that has already taken place puts us in a better position to achieve this. When the comprehensive assessment concludes, banks will acknowledge losses and raise provisions and capital – after the disclosure of the results, capital shortfalls are expected to be covered within six months for the Asset Quality Review or the baseline stress test scenario, and within nine months for the adverse stress test scenario. Thus, from the bank side, restructuring loans to distressed borrowers should become more feasible. What we need going forward is more efficient debt restructuring and insolvency regimes for firms, which at present vary widely between euro area countries. The effectiveness of the restructuring regimes is often hampered by sluggish creditor coordination, a lack of new financing for viable companies undergoing restructuring and an overburdened judicial system. For example, according to the World Bank, to resolve insolvency in Italy takes 1.8 years, compared with just 0.4 years in Ireland. A number of stressed countries have already begun to take initiatives to improve restructuring and insolvency proceedings. In Greece, for example, facilitating debt workouts for viable companies is being made simpler by two new out-of-court debt restructuring tools: one for larger enterprises that includes a multi-creditor coordination mechanism inspired by international standards; and one for SMEs that employs standardised templates. In Spain, the substantial amendment to the Insolvency Law earlier this year, among other things, makes facilitating out-of-court settlements easier while also making in-court                                                 11  See ECB Bank Lending Survey, July 2014. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  settlements more effective. Court approved refinancing agreements now have lower majority requirements and permit the extension of maturities on bank loans, negotiating haircuts and arranging debt-for-equity swaps. Ireland and Portugal have also introduced various measures targeted at enterprises, SMEs and households. In most cases, however, restructuring and insolvency regimes could be made more efficient still by adopting best practice more broadly. This would include, inter alia, strengthening measures to facilitate out-of-court settlements for viable firms; introducing centralised guidelines for voluntary debt workouts coupled with independent intermediation for larger companies; and establishing standardised voluntary workouts for SMEs. The deleveraging of European firms is however not only about reducing debt; it is first and foremost about raising equity. We have in fact already seen a significant decline in debt-to-equity ratios for larger euro area corporates since end-2009 due to valuation gains in equity markets, supported by low interest rates.12 To the extent that our new monetary policy measures affect the relative supply of financial assets and initiate further portfolio rebalancing, we may see further spillovers to equity markets that continue this trend. For smaller firms, however, these channels are less powerful as equity markets are largely underdeveloped. Raising equity therefore has to be more proactive process. One way to achieve this is to use debt-for-equity swaps (fostered possibly through tax incentives) to facilitate private debt workouts. Another is for EU investment funds to be distributed in the form of equity as well as debt, as the European Bank for Reconstruction and development (EBRD) and International Finance Corporation (IFC) already do in many countries, and as I called for in a recent article.13 A third, more medium-term aim is reduce fragmentation in European venture capital markets to increase the depth of private equity markets. This last point is another example of where advancing towards a single market in capital would be beneficial for the euro area – it would not only help strengthen capital markets relative to banks, but also help strengthen equity funding relative to debt. This would also have positive structural effects for the euro area: cross-country integration through equity improves risk-sharing and, as it is harder for investors to “cut and run”, would most likely provide more resilience in a crisis than integration through interbank lending and fixed income investment. New research shows that the vulnerability of the euro area to a “sudden stop” worsened the crisis by further constraining the fiscal reaction of governments during the downturn.14  While such options to increase equity funding are being developed, a strategy that can improve debt dynamics for all firms’ is to raise “implied equity” – the outlook for future income. If firms expect higher income, it improves their debt-to-income ratios and debt service capacity, which in turn creates space for new investment.15 In this sense, raising both the level and trend of potential growth is an integral part of recapitalising European firms, and indeed of the economy as whole.                                                 12  For more information see article on “Deleveraging patterns in the euro area corporate sector”, ECB Monthly Bulletin, February 2014. 13  See opinion piece by Benoît Cœuré and Jörg Asmussen, “A three-pillar-strategy for the euro”, published in Berliner Zeitung and Les Echos, 19 September 2014. 14  Martin, Philippe and Thomas Philippon (2014), “Inspecting the Mechanism: Leverage and the Great Recession in the Eurozone”, forthcoming. 15  The concept of “implied equity” echoes in an investment context what Holmstrom and Tirole have called “inside liquidity”, i.e. future income streams that the private sector can pledge to react to a liquidity shock. Raising implied equity has therefore the additional benefit of making the economic system more resilient to shocks, i.e. it has stabilising as well as allocative properties. See Holmström, Bengt and Jean Tirole (2010), Inside and Outside Liquidity, MIT Press. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  We face however a circular problem in the euro area: we need higher potential growth to work through the debt overhang so that firms can being investing again; but that investment is itself necessary to raise potential growth. And this circle is potentially vicious: if low potential growth leads to lower investment, then it further lowers potential growth. A policy mix to lift investment demand This is where the next part of a comprehensive approach comes in: getting the policy mix right on the supply side of the economy to lift investment demand. In a basic Solow growth model, investment grows at the growth rate of productivity plus the growth rate of hours worked along the steady state path of the economy. As we can only expect limited labour participation gains in an ageing society, to raise investment demand we therefore have to raise productivity. Indeed, achieving an upward shock to TFP seems to me essential to trigger, in a sustainable way, a positive accelerator effect between productivity, investment and credit. But it requires an environment characterised by two things: competition and certainty. Competitive markets are necessary to ensure that investment and productivity are indeed mutually enhancing, which as I said earlier is not a given: high investment in several euro area countries in the pre-crisis period did not lead to a convergence in TFP. Certainly, an important reason for this was that too much capital flowed into real estate. But misallocation also resulted from low levels of competition in the non-tradable/services sector more generally which distorted price signals. As some firms could capture excess rents, a falling marginal product of capital was counterbalanced by rising profit margins, meaning that total compensation from investing in these sectors remained high.16  So: the flipside of productive investment is more competitive markets that produce more accurate price signals, thus drawing resources to where they are most efficiently employed. Achieving this requires not only product and labour market reforms that accelerate the “churn” process within and across sectors17, but also reducing unnecessary regulations that hinder the allocation and reallocation of resources. The World Bank’s “Doing Business” report gives examples such obstacles. If an entrepreneur wants to start a new business in Spain, she has to go through 10 separate procedures, while doing so in Slovenia requires only two. If a firm wants to launch a green field investment, it would have to wait 200 calendar days in Ireland before a new warehouse gets electricity; in Germany it would have to wait only 17 days.18  There are reasons to be optimistic about the effects of a reform process in the euro area. Recent micro-level research from the Eurosystem’s Competitiveness Network, for instance, shows that there is a large and skewed distribution between the most and least productive firms in individual euro area countries. Far from being normally distributed, there are a few highly productive firms and many which have low productivity.19 This implies that a faster and more efficient reallocation across firms and sectors could be quite powerful.                                                 16  European Commission (2013). 17  For more on the effects of “churning” on productivity see Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson (2008), “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?”, American Economic Review, 98(1). 18  World Bank (2013), Doing Business 2014: Understanding Regulations for Small and Medium-Size Enterprises. 19  CompNet Task Force (2014), “Micro-based Evidence of EU Competitiveness: The CompNet Database”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1634. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  Where certainty complements this process is by fixing expectations: the more firms trust that structural reforms will be followed through vigorously, the more they will be inclined to invest on that basis. Put differently, certainty allows the positive medium-term effects of structural reforms to be brought forward into the present. The fact that euro area corporates are currently holding record amounts of cash, rather than investing, suggests that plans for structural reforms are not yet credible enough to reap this “certainty dividend”. Certainty also extends to tax policy. Remember that what matters for firms when deciding whether to invest is the after-tax return on investment. Thus, if firms expect the burden of future taxation to rise, the internal rate of return on a given project is lowered, effectively cancelling out the stimulative effect of lower interest rates on investment. And by contrast, a lower expected tax burden increases the effectiveness of any monetary policy measures. But certainty means also that we stick to our commitments. Indeed, sticking to our own commitments has to become the hallmark of the euro area. The ECB will continue to provide a nominal anchor to the euro area recovery by delivering its primary mandate to bring inflation back to a growth rate of below but close to 2%. It is essential that in parallel all countries follow the rules outlined in the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) and in the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure (MIP) and that these rules are not stretched to the point where they would lose credibility. Conclusion My main message today is simple: we need to focus on the quality of credit, not only the quantity. To create an environment where credit flows to productive investment requires a coherent and comprehensive approach. It requires managing the bank deleveraging process while the euro area transitions to a more balanced financing mix. It requires finding workable solutions to reduce the debt overhang involving both reducing debt and raising equity. And it requires acting on the basic determinants of investment demand, namely productivity. Fortunately, all the pieces of the jigsaw are now in place to achieve such an approach. Banks are approaching the end of their deleveraging. This is creating a better capitalised sector that can facilitate restructuring. And we have an emerging consensus on the importance of supply sides policies to boost growth potential. We now simply need to put those pieces together. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Manuel Sánchez: An economic outlook and policy update on Mexico Remarks by Mr Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the United States-Mexico Chamber of Commerce, New York City, 26 September 2014. *      *      * I am honored by the invitation to be here again in the vibrant city of New York. Thank you for the opportunity to share my thoughts with you on the economic outlook and policy challenges we face in Mexico. A few things have changed since the last time we were together, and I hope to bring you up to date on the most important developments. I would like to talk first, about the current rebound in the Mexican economy and how the financial markets are performing; then, give you some perspective on inflation and monetary policy; and finally, describe the most recent progress on Mexico’s structural reform agenda. As usual, my comments are entirely my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. The current economic rebound At this time last year, Mexico’s economy was deteriorating. Today, an incipient upswing is underway. Specifically, in the second quarter, Mexico’s economy posted vigorous growth, similar in annualized terms to that of the United States. Data for the third quarter, including the GDP monthly proxy for July, suggest that momentum continues. Improvement in the industrial sector has included a strong push from manufactured products, with transportation equipment doing particularly well. After six consecutive quarters of contraction or stagnation, construction has seen some rebound. External demand has played a predominant role in the recovery due to greater manufacturing exports, particularly to the United States. Within that category, automobile exports stand out. In addition, the expansion of services continued, especially those most associated with external demand. On the domestic side, consumption in the second quarter picked up, and recent sales data suggest that the pace continues. Formal employment is expanding, as has been the case since 2010. However, total employment has been stagnant this year. The previous two facts are consistent with a slight decline in informality. More formal-sector jobs may have provided support for higher consumption. Yet, consumer confidence remains relatively low, indicating some fragility there. Furthermore, investment in the second quarter kept up a revival, driven by the private sector, and could strengthen even further in the near term. Indeed, this is suggested by the business community’s more positive answer to the survey question of whether or not this is the right moment to invest.1 The Bank of Mexico estimates that GDP will grow between 2 and 2.8 percent in 2014 and between 3.2 and 4.2 percent in 2015. Consensus analysts’ point forecasts fall within these intervals.2 The balance of risks for the growth scenario is to the upside. The possibility of higher-than-anticipated economic expansion in the United States, as well as more constructive                                                  1  See INEGI and Banco de México (2014), Encuesta Mensual de Opinión Empresarial del Sector Manufacturero, September. 2  See Banco de México (2014), Quarterly Report, April – June 2014, Summary, August; and Blue Chip Economic Indicators, September 2014. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches investment sentiment stemming from progress in the implementation of structural reforms, contributes to this assessment. Financial market developments Since February, international financial market volatility has declined considerably due to expectations that the normalization of U.S. monetary policy will take place later than previously thought, and in a gradual way. A return to the search for yield has implied downward shifts for Mexico’s yield curve, together with the long end of the U.S. curve. Intermittent breaks in the calm since the end of July reflect the swinging of market expectations for the start of U.S. monetary tightening back toward an earlier timeframe, and heightened geopolitical pressures. In this context, the dollar has appreciated, and the prices of some emerging-market financial assets have fallen somewhat. In Mexico, the recent increase in global risk aversion has fueled a higher term premium for government bonds and along with it, a steeper yield curve. However, the peso has depreciated less than the currencies of many other emerging-market economies. Both markets have behaved in an orderly manner, with traded volumes high and bid-ask spreads tight. Going forward, greater financial volatility and further downward pressure in asset prices cannot be ruled out. Interest rates on a wide variety of securities in advanced countries, including high-yield bonds, remain close to all-time lows amid market uncertainty and speculative conditions, suggesting that these levels are not sustainable. In the monetary policy meeting of last July, the U.S. Federal Reserve said that it was within closer reach of its medium-term targets. Also, many FOMC members noted that if convergence to these targets accelerates, it would be appropriate to begin the tightening phase sooner than previously foreseen. In the most recent meeting in September, forecasts by FOMC members for the fed funds rate seem to suggest a faster pace of normalization than previously expected. In a similar way, the Bank of England has noted that it is nearer to reaching its long-term objectives. Futures markets predict that U.S. and British policy rates will begin to rise next year, although uncertainty still reigns over the exact timing and pace of the tighter policies. Adding to the mix of unknown factors the markets must consider, the Eurozone and Japan are likely poised to loosen their monetary stances further in the face of disappointing economic performance. Although the net effect in world financial markets is still in the balance, the markets currently appear to give more weight to probable tighter polices in the United States and the United Kingdom. Inflation, minimum wages and monetary policy Since last July, Mexico’s annual headline inflation breached the upper limit of the variability interval around the central bank’s permanent target of 3 percent. This development, which has surpassed market expectations, reflected pressures in the core component, especially goods prices, as well as the noncore component, driven particularly by livestock prices. The possible persistence of these adverse factors makes it likely that inflation will remain above or near 4 percent during the second half of the year. Some conditions should contribute to a decrease in inflation next year, such as base effects from the 2014 fiscal reform, lower rises in government-administered gasoline prices, and a possible drop in some telephony charges due to new regulations. However, the impact should be properly assessed. For example, the new gasoline price policy does not mean the absence of annual pressure from this front during the year. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 The balance of inflation risks appears to be to the upside due to the following. First, proposals are being considered for substantial rises in minimum wages, which could generate inertia in inflation and second-round effects in the price-formation process. Second, the possibility of unforeseen additional pressures in agricultural prices persists. Historically, this component has posted a higher average and more volatile annual change than that of energy and government-administered prices. Third, the risk of bouts of high financial volatility remains, and this could push prices higher through the exchange rate channel. The upside risks are especially significant as annual headline inflation will probably surpass 4 percent most of this year, and analysts’ inflation expectations for all time frames remain above the permanent target. These challenges merit careful monitoring. I would like to add a few comments on possible minimum wage hikes in Mexico. Minimum wages are a feature common to most countries, and Mexico is no exception, with the level set by a national commission for all jurisdictions. What is particular to our country is a notable deterioration of this indicator in the 1980s and 1990s due to high and unstable inflation. This process yielded lower purchasing power for all salaries and underscores the vital necessity of protecting the significant ground gained in the last decade in the battle to control inflation, and of consolidating this progress. What effects would minimum wage hikes have in Mexico? The economic literature on competitive labor markets suggests that rises in real minimum wages can hurt employment and training, especially of young and unskilled laborers, and promote informality. Also, there may be some pass-through from these increases to prices of final goods and services. The degree of these and other impacts remains an empirical issue.3 In the case of Mexico, these effects could be material, for at least two reasons. First, negotiations of private-sector contractual salaries have tended to take into account minimum-wage revisions as a floor reference, although the two are not automatically tied. The wage contagion could reflect partly a substitution effect away from less-skilled workers, a phenomenon observed in many countries.4 Second, the minimum wage serves as an index for myriad legal purposes, including fines, tax exemptions, public pensions, government-sponsored mortgages, and many private contracts. Wage contagion and indexation would broaden the possible negative real effects on the economy. Furthermore, significant minimum wage hikes may contaminate the process of price formation. These adjustments could trigger a chain reaction on inflation expectations, complicating the challenges for the Bank of Mexico in getting inflation to converge to its permanent target. To handle the risk from indexation, complicated legal changes and cumbersome contract revisions would be called for.5                                                  3  For empirical evidence on the possible effects of minimum wage increases, see, for example, Neumark, D. and W. Wascher (2008), Minimum Wages. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press; Neumark, et al. (2013), “Revisiting the Minimum Wage-Employment Debate: Throwing Out the Baby with the Bathwater?” NBER Working Paper 18681; and Meer, J. and J. West (2013), “Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment Dynamics.” NBER Working Paper No. 19262. 4  See, for example, Maloney, W. and J. Mendez (2004), “Measuring the Impact of Minimum Wages: Evidence from Latin America.” In Heckman, J.J. and C. Pagés (2004), Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin American and the Caribbean. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 5 There is evidence that the decline in real minimum wages in Mexico increased employment for less-skilled female workers. See Feliciano, Z.M. (1998), “Does the Minimum Wage Affect Employment in Mexico?” Eastern Economic Journal, 24(2). 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches An update on structural reforms As you all know, Mexico has embarked on an ambitious structural reform agenda, encompassing many sectors of the economy, including the labor market, education, the financial sector, telecommunications, and energy. Already this year, the laws that cement and put the finishing touches on the reforms have been finalized. But the devil, indeed, is in the details. The quality of implementation is of the utmost importance for the transformations to yield their expected benefits. Reforms are currently in the implementation stage. Some of the changes have come into effect with the mere publication of the new laws, such as the prohibition of bundled sales of products in the financial sector. Others imply specific actions already contemplated. For example, in education, the first generalized test is in place to qualify a teacher to receive an elementary school post, breaking with a long tradition in which new graduates from teaching schools were automatically hired. In the financial sector, a newly established resolution scheme is being applied to the case of a small bank without incident. In telecommunications, the arrival of new competitors, drawn by a changed set of rules and conditions in the marketplace, sets the stage for a possible shakeup. Auctions for nationwide television licenses are in the offing. Much interest is focused on the energy reform. Geographical areas for oil and gas exploration and production have already been allocated to Pemex, and the first round of auctions for the private sector will take place early next year. These opportunities are generating enthusiasm in the private sector and should draw significant investment from both domestic and foreign companies. Greater competition, in turn, should boost total factor productivity and potential GDP growth in the medium term. To take full advantage of this situation, Mexico needs to complement the already enacted reforms with changes that would improve the environment for conducting business. These measures should include strengthening the rule of law, investing further in physical infrastructure, and enhancing public security. Concluding remarks Mexico has seen an incipient economic upturn this year, driven by stronger external demand and higher domestic spending. The panorama is favorable given more consistent U.S. economic performance and Mexican structural reforms in the first stages of implementation. Mexico’s economy has benefited from the continuation of portfolio capital inflows amid benign financial conditions, notwithstanding some recent volatility. However, a change in market sentiment could trigger a reversal of this relative financial bonanza at any moment. Although Mexico enjoys strong macroeconomic fundamentals, financial risks should continue to be monitored. Continuation of recent upward trends in inflation as well as factors that may generate additional price pressures are risks that must be carefully watched in order to make convergence to the permanent inflation target a reality. Current discussions on recovering the real value of the minimum wage underscore the need to keep the upper hand in the fight against inflation. Finally, progress on structural reform is encouraging, but implementation over time must be adequate for expected benefits to fully materialize. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest monetary and economic developments and outlook Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, on the Monetary Policy Decision of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 27 August 2014. *      *      * Today, on 27 August 2014, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and approved the monthly Monetary Policy Report. After discussions on the recent economic and monetary developments in Albania, and their future course, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged, at 2.50%. The Supervisory Council deems that the current monetary conditions are adequate to ensure the return of inflation to target in the medium term. Let me now proceed with an overview of the economic developments and key issues discussed at today’s meeting. *** After falling in the previous three months, annual inflation picked up in July, standing at 1.8%. As in the previous months, annual inflation continued to be determined by the performance of food prices, especially seasonal fresh food. Other CPI items continued to provide low and steady contribution to the increase of inflation. From the macroeconomic perspective, prices continue to be determined by low inflationary pressures, from both the demand and supply side. Below-potential economic growth and the negative output gap exerted contained pressures on prices. Imported inflation was also moderate and downward, due to low inflation in our trading partners’ economies and the steady exchange rate. Inflation expectations remain low, and monetary expansion is in line with moderate price rises in the medium term. New data on the real sector analysed in the last meeting are scarce. Signals from indirect indicators corroborate our previous assessments for a faster economic growth in the second quarter, in line with forecasts for a gradual recovery throughout the year. During the period, the positive performance of private domestic demand was driven by the more favourable lending standards and the enhanced confidence of both businesses and households. At the same time, foreign demand for goods and services continued to grow, but the increase in imports due to the recovery of consumption and investment has weakened its contribution to economic growth. Exports and imports of goods continued to grow, by 9.2% and 10.4%, respectively, in annual terms during the second quarter, and the trade deficit by 11.6%. As expected, the consolidating fiscal policy conditioned the drop of public sector demand and its direct negative contribution to aggregate demand. The consolidation path of the fiscal policy is reflected in both revenue increase and spending decrease. The performance of revenues was affected by the rapid increase of tax revenues, due to the effects of the new fiscal package and improvement of the tax system administration. On the other hand, budget expenditure fell both for current and capital expenditure categories. Budget deficit stood at around ALL 22.2 billion, at the end of the first six months, or around 54% lower than in the previous year. The Bank of Albania supports the measures for fiscal consolidation, as the pursuit of such a policy contributes to maintaining long-term stability and reducing risk premiums in the economy. However, the Bank of Albania reiterates the need for a more uniform distribution of expenditure and budget deficit throughout the year, in order to minimise the volatility in economic activity and financial markets. Financial markets were relatively calm during July and August. The activity in these markets ranged in normal levels, characterised by contained liquidity pressures and small fluctuations in interest rates. In response to the stimulating monetary policy, markets tended 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches to reduce interest rates, although the intensity of reduction varied across market segments. Thus, a faster reduction of interest rates has been noted in the interbank market, on lek deposits and in the short-term segment of government securities. On the other hand, the interest rates on long-term government securities and on credit fell at a slower pace. The latter continue to reflect high risk premiums, related both to the burdened balance sheet of Albanian businesses and the conservative lending policies adopted by banking groups. Annual growth of money supply was 0.9% in June. Its performance reflected the low need for funds by the public sector and the decline in credit to the private sector. The annual decline of credit to the private sector was 1.8% in June, maintaining the same pace as in May. In the meantime, in monthly terms, credit grew for the second consecutive month, albeit at lower levels than the historical ones. Signals for eased standards of supply and growth of credit demand, obtained from the surveys conducted in the second quarter, seem to materialise slowly in improved credit performance. As we have previously stated, the tightened lending standards and the sluggish credit performance is a regional and European phenomenon, which may be solved only in the presence of the steady growth of the domestic economy and the complete calming down of European financial markets. The Bank of Albania deems that the country’s reality and perspective require adopting more realistic strategies for a faster crediting to the economy. While upholding the financial stability, we have taken and will continue to take the right measures to support this process. On the other hand, sound and improving balance sheets of the Albanian banking system guarantee the funding of the Albanian economy in the medium and long term. *** At the end of the discussions, the Supervisory Council concluded that the incoming available information does not change our baseline projections. The economy is expected to grow gradually during the year, driven primarily by domestic demand. Reflecting the monetary stimulus, the heightened confidence in the economy, as well as the expected improvement of financial conditions and business climate in our trading partners, the Albanian economy is expected to converge gradually towards its potential in the medium term. Closure of the negative output gap will lead to the gradual return of inflation to target. At the end of discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged, at 2.50%. Based on available information and in line with our projections, the Supervisory Council deems that the stable return of inflation to target will require keeping the key interest rate at low levels for some quarters ahead. Risks surrounding the basic projections remain on the downside, closely related to the stability of sources of growth, as well as economic and financial developments in trading partners. The Bank of Albania remains vigilant and is monitoring the situation; it is totally committed and has all the necessary instruments for meeting the inflation target. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The three Cs of Alliance for Financial Inclusion’s success Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central bank of the Philippines), at the 2014 Alliance for Financial Inclusion Global Policy Forum, Port-of-Spain, Trinidad and Tobago, 10 September 2014. *      *      * Salutation Governor Jwala Rambarran; Governor Zeti of Bank Negara Malaysia, host of AFI’s future headquarters; ministers; fellow governors; Dr. Alfred Hannig; distinguished delegates; AFI partners; ladies and gentlemen, good morning. It is a privilege to speak at the opening of the 2014 Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) Global Policy Forum (GPF) – which has quickly evolved into the world’s major gathering of policymakers, regulators, prime movers and advocates of financial inclusion. Today, we have a record number of over 400 participants, a 300 percent increase from the first GPF in 2009. Let me thank Central Bank Governor Jwala Rambarran for hosting the 2014 GPF. We can say that it is appropriate to hold this event here in the paradisical Trinidad & Tobago, a firmly committed member of AFI. Moreover, Trinidad and Tobago is the birthplace of calypso music.1 After all, the GPF is quite an upbeat, fun and engaging assembly of AFI members and friends. Holding this GPF here on the 50th anniversary of the country’s central bank, the 100th member of AFI, lends added color to this gathering. Brief overview of AFI independence As outgoing chair of the Steering Committee, I am privileged that my last opportunity to open the GPF comes at this point in AFI’s history. The past two years have been crucial to set in motion the transformational processes that have driven the AFI journey to independence. Now we are about to cross the proverbial Rubicon – as AFI leaves its “project” status and becomes an international organization. We are embarking on a fundamental change that requires our solid resolve as a global network. AFI’s transformation as an international organization with juridical identity will strengthen its DNA – the member-driven, equitable, and inclusive nature of AFI’s governance, membership, and activities. This DNA has set AFI apart as a policy-driving network. It has effectively mobilized financial sector policymakers, regulators and international organizations, to proactively confront the challenges of financial exclusion. The Cs of AFI’s success The success of AFI can be attributed to what we can call three Cs: (1) commitment, (2) collaboration, and (3) concrete results. Commitment is an important first step in the attainment of any goal. As one of the pioneer members, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) can attest to the steadfast engagement of AFI members and partners in activities and programs toward financial inclusion. We have benefitted from the commitment of visionary funding partners who believed in the concept of AFI and sustained us in our journey toward increasing access to financial services for the poor. The trust and support of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, German                                                 1 A kind of West Indian (originally Trinidadian) music in syncopated African rhythm, typically with words improvised on a topical theme (Oxford Dictionary). 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  International Cooperation (GIZ), Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) and other donors like the Australian Agency for International Development (AUSAID), facilitated the exponential growth of AFI. Within six short years, it is now a network of 120 member institutions from 95 developing countries. Future commitments from like-minded donors will surely fortify AFI’s ability to continuously undertake its important mission. AFI would not be what it is now without the commitment of members who devoted substantial time, resources and expertise to make AFI activities fruitful and successful. If we count just the face-to-face meetings of the seven AFI working groups2, we get a total of 57 meetings from 2010 to 2014. Steering Committee meetings, and those of the Subcommittees on Independence, Host Country Evaluation and Global Standards, are not yet accounted in this number. If “time is gold”, then it is clear that the membership definitely invested so much in the AFI journey. Underpinning this investment in time and resources is AFI members’ commitment to achieving our shared vision of a financially inclusive world. AFI members firmly supported the Maya Declaration in 2011 and the consequent Sasana Accord in 2013. These declarations are documentary proof of members’ dedication to implement concrete and measurable policies and programs that expand inclusion in their respective jurisdictions. To date, 47 out of 120 member institutions have publicly articulated their own Maya commitments. While targets and accomplishments vary from country to country on account of domestic contexts, the most significant outcome of the Maya Declaration is increased institutional accountability. By AFI’s count, a total of 71 measurable policy improvements have been made by Maya countries. The second C is a blend of collaboration and cooperation, which describe (1) how AFI members interact with each other, and (2) how the AFI network engages with external stakeholders. Collaboration and cooperation is inherent in the design of AFI’s signature platforms – the working groups and the knowledge exchanges. The working groups, with a membership total of at least 194 individuals, function as “communities of practice”. As peers on equal footing, they share and discuss ideas to produce outputs that are relevant in policymaking and program development. These outputs include guideline notes, discussion papers, surveys, data indicators, case studies and peer reviews – which we collectively call knowledge products. These products constitute majority of the AFI library, and serve as useful references for AFI members and external interested parties. Like other AFI members, the BSP benefited from the working groups, as we implemented various aspects of our financial inclusion agenda. For example, our national baseline survey on financial inclusion was enriched thru peer reviews by CNBV Mexico and Bank of Tanzania in the Data Working Group. Our regulatory perspective on digital financial inclusion was constantly deepened thru the interactions in the Mobile Financial Services Working Group. These are just a few examples, considering that the BSP is an active member in all the working groups, save for the regional group of Pacific Islands. On the other hand, the knowledge exchange (KX) – one of the most availed of grants by AFI members – is a structured, purposive and onsite study visit. As recipient of one, and host of 20 AFI knowledge exchanges since 2010, the BSP can attest that the KX is mutually                                                 2 AFI has six working groups with thematic focus on consumer empowerment and market conduct; financial inclusion data; global standards and proportionality (originally financial integrity); mobile financial services; small and medium enterprises; financial inclusion strategy. The seventh working group is focused on financial inclusion in the Pacific islands. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  beneficial to the visitor and the host. It facilitates open, candid dialogue among regulators facing similar issues, but operating in different domestic situations. Many policy solutions are informed by lessons learned from knowledge exchanges. For example, our consumer protection framework and financial education program were inspired by what we learned, in no small measure, from a KX with Bank Negara Malaysia. We shared our regulatory experience with colleagues from the Bank of Tanzania, and later provided insights on their draft electronic money regulations. I am sure that other AFI members also have interesting stories to tell about their KX experiences. Collaboration and cooperation likewise characterize AFI’s engagement with external stakeholders. This approach has resulted in rewarding partnerships and increased global attention on financial inclusion. Let me cite some examples: We have initiated, and will continue to deepen the engagement with Standard Setting Bodies (SSBs) thru a structured peer learning program. Global standards greatly affect the level of exclusion, as well as the range, quality and affordability of financial products available to clients at the bottom of the pyramid. AFI is in a unique position to contribute value to the SSB discussions; given the wealth of experience that the membership has in practicing the proportionality principle; in a manner that is conducive for financial inclusion. Presently, the BSP chairs the Basel Consultative Group Workstream on Financial Inclusion. This working group aims to form an overall risk picture on financial inclusion that would be of particular relevance to banking supervisors around the world. AFI members provided invaluable inputs to the workstream thru their participation in the Range of Practice Survey. As implementing partner of the G20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI), AFI has gained stature as the voice of the developing world in the area of financial inclusion. We significantly contributed to the development of the G20 Principles for Innovative Financial Inclusion. Finally, AFI’s regular collaboration with the G24 in conducting policy forums, continues to deepen awareness on financial inclusion issues, and inspire action among G24 member countries. Commitment, collaboration and cooperation are necessary, but insufficient to beget success. These factors must translate into a third C – concrete results. The results-oriented culture of AFI ensures that policy solutions, regulatory enhancements and program interventions always benefit the ultimate stakeholder whom we all target to serve: the financially-excluded. To date, we have seen policy solutions that resulted in: • 16.7 million mobile money accounts for 15 percent of adults, achieved within 2.5 years in Bangladesh  • 7 million mobile money accounts for 67 percent of adults, achieved within 7 years in Kenya • 19.4 million basic bank accounts for 27 percent of adults, achieved within 5 years in Mexico • 26.7 million mobile money and cash card accounts, achieved within 4 years in the Philippines • 1.7 million savings accounts for 25 percent of adults, achieved within 4 years in Rwanda This sampler data from selected AFI members reinforce the importance of impact measurement and monitoring. As responsible policymakers and program implementers, we must verify that our actions are indeed achieving inclusion objectives. We can only claim true success if we have incontestable proof that global partnerships and national goals adequately empower our ultimate stakeholders. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Conclusion As I end my term as Chairman of the Steering Committee, allow me to extend deep appreciation to my distinguished colleagues in the Committee, all member institutions, our strategic partners and donors, and the AFI Management Unit, for your unwavering support. Your active and thoughtful participation in the Committee, and in AFI processes, has made our work much more manageable and gratifying. I am pleased to announce that the Steering Committee will be led by incoming Chair Daniel Schydlowsky of Peru. As I contemplated an appropriate end to my opening remarks, TNT came to mind; not only because it resembles the initials of our host country Trinidad “n” Tobago; but also because of the massive force of change that we want to take place in our respective countries. Let us all keep the three Cs of AFI aglow to see forceful initiatives in AFI’s future – to catapult financial inclusion to greater heights around the world. Thank you and good morning. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Simon M Potter: Implementation of open market operations in a time of transition Remarks by Mr Simon M Potter, Executive Vice President of the Markets Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, before the Japan Center for Economic Research, Tokyo, 25 September 2014. *      *      * I would like to thank Deborah Leonard and Matthew Raskin for their excellent assistance in the preparation of these remarks and colleagues in the Federal Reserve System for numerous insightful comments and suggestions. Thank you, Takeuchi-san. It is a pleasure to reconnect with you here in Tokyo and an honor to have the opportunity to speak before this distinguished audience. Central banks responded aggressively to the financial crisis that began in 2007 and the slow recovery that’s followed, and have taken unprecedented steps in providing monetary policy accommodation in pursuit of their macroeconomic policy objectives. In doing so, many have had to adapt in unconventional ways the frameworks and tools they use to implement their policy decisions. My remarks today will focus on the role played by the Open Market Trading Desk (the Desk) at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in the implementation of monetary policy in the U.S., and on the evolution of our operational tools in recent years. I will then discuss the implications of these changes for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and for the eventual “normalization” of monetary policy when the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) believes it is appropriate to remove the extraordinary levels of monetary policy accommodation that it has provided. Finally, I will discuss some of the considerations that must be taken into account in normalizing monetary policy. As always, these are my views and do not necessarily reflect those of the New York Fed or the Federal Reserve System.  The desk’s role in implementing monetary policy The Federal Reserve (the Fed) has a somewhat more complex organizational and governance structure than most other central banks around the world, so before discussing recent developments in the implementation of monetary policy, I’d like to take a moment to describe roles and responsibilities within the Federal Reserve System and where the Desk fits in. The statutory basis for U.S. monetary policy is found in the Federal Reserve Act, which was enacted just over 100 years ago. Modern language around monetary policy objectives was added in 1977, when the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Open Market Committee were charged by Congress with maintaining “long run growth of the monetary and credit aggregates…so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” The goals of maximum employment and price stability have come to be known as the Fed’s “dual mandate.” Formulating policy in pursuit of that dual mandate is the province of two separate-but-related policymaking entities within the Federal Reserve System (the System) – the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the Board of Governors) and the FOMC (which I also refer to as “the Committee”) – each of which has responsibility for certain policy tools. The FOMC is the principal body for monetary policymaking and consists of the seven members of the Board of Governors plus the presidents of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks (only five of whom are voting members in any given year). The FOMC is responsible for the use of open market operations (OMOs), which are purchases and sales of securities in the open market for the System Open Market Account (SOMA), the Fed’s securities 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  portfolio. OMOs are traditionally the primary tool through which monetary policy is implemented. The Board of Governors is responsible for several complementary policy tools. These tools pertain largely to depository institutions (DIs or “banks”) and include the discount rate – that is, the rate at which banks borrow from the discount window, the Fed’s lending facility administered through the twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks – and policies around reserves held by depository institutions at the Fed (including reserve requirements, and more recently, the payment of interest on reserve balances and term deposits).1 However, it’s important to note that each of these tools is merely a means to an end, used to influence financial conditions in order to achieve the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. Since 1936, the New York Fed has been selected each year by the FOMC as the Bank within the System responsible for the execution of OMOs. Within the New York Fed, the Desk, under the guidance of a manager of the SOMA selected by the FOMC – currently me – is responsible for conducting open market operations under the authorization and direction of the FOMC.2 In practice, the FOMC’s operating objective for OMOs – for example, a target rate for overnight interest rates or a specified amount of assets to purchase – is communicated to the Desk through a policy “directive” that the Committee votes on at the conclusion of each meeting. This directive specifically instructs the Desk to conduct transactions for the SOMA in furtherance of the desired operating objective. The Fed’s changed operating framework In recent years, like many other central banks around the world in the face of the Great Recession and the prolonged economic recovery that has followed, the Fed adopted unconventional measures to provide monetary policy accommodation in pursuit of its macroeconomic policy objectives. This is reflected in changes in the Fed’s operating framework and the FOMC’s operating objective for OMOs. For many decades prior to the crisis, the operating objective for OMOs was expressed as a target for the federal funds rate – an overnight, unsecured rate in the market for reserve balances. The target rate was achieved through permanent and temporary OMOs that sought to adjust the supply of reserve balances in the banking system to a level that was expected to equal the estimated level of demand for reserve balances at the FOMC’s target rate. The Desk’s permanent additions to the supply of reserve balances were designed to fall somewhat short of the total demand, creating a “structural deficiency” in the supply of reserves. The Desk then conducted daily fine-tuning operations to temporarily add reserve balances to get to the desired level. These daily operations represented a marginal adjustment to the aggregate supply of reserves, largely in response to the exogenous impact of transitory changes in other Fed liabilities such as currency in circulation and the level of the U.S. Treasury’s account balance at the Fed. Minor variations in the total level of reserves supplied could move equilibrium market rates up or down as individual depository institutions with a deficiency of reserves had to find and trade with depository institutions with a surplus of reserves. This system functioned with a relatively low level of reserve balances.3 The Desk was able to reliably achieve the FOMC’s                                                 1 The Board of Governors is also responsible for the supervision and regulation of banks and systemically important financial institutions, payments systems and infrastructure, and overall oversight of the Federal Reserve System. It may also authorize Federal Reserve Banks to extend credit to other entities under emergency lending authority. 2 The FOMC’s Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations and Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations outline the activities that the selected Bank is eligible to undertake. The domestic policy directive and foreign currency directive specifically instruct the Desk to execute such operations in furtherance of a particular operating objective defined by the FOMC. 3 In the five years prior to the crisis, total reserve balances averaged $20 billion and excess reserves – balances in excess of those required to satisfy reserve balance requirements – averaged about $1.5 billion. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  policy directive under this implementation framework. The effective federal funds rate – the average rate prevailing in the brokered federal funds market each day – routinely hit the FOMC’s target rate, generating a high degree of confidence among market participants in the Desk’s ability to implement policy. This operating framework changed as the financial crisis deepened. By December 2008, the FOMC had lowered its target for the federal funds rate from a point target of 5¼ percent in mid-2007 to a target range of zero to ¼ percent. With the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates effectively at the zero lower bound, the FOMC’s operating objective for OMOs was expanded to include adjustments in the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s securities portfolio. In particular, the FOMC initiated large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS), agency debt, and later longer-term Treasury securities, in order to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help make broader financial conditions more accommodative. The expansion of the domestic securities portfolio that resulted from LSAPs vastly increased the supply of reserve balances in the system (Figure 1).4  Importantly, in October 2008, the Fed was granted authority to pay interest on depository institutions’ reserve balances.5 In an environment of elevated reserve balances that resulted from the Fed’s asset purchases, the payment of interest on excess reserves (IOER) – currently at a rate of ¼ percent – has kept the overnight federal funds rate within its target range (Figure 2).6 Although the FOMC continues to direct the Desk to undertake OMOs as necessary to maintain conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds trading in a range from zero to ¼ percent, the Desk has not needed to conduct OMOs to manage the supply of reserves since December 2008. Instead, OMOs have focused on directives to adjust the size and composition of the SOMA portfolio. Since late 2008, the FOMC has directed the Desk to carry out three large-scale asset purchase programs and several other portfolio-oriented initiatives, such as the maturity extension program (MEP) and changes in reinvestment policies (Figure 3). Under the MEP, commonly referred to by market participants as “Operation Twist,” the FOMC lengthened the maturity profile of the SOMA’s portfolio of Treasury securities by offsetting purchases of longer-term Treasury securities with sales of equal par amounts of shorter-term securities and redemptions of maturing ones.7 Additionally, since mid-2010, the FOMC has directed the Desk to reinvest or roll over payments of principal on the securities holdings in the SOMA,                                                 4 These asset purchases followed various programs the Fed initiated during the crisis to support the liquidity of financial institutions and foster improved conditions in financial markets. Credit extension through these crisis-related programs was temporary in nature, so the impact of these programs on reserve balances was unwound as the loans were repaid. In contrast, reserve expansion associated with LSAPs has a more enduring effect as long as the assets remain in the SOMA portfolio, subject to offsetting influences on reserves from changes in other balance sheet items. 5 The authority for the Federal Reserve to pay interest on reserve balances held by depository institutions was granted by Congress prior to the crisis, in the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2006, with a planned effective date of October 2011. However, implementation was accelerated as part of the response to the financial crisis. The statute authorizes Federal Reserve Banks to pay interest on balances maintained to satisfy reserve balance requirements (required reserves) and on excess balances (excess reserves). 6 As noted earlier, the Board of Governors is responsible for setting the rate of interest on reserves. Since December 16, 2008, the interest rates on required reserve balances and excess reserve balances have both been ¼ percent, but the rates need not be the same. Although the interest rate on reserves represents an overnight rate, it is calculated and paid out on a lagged basis according to two-week reserves management maintenance periods. The payment is based on daily account balances and a weighted average of applicable overnight rates over the maintenance period. More information can be found in Regulation D. 7 The MEP provided additional monetary policy accommodation by increasing the duration of the SOMA portfolio, but unlike LSAP programs, on net it had a neutral effect on the level of reserves. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  which maintains the size of the portfolio and adjusts the asset type and maturity composition of its holdings.8  Large-scale asset purchases as a policy tool and their execution Of course, as this audience knows well, the Federal Reserve was not the first major central bank to use alternative tools for monetary policy implementation at the zero lower bound. The quantitative easing policy (QEP) that the Bank of Japan (BoJ) initiated to combat deflation in 2001, after operating for some time under a policy of zero interest rates, provided a valuable precedent when central bankers elsewhere faced similar challenges later that decade. However, the balance sheet expansion under the BoJ’s original quantitative easing differed significantly from the asset purchase programs undertaken by advanced economy central banks over recent years, including the BoJ’s current quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE). The earlier QEP was a liability-driven program in which the BoJ changed its operating objective from an overnight interest rate to quantitative targets for the level of current account balances outstanding at the BoJ (the counterpart to reserve balances held by depository institutions at the Fed). To achieve its new target, the BoJ provided ample liquidity through a range of operations. Although the BoJ increased its outright purchases of long-term government bonds as part of this initiative, a large share of the easing was accomplished through temporary open market operations or purchases of short-term securities. In contrast, the FOMC’s portfolio-oriented programs have been driven by a desire to expand and lengthen the maturity structure of the asset side of the Fed’s balance sheet in order to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates. The accompanying growth of reserve balances has been a byproduct of those purchases, not a specified objective. Former Fed Chairman Bernanke referred to this approach as “credit easing,” in contrast to the BoJ’s “quantitative easing.”9  The FOMC’s different objective for OMOs reflects the primary transmission channel through which LSAPs are understood to affect financial and economic conditions. Central bank purchases of longer-term bonds reduce the stock of such securities held by private investors. Accordingly, the purchases remove duration risk – and in the case of agency MBS, prepayment risk – from the private sector, which drives term and other risk premiums on those assets lower than they would otherwise be.10 This re-pricing of risk ultimately puts downward pressure on long-term interest rates, an effect that spreads to other assets as some investors rebalance their portfolios. The term premium effect of the Fed’s purchases should continue to influence financial conditions as long as the assets remain in the SOMA portfolio, although the size of the effect will diminish over time as the risk associated with the portfolio diminishes. Some standard portfolio risk measures illustrate the degree to which the Federal Reserve has absorbed extra duration risk onto its balance sheet. The SOMA Treasury portfolio currently has an average duration of about 7.5 years, compared with a pre-crisis level of about 2.6 years. Meanwhile, the duration risk of the entire domestic securities portfolio, including agency MBS and agency debt as well as Treasury securities, is equivalent to about $2.9 trillion in 10-year Treasury securities (Figure 4). Purchases likely also work                                                 8 From mid-August 2010 through September 2011, principal payments from holdings of agency debt and agency MBS were reinvested in longer-term Treasury securities. Since October 2011, they have been reinvested in agency MBS. 9 Ben S. Bernanke, “The Crisis and the Policy Response,” Stamp Lecture, London School of Economics, London, England, January 13, 2009. 10 A security’s duration captures the weighted average term to maturity of the security’s cash flows and provides a measure of the sensitivity of the security’s price to changes in interest rates. Duration (and therefore price risk) is generally greater for longer-maturity and lower-coupon securities. Agency MBS prices additionally carry prepayment risk, the risk associated with the uncertainty around the timing of principal cash flows owing to the fact that homeowners have the option to prepay their mortgages at any time. Because of this embedded option, agency MBS cash flows vary as interest rates change. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  through a signaling effect, to the extent that they are perceived as a credible signal of the central bank’s intentions regarding the future level of short-term interest rates. And in circumstances when market functioning is unusually strained, as was the case prior to the Fed’s first LSAP program, asset purchases may enhance liquidity through the central bank’s consistent and significant presence in the market. Over the past six years, the FOMC has been flexible in using these tools, adapting as it learned and as individual circumstances changed. In the first two LSAP programs and MEP, for example, the FOMC communicated an expected total size and completion date for each program. However, the third (and current) LSAP program has been outcome-based, with the FOMC announcing only a monthly pace and composition for its purchases and noting that purchases would continue until there is a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market in a context of price stability. Other central banks have also used conditional asset purchases effectively. Perhaps the best example is the Outright Monetary Transactions program announced by the European Central Bank (ECB) in September 2012. This program is credited with helping to stabilize euro-area fixed income markets by ruling out certain bad equilibria. This success was achieved without the purchase of a single asset. Another example of conditional asset purchases is the BoJ’s statement of a commitment to continue QEP until inflation registered stably at or above zero. Changes in the Fed’s balance sheet and implications for normalization So where are we now? The current purchase program appears to be nearing its completion. Last week, the FOMC directed the Desk to reduce purchases of Treasury securities to $10 billion per month and purchases of agency MBS to $5 billion per month starting in October. The Committee also indicated that it will end the current purchase program at its next meeting if incoming information broadly supports its expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective. It also directed the Desk to maintain its agency MBS and Treasury security reinvestment policies – activities it separately announced it expects to continue after it begins to increase its target range for the federal funds rate. Should this course come to pass, the domestic securities portfolio will peak at a par value of about $4.2 trillion – more than a five-fold increase since the start of the financial crisis in August 2007. The composition of the portfolio will also remain more complex. Formerly composed entirely of Treasury securities, the domestic portfolio is now only 60 percent Treasury securities, with the remainder held in agency MBS (and a small amount of agency debt securities). As I noted earlier, the weighted average maturity of the Treasury portfolio has lengthened substantially, while the MEP essentially eliminated the portfolio’s holdings of any Treasury securities maturing prior to February 2016. Meanwhile, it’s hard to predict the exact pace at which the SOMA portfolio’s agency MBS holdings will pay down over time given the prepayment uncertainty associated with those securities. At last week’s meeting, the FOMC also reaffirmed its view that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current zero to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. Meanwhile, as a matter of prudent planning, the Committee has been deliberating how it should proceed to remove policy accommodation (often called “normalization”), when it believes the appropriate time to do so comes. Although the specific timing of this is not yet known, it’s certain that the level of reserve balances in the banking system will be very high. Assuming no other liabilities are issued, there would be about $2.9 trillion in reserves – mostly in excess reserves – if the Committee ends asset purchases next month and continues reinvestments. In itself, an elevated level of reserve balances need not impede the FOMC’s ability to effectively raise the level of short-term interest rates because of the ability to pay interest on excess reserves. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Following last week’s FOMC meeting, the Committee released a revised set of normalization principles and plans (taking into account changes in the SOMA portfolio and enhancements in available tools since it originally issued such principles in June 2011) that it intends to implement when it becomes appropriate to begin normalizing the stance of monetary policy. Importantly, as the Chair noted during her post-meeting press conference, this statement is intended to provide information to the public about the eventual normalization process; it does not signal a change in the current or future stance of monetary policy. According to the principles, the Committee will adjust the level of monetary accommodation primarily by utilizing policy tools to influence the level of short-term interest rates – in the first instance, using tools with rates directly administered by the Fed. Tools that can immobilize or drain large levels of reserves to tighten control over the federal funds rate also remain available. However, the principles do not envision that active adjustments to the SOMA portfolio will play a featured role. Specifically, the FOMC indicated that the federal funds rate will continue to play a central role in the Fed’s operating framework and communications during normalization, and that it will raise the target range for the federal funds rate when economic conditions warrant a less accommodative monetary policy stance. Adjustments in the interest rate that the Fed pays to depository institutions on excess reserve balances – that is, the IOER rate – will be the primary tool to move the federal funds rate into the target range. Raising the IOER rate should put upward pressure on a range of market interest rates and influence overall financial conditions in a way that fosters the Federal Reserve’s macroeconomic objectives. The Committee also indicated that an overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility and other supplementary tools will be used, as needed, to help control the level of the federal funds rate. An ON RRP facility will supplement the primary role of IOER in controlling the federal funds rate by providing an alternative safe, overnight asset for money market investors. I will describe the role of the ON RRP facility in more detail in a moment.11  The Committee expects to gradually return the balance sheet to a more normal size and composition, primarily by ceasing to reinvest repayments of principal. A halt or reduction in reinvestments is expected to occur after the FOMC begins increasing the target range for the federal funds rate. The FOMC does not plan to use asset sales as part of the normalization process, but suggests that limited sales might be warranted in the longer run to reduce or eliminate residual agency MBS holdings. The Federal Reserve will continue to test some of these tools to gather additional information about their efficacy and to enhance their operational readiness prior to liftoff. For the past year, the Desk has been conducting an exercise of ON RRP operations. Conducting ON RRPs for same-day settlement with a broad range of counterparties – including primary dealers, money funds, government-sponsored enterprises, and banks – allows the Federal Reserve to provide a safe, liquid investment to a wider range of money market participants than those able to earn IOER, and thus expands the universe of counterparties that should generally be unwilling to lend at rates below those available through the Federal Reserve. The increased competition that the availability of this instrument provides should help to firm the floor on the level of short-term interest rates – that is, the rate beneath which market participants should theoretically be unwilling to lend funds. Indeed, ON RRP exercise results over the first year suggest that the operations have been successful working with IOER in establishing a floor on the level of key money market rates (Figure 5).                                                 11 A reverse repurchase agreement (reverse repo, or RRP) is a type of temporary OMO in which the Desk sells a security from the SOMA portfolio to an eligible counterparty with an agreement to repurchase that security at a specified price at a specific time in the future. It is economically equivalent to a collateralized investment with the Fed in which the difference between the sale price and the repurchase price, adjusted for the time between transaction legs, implies a rate of interest paid by the Fed on the cash invested by the counterparty. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  All of the Desk’s eligible counterparty types participate in the ON RRPs, with money funds accounting for the largest share of take-up (Figure 6). Take-up at the operations generally increases when the spread between market rates and the ON RRP offered rate narrows. Take-up also rises substantially around quarter- and year-end financial reporting dates, when some money market participants’ access to other overnight secured investments is more limited. The increase in take-up on these dates is especially large for prime money market funds (Figure 7). In addition to patterns of usage of the ON RRPs themselves, we also analyze trading patterns and interest rate dynamics in secured and unsecured funding markets. In doing so, we use a wide range of data, including transactions data for unsecured funding markets obtained through a new Federal Reserve collection effort (FR 2420). While ON RRPs are a powerful tool for policy implementation, FOMC and market participants have noted the potential for very large regular usage to alter patterns of financial intermediation or, in a fixed-rate structure with no take-up limits, to exacerbate liquidity pressures during times of stress. To further examine how ON RRPs might best be structured to supplement IOER in the control of the federal funds rate while limiting the potential for unintended effects in financial markets, the FOMC has directed the Desk to test several changes to the design of its ON RRP operations. As of Monday, the per-counterparty maximum bid limit was raised from $10 billion to $30 billion, and an overall size limit of $300 billion was imposed for each operation. If the total amount of bids received in an operation is less than or equal to the $300 billion size limit, awards will be made at a fixed offering rate. However, if the total amount of bids received exceeds the overall operation size limit, the $300 billion in ON RRPs will be allocated through a single-price auction using interest rates that counterparties now include with their bids. Awards are made at a “stopout rate” – the rate at which the overall size limit is achieved – with all bids below this rate awarded in full and all bids at this rate awarded on a pro rata basis. The stopout rate is determined by evaluating all bids in ascending order by submitted rate up to the point at which the total quantity of offers equals the overall size limit.12 The Federal Reserve will be closely analyzing the results of the ON RRP exercise conducted under these new testing parameters in order to further its understanding of how an ON RRP facility might best be structured during the initial stages of the normalization process. In addition, the Federal Reserve Board has been testing a facility through which it offers term deposits to credentialed depository institutions. Term Deposit Facility (TDF) transactions could be used to temporarily reduce the quantity of reserve balances. An eight-week series of tests this summer explored how demand for term deposits responds to variations in the maximum award limits and rates. Higher offered rates attracted greater use, both in terms of the number of participants and the total dollar volume demanded. Demand for the TDF may have been tempered somewhat by the instruments’ lack of an early-withdrawal feature, and thus the inability to consider them as high-quality liquid assets for regulatory purposes. The next round of TDF testing, which will commence in October, will incorporate an early withdrawal feature, as well as gradually increase the maximum award amount and rate. A broader perspective on normalization I’ve discussed how the FOMC’s eventual approach to removing monetary policy accommodation reflects developments in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet since the onset of the financial crisis. As noted earlier, the relatively long maturity structure of the SOMA portfolio means that the level of reserve balances in the U.S. banking system will decline only slowly through passive means, absent any asset sales. Other central banks that have undertaken unconventional measures also face (or will eventually face) similar challenges when they deem it appropriate to begin their own policy normalizations.                                                 12 For more details about ON RRP operations, please see FAQs on the New York Fed’s website. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The Bank of England (BoE) and the Bank of Japan are two relevant examples that come immediately to mind. The BoE’s Asset Purchase Facility, through which its Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) purchased £375 billion of longer-term assets between 2009 and 2012, was quite comparable in purpose and design to the Fed’s LSAP programs. Moreover, since March 2013, the BoE has reinvested the cash flows associated with maturing gilts in the facility in order to maintain the stock of securities at a steady level. In its February 2014 Inflation Report, the MPC provided guidance on its expected normalization framework, laying out an approach in which its Bank Rate – the deposit rate for central bank reserves in the U.K. – is the active marginal instrument for monetary policy while portfolio-related tools, including reinvestments and asset sales, receive less emphasis. Specifically, the MPC suggested that it intends to maintain its stock of purchased assets, including reinvesting the cash flows associated with maturing securities, at least until it raises its target short-term interest rate from its current level. Meanwhile, the BoJ is still purchasing assets under QQE, which it launched in April 2013. With a goal of increasing its Japanese government bond (JGB) holdings by ¥50 trillion per year, it has not yet initiated a discussion of eventual normalization. When that time comes, however, the BoJ will be holding a large portfolio of longer-term JGBs. The BoJ’s balance sheet will therefore look markedly different than it did when the QEP ended in 2006, at which time the BoJ just allowed short-term funds-supplying operations to roll off. The portfolio size and composition to which each central bank eventually normalizes will, of course, depend on what it eventually determines is appropriate to support implementation of monetary policy in the longer run. Indeed, the FOMC has indicated that in the longer run, it will hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively, and that it will hold primarily Treasury securities. The ECB has also used unconventional measures to provide accommodation, but unlike the Federal Reserve, BoJ, and BoE, this has primarily been through liquidity provided directly to the banking system via longer-term refinancing operations, rather than through asset purchases. This liquidity was provided at fixed terms of up to three years, thus allowing the size of the ECB’s balance sheet to normalize automatically as refinancing agreements mature. By contrast, the ECB’s upcoming purchases of asset-backed securities and covered bonds will present it with longer-term portfolio considerations. Finally, I should note that central banks – like other financial market participants – need to remain aware of changes in the financial market landscapes in which they operate. They may need to adapt their operations accordingly as they move away from asset purchases and back to money market instruments to implement monetary policy. For example, in addition to reflecting developments in its balance sheet since the financial crisis, the FOMC’s approach to normalizing policy also reflects changes in U.S. money market dynamics that have been influenced by various factors. These factors include the extraordinary level of liquidity that’s been provided, access to IOER that is limited to depository institutions, and a number of international and domestic regulatory reforms. International regulatory reforms include the liquidity coverage ratio, leverage ratio, and net stable funding ratio. In the U.S., changes in deposit insurance premium calculations, rules governing money market mutual funds, and the potential for a capital surcharge based in part on short-term wholesale funding may also affect certain market participants. Many of the changes in regulation – along with changes in market structure, technology, and other factors – may affect market participants’ activity and relationships in money markets. On net, their balance sheet costs may be higher, which may prompt money market participants to require higher returns to engage in competition to arbitrage wedges in money market rates and to alter their participation in central bank operations and facilities. This outcome may affect the transmission of monetary policy or require central banks to adapt their operations to accommodate these realities. Conclusion In conclusion, I’d like to note that the framework for implementing monetary policy and the landscape in which we operate have seen important changes in the years since the crisis, 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  and they continue to evolve. The Desk plays an important role in this process, carrying out open market operations at the direction of the FOMC, in pursuit of the operating objectives the FOMC deems appropriate to achieve its dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. The operating tools that the Federal Reserve has developed will allow us to tighten monetary policy when the FOMC determines it is appropriate to do so, but I have no doubt that we will continue to learn more about how these tools interact as we normalize policy and make adjustments over time, just as we have done in the past. We will also learn from and share our experiences with other central banks that are undergoing similar transitions. Thank you.     
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches        
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11        
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches        
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Mario Draghi: Keynote speech at the Euro Conference – Lithuania Keynote speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Euro Conference – Lithuania, Vilnius, 25 September 2014. *      *      * Summary The euro area benefits from Lithuania’s accession in at least two ways: first, Lithuania has shown that adjustment is not only necessary, but also possible – even without currency devaluation; second, Lithuania’s decision to join the euro area demonstrates that our common currency is attractive. Lithuania itself will – amongst others – benefit from having a say in the monetary policy-making of the world’s second largest economy. Initial scepticism among some Lithuanians regarding the introduction of the euro is already transforming into increasing support now that people become more informed about their new currency and the changeover modalities. Joining the euro area does not only follow from economic considerations: it is a binding commitment to European values. *** Dear Prime Minister Butkevičius, Dear Vice President Katainen, Dear Finance Minister Šadžius, Dear Chairman Vasiliauskas, Excellencies, Ladies and gentlemen, You might be aware of the timer above the door of Lietuvos bankas, Lithuania’s central bank, which is counting down to the euro changeover – less than 100 days [98 days] remain until Lithuania adopts the euro. Lietuvos bankas installed the countdown clock two months ago, when the Council of the European Union gave the green light for the adoption of the euro, but I am sure that many of us have been anticipating this day for much longer. And we have probably asked ourselves: what does Lithuania’s accession mean for the euro area and what does the euro changeover mean for Lithuania? In my remarks today I will elaborate on both of these aspects. How does the euro area benefit from Lithuania’s membership? With Lithuania introducing the euro, all three Baltic countries will soon be part of the currency union. This is a great asset for the euro area, not least because it demonstrates the euro area’s attractiveness. Not that long ago the Baltic countries were in the midst of a deep recession. In 2009 Lithuania’s GDP declined by roughly 15%. Today, Lithuania is one of the fastest growing countries in Europe. Last year its GDP grew by 3.3%, whereas the euro area’s GDP shrank by 0.4%. Quite remarkably, Lithuania managed to reboot its economy without any external support. The Baltic countries have demonstrated that adjustment is possible – even without currency devaluation. While Lithuania’s government deficit stood at 9.4% in 2009, last year it had fallen to 2.1% and is expected to decline further. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Beyond the economic aspects, the Baltic success story also shows that adjustment is politically feasible. Despite major fiscal consolidation, there was hardly any public protest against the government measures. So how was this possible? In my view, we can draw an important lesson from the Baltic experience: governments not only acted boldly, but also immediately. They used the momentum of the crisis to implement the necessary consolidation and thus managed to convince the public of the need for these measures. Besides being politically astute, this swift and bold action was key in strengthening investors’ trust. It enabled the Baltic countries to recover quickly from recession. The Baltic case shows that – while consolidation might weigh temporarily on economic growth in the short term – it is the basis for sustainable growth in the longer run. Beyond showing commitment to making its own economy fit for the euro area, Lithuania has also contributed to making the currency union as a whole more stable – even before becoming part of it: the priorities set last year under its EU presidency included more steps towards banking union and a further deepening of Economic and Monetary Union. To resume, the euro area benefits from Lithuania’s accession in at least two ways: first, Lithuania has shown that adjustment is not only necessary, but also possible – even without currency devaluation; second, Lithuania’s decision to join the euro area demonstrates that our common currency is attractive, despite difficulties in some euro area member countries. How will Lithuania benefit from becoming part of the euro area? But does the Lithuanian public agree that Lithuania will benefit from membership of the euro area? Or is the introduction of the euro just a project of the political elites? I am aware that some Lithuanians would rather stick with the litas. According to survey data, only half of the population favours the introduction of the euro. We certainly need to take such scepticism seriously. Europe cannot simply be a project that is imposed by the elites without the backing of the general public. Recent experience shows, however, that initial scepticism might well turn into support, once people become more informed about their new currency and the changeover modalities. Prior to their respective accessions, it seemed that citizens in the other Baltic countries were not really in the mood for the euro either. However, information campaigns and the reality of the new currency resulted in growing support – a trend that we are already observing in Lithuania. According to the latest survey data, support for the single currency increased by 18 percentage points from late last year to mid-2014 in Lithuania. In Latvia, it even increased by 30 percentage points (to 68%) over the same period.1 And, even though public support for the European project as such has been on the decline across Member States during the crisis, if anything, citizens in euro area countries have persistently demonstrated solid support for the common currency. In essence, those that are sceptical about the new currency have two concerns: first, they are worried that the changeover might lead to price increases; second, they are afraid that their country might lose part of its identity. Compared with other EU Member States that are not yet part of the euro area, these concerns are especially high in Lithuania. Three-quarters of survey respondents in Lithuania believe that introducing the euro will lead to increased prices.2 I am confident we can demonstrate that such worries are unwarranted. First, the ECB will be the competent                                                  1  http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/eb/eb81/eb81_en.htm. 2  http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/flash/fl_400_en.pdf. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 monetary policy authority once Lithuania is part of the euro area. And I can assure you that we take our price stability mandate very seriously and will continue to do so. Second, the Lithuanian authorities can draw on the experience from 18 previous euro changeovers in designing measures to prevent unjustified price increases. I trust they will make sure that the new banknotes and coins will have the same purchasing power as the litas. What about the other main concern, a loss of national identity? Designed by Antanas Žukauskas, the new coins resemble the litas coins, showing Vytis (“the Chaser”), which is an adaption of the country’s coat of arms. But Lithuania will not just bring a national symbol to the euro area. In joining the euro area, Lithuania will effectively re-gain part of the sovereignty it gave up earlier. Lithuania’s Minister for Finance, Rimantas Šadžius, allegedly said, “We already have the euro, it just has a different name”. What he was referring to was the fact that the litas has been pegged to the euro since 2002. But even before then, Lithuania’s monetary policy was constrained by a fixed exchange rate: from 1994 to 2002 the litas was pegged to the US dollar. The Chairman of the Board of Lietuvos bankas, Vitas Vasiliauskas, has already participated twice as an observer in the monetary policy meetings of the ECB’s Governing Council. As of January next year, he will participate actively in the monetary policy-making of the world’s second largest economy. This shows that, in an era in which nation states are closely interlinked, sharing sovereignty means gaining sovereignty. If we explain this properly, I am sure we can convince those worried about losing part of their national identity that, rather than losing something, they will gain from closer integration. There are, of course, many more ways in which Lithuania can benefit from being part of the euro area. To name but one, international investors usually perceive the Baltic countries as belonging to the same economic area. With Latvia and Estonia already using the euro, Lithuania would have a clear competitive disadvantage when it comes to attracting investment from abroad if it delayed adopting the euro. Furthermore, belonging to the common currency area may provide stability for the country in the current geopolitical environment. I appreciate that the Lithuanian government approved a public information and communication strategy on the euro adoption. And I trust that it will do its best to implement this strategy such that “LAISVĖ, VIENYBĖ, GEROVĖ” (freedom, unity, well-being) will not just be inscribed in the edge of the new two euro coins, but become reality. Conclusion The way in which Lithuania has striven to become part of the euro area shows that our common currency is attractive – despite the difficulties experienced in some member countries. But joining the euro area does not only follow from economic considerations: it is a binding commitment to European values. I am happy to see that Lithuania is ready to make this commitment – welcome Lithuania!  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Moving forward together Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central bank of the Philippines), at the Alliance for Financial Inclusion Annual General Meeting “Independence, Host Country and Governance”, Port-of-Spain, Trinidad and Tobago, 9 September 2014. *      *      * It is a great privilege for me to welcome all of you to the Annual General Meeting (AGM) of the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI). I feel distinct pleasure in seeing familiar pioneers of financial inclusion, and new faces gathered in this hall. We have a weighty agenda that includes landmark issues for AFI and its membership. A key focus of today’s discussions is AFI’s progress toward becoming an international, independent organization and the important next steps that we will all be taking together. As is the usual practice, we are having the AGM before the Global Policy Forum (GPF), AFI’s centerpiece event where financial inclusion stakeholders gather. A members-only AGM taking place before the GPF allows us to make collective decisions and have a unified voice before we set out to collaborate with our external stakeholders. Let us make use of this AGM as a venue that has, time and again, provided us with a collegial and enriching environment to discuss and find solutions to important matters facing us. This general meeting allows us to bring up our relevant individual and institutional concerns, to hear out our peers, and to share and leverage on our best practices and knowledge toward building a stronger network of nations championing financial inclusion. In the past two AGMs, we reached agreement and started the initial work to be a fully independent institution. In Cape Town, members reasoned that the aspiration for independence will foster a stronger policy-enabling environment for the members, and will strengthen AFI’s leadership standing in financial inclusion. Key considerations surrounding our pursuit of independence, such as legitimacy and fiscal sustainability, were underscored. Also, last year in Kuala Lumpur, the AFI host country bidding was officially launched. The adoption of this bidding process offered transparency that further fortified AFI as a credible organization. Today, we continue laying the foundation of our work toward our independence. In this meeting:  Members will be provided with an overview of the AFI independence process, with a presentation to be made by Superintendent Daniel Schydlowsky of Peru. Our resolve to achieve independence will not only advance our sense of ownership, but also assure ourselves that we are building together a member-governed and member-driven organization that is sustainable. As such, crucial and practical issues such as the membership fee structures and related recommendations on membership rights and participation will be discussed.  Secondly, the rigorous work of the Sub-committee on Host Country Evaluation will be presented to us for our appreciation. The choice of the future home of AFI is a crucial milestone in our journey to become an independent institution. Thus, it is with a sense of excitement that I inform you that the newly selected AFI host country will be announced shortly.  Thirdly, the Independence Sub-committee Chair, Governor Njuguna Ndung’u of Kenya will outline the governance recommendations that will determine how the independent AFI will be steered toward our collective mission of adopting and expanding effective, inclusive financial policies in developing nations. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches With these, all members are encouraged to be proactive in the discussions. Your insights and contributions to the many important issues will enrich the process and ultimately strengthen AFI. The important agenda I have just outlined – charting our way toward independence, governance issues, and the conferment of the new AFI host country – will allow us to advance our strength as one body and our partnership for the ultimate betterment of the poor people we target to serve. On a final and a more personal note, let me take this opportunity to thank all of you for your personal commitment and individual contribution to AFI over the years. After this forum, I will be stepping down as the Steering Committee Chair – a role which has been a privilege and a joy to hold, in large measure due to all your support. Warm thanks to my colleagues at the Steering Committee who have shared their expertise in building and providing strategic guidance to AFI; to the Management Unit – the team that has made our AFI work seamless and efficient; to all the members – the bright minds behind our financial inclusion policies and various programs that are truly making a difference; to all those who made AFI programs and initiatives a success through their effective organization of activities and events; our sincerest gratitude to all of you. I am pleased to announce that Superintendent Daniel Schydlowsky of Peru is the incoming chairman of the Steering Committee. I will, of course, stay on as an active member of AFI and will remain committed in sharing our institutional knowledge, and, being a personal advocate of financial inclusion, in advancing AFI’s global mandate. My colleagues and friends, let us all remain committed in being responsible stewards of this global policy network on financial inclusion. Together, let us note that stewardship is not merely an obligation but a proactive response and opportunity for us to develop further what has been entrusted to us. We are all called to foster this global connection and move forward together toward institutional independence. Thank you and more power to all of us.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jerome H Powell: Community banks in the United States Introductory remarks by Mr Jerome H Powell, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, co-sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and Conference of State Bank Supervisors, St. Louis, Missouri, 23 September 2014. *      *      * It is a pleasure for me to join Jim Bullard and John Ryan in welcoming all of you to the second annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, co-sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and Conference of State Bank Supervisors. I had the privilege of addressing the inaugural community banking conference held here last year, and as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board’s Subcommittee on Smaller Regional and Community Banking, I am delighted to return to this venue to participate in this year’s event.1  As all of you surely know, community banks play a vital role in America’s financial system, providing essential services to households, small businesses, and small farms in communities throughout the country. Community banks differ from their larger cousins, not just in size, but in the fundamental focus of their business. Community bankers’ primary objective is to serve the members of their local communities, who are not only their customers but also their neighbors and friends. They have strong links to the people and businesses that reside in their communities, as well as direct knowledge of local economic conditions. These close ties give community bankers a clear advantage in understanding local needs and tailoring their products and services to meet those needs. I will confess that I have never worked at a community bank; however, I have been a community bank customer, and in that role I have had personal experience interacting with bankers whose mission is to provide high quality of service to every customer who walks in the door. Despite the advantages that I just mentioned, life is not always easy for community bankers. The number of community banks in the United States has declined sharply over the past three decades, due to a combination of failures and acquisitions.2 And many remaining community banks have struggled to survive, especially during the last five or six years. Although improving overall economic conditions have begun to provide some relief to these struggling banks, they continue to face significant challenges. The burden of regulatory compliance can be particularly daunting for small banks. And competition, from large banks and credit unions as well as other nonbank financial service providers, is always a concern. My colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board and I are committed to making sure that we understand the challenges faced by community banks. One way that we further our understanding is by talking to the bankers themselves. The entire Board of Governors meets twice a year with the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, which includes representatives of community banks, thrifts, and credit unions in each of the 12 Federal Reserve Districts.3 Individual governors also take advantage of opportunities to meet with community bankers from time to time. During last year’s conference I met with a group of St. Louis area community bankers to hear what was on their minds. I will conduct a nationwide webinar with community bankers next month. In fact, I speak regularly to a number of bank executives, including those who run smaller institutions. I find these types of                                                 1 For more information on the Board’s committees, including membership, see http://www.federalreserve.gov/ aboutthefed/bios/board/default.htm.  2 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2012), “FDIC Community Banking Study”, December, www.fdic.gov/regulations/resources/cbi/report/cbi-full.pdf.  3 For more information on the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, see www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cdiac.htm.  
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  conversations – with people who live and work in the world outside the Capital Beltway and far from Wall Street – to be particularly enlightening. And, of course, this conference, which was conceived as the result of a successful collaboration between the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, provides an annual opportunity for community bankers, bank regulators, and academic researchers to come together to share ideas and insights surrounding the issues that matter most to community bankers. This year’s program includes presentations by the authors of a number of excellent academic research papers, the unveiling of the results of a new survey of community banks conducted on behalf of the conference organizers, reactions by community bankers to the research and survey findings, and several compelling speeches. The primary focus of today’s agenda is research. The response to the conference’s call for papers was quite impressive, and the conference research committee faced the challenging task of selecting the most relevant, interesting, and high-quality papers to be included in the program. The authors of these papers include academics and policymakers, with backgrounds in law, economics, and finance. The topics covered clearly demonstrate a desire, on the part of the researchers, to promote a deeper understanding of what makes community banks tick and of how a wide range of government policies affects the activities, profitability, and viability of community banks. The first session considers factors underlying community bank formation, behavior, and performance. The first paper looks at characteristics of newly chartered banks – where they form, and how they fare over time. The second paper also focuses on newly chartered banks, considering possible explanations for the near absence of new bank charters over the past few years. Those of us at the Fed pay a great deal of attention to this type of bank formation, because it is the primary source of new competition in the markets in which community banks compete. The third paper in this session looks at how rivalry among banks affects their decisions to adopt new technology, and the fourth seeks to explain the persistence of low net-interest income among community banks in recent years. The second session addresses the effects, both intended and unintended, of specific government policies on community bank behavior. One paper looks at how the 2006 commercial real estate guidance for banks affected loan growth.4 Another paper examines the effect of the creation of the Small Business Lending Fund on community bank lending to small businesses. The third paper in this session focuses on what happens when banks perceive that examiners have given them inappropriately negative evaluations. The underlying theme of the third research session is how broad government policies affect community bank profitability and viability. The first paper provides an overview of the effects of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act on community banks. The second paper considers whether a provision of the JOBS Act that modified the threshold for Exchange Act reporting for unlisted banks and bank holding companies helped or hurt small banks. The third paper contrasts the thousands of small community banks operating in the United States with the handful of very large financial institutions and proposes a new approach to regulation that recognizes the very different business models of these two types of institutions. The fourth and final paper takes a high-level look at the effects of regulatory policy on the structure of the U.S. banking system and the viability of community banks. On day two of the conference, you will learn about the results of a recently conducted survey that was completed by more than 1,000 community bankers from across the country, as well as the feedback obtained from more than 1,300 bankers participating in town hall meetings                                                 4 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2006), “Federal Banking Agencies Issue Final Guidance on Concentrations in Commercial Real Estate Lending”, press release, December 6, http://federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20061206a.htm.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  hosted by state bank commissioners in 30 states. The presentation of these findings will be followed by a panel discussion by a select group of community banking experts. I hope I have succeeded in whetting your appetite for the sessions that lie ahead, and I encourage you to make the most of this unique opportunity to interact with bankers, regulators, and researchers who share a common interest in the future of community banking.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Mario Draghi: Introductory remarks at the EP’s Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before the European Parliament’s Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, Brussels, 22 September 2014. *      *      * Mr Chairman, Honourable Members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, Ladies and Gentlemen, This hearing today takes place at a moment of change for the ECB. On 4 November, the ECB will become the banking supervisor for the euro area, including the direct supervision of 120 large banks. This marks the biggest step of European economic integration since the inception of the euro. We are well prepared for this step, but we are also conscious of the important additional responsibility we will be taking on. Additionally, over the course of the coming months, the majority of the ECB’s services will move to the new ECB premises at Frankfurt Ostend, while the SSM staff will remain in the city centre. This will also geographically underline the separation between the ECB’s new supervisory function and its other tasks. In this context, I wish to inform you that we have published today our decision on the implementation of separation between the ECB’s monetary policy and supervisory functions as required by the SSM Regulation. I know that on 3 November, on the eve of the start of single supervision, you will have ample opportunity to discuss with the Chair of the Supervisory Board. By then, the results of the Comprehensive Assessment will also be known. Against this background, I will today and in the hearings from now on focus my attention on the traditional tasks of the ECB – and in particular on monetary policy. Economic situation The economic recovery in the euro area is losing momentum. Following some moderate expansion in recent quarters, growth of the euro area real GDP came to a halt in the second quarter of this year. The early information on economic conditions which we received over the summer has been somewhat weaker than expected. While industrial production and manufacturing orders in July gave some reason for optimism, more recent survey indicators have given no indication that the sharp decline registered in August has stopped. Looking ahead, we continue to expect euro area domestic demand to be supported by various factors. These include our accommodative monetary policy stance, favourable financing conditions, and structural reforms sustaining private consumption and investment. At the same time, unacceptably high unemployment and continued weak credit growth are likely to curb the strength of the recovery. The risks surrounding the expected expansion are clearly on the downside. In particular, heightened geopolitical tensions could dampen business and consumer confidence. Risks of insufficient structural reforms could weigh on the business environment. From a high of 3.0% toward the end of 2011, inflation in the euro area has been on a downward path for a considerable period of time. In August, inflation was estimated to have reached a low of 0.3% but has been revised later to 0.4%. We expect inflation to remain at low levels over the coming months, before increasing gradually during 2015 and 2016. Given the prolonged period of low inflation that we have already experienced, we will closely monitor risks to price developments looking forward. We will focus in particular on the 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches possible repercussions of dampened growth dynamics, geopolitical developments, exchange rate developments and the pass-through of our monetary policy measures. TLTROs, the September measures, and the transmission mechanism Before turning to our latest monetary policy decisions, let me stress that the ECB has done a lot over the past three years to safeguard price stability. We successfully fought the confidence crisis in the euro that raised interest rates to abnormal levels. We provided the euro area banking system with unprecedented funding. We have continuously lowered our policy rates. Yet, against the backdrop of a persistently weak inflation outlook, a slowing growth momentum, and subdued monetary and credit dynamics, we decided in early September to adopt a number of additional monetary policy initiatives which will complete and complement the measures already announced in June. First, we lowered the key ECB interest rates by 10 basis points to their effective lower bound. The main refinancing rate now stands at 0.05%, and the deposit facility rate at –0.20%. Second, we announced further measures to enhance the functioning of monetary policy transmission, support lending to the real economy and provide further monetary accommodation given that we have now reached the lower bound. Restoring a functioning transmission, notably in bank lending, is instrumental in ensuring that the monetary policy stimulus that has been introduced reaches the final borrowers and thereby supports real incomes, spending and price formation. Following this announcement, under our ABS purchase programme (ABSPP) we will soon start purchasing simple and transparent securities with underlying assets consisting of claims against the euro area non-financial private sector. We will also start purchasing covered bonds issued by euro area MFIs under a new covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3). These measures will effectively complement and strengthen the targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) whose first allotment was just conducted a few days ago. In this respect, let me provide you with some fresh details on the outcome of the first TLTRO operation. Last Thursday, 255 banks participated in the first TLTRO for an amount of 82.6 billion euros. This is within the range of take-up values we had expected based on banks’ revealed behaviour under previous programmes. In December, banks will have another opportunity to borrow funds in the form of their TLTRO initial allowance, which entitles them to borrow a cumulative amount – between the September and the December 2014 tenders – equivalent to up to 7% of their outstanding stock of loans to the non-financial private sector excluding loans to household for house purchase. By design, the September and December operations should be assessed in combination. As of next year, there will be additional quarterly allotments in which banks will be able to receive additional funding determined by their recent lending performance. While it is yet too early to assess the impact of the TLTROs on the broader economy, their announcement already had a noticeable positive impact on financial market sentiment. Overall, we expect the TLTROs to act as a powerful tool to strengthen the transmission of monetary policy and facilitate new credit flows to the real economy, given the predominantly bank-based financing structure of the euro area economy. Impact channels of the additional measures The additional measures we took in September will empower the credit easing impact of TLTROs in three directions. First, we expect that purchases of simple and transparent ABS 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 will strengthen the direct pass-through effect – i.e. the extent to which the funding cost relief for banks will be passed along to their borrowers – that we can associate with the TLTROs to a measurable extent. This is because the ABS market remains severely impaired – so that the potential for interventions to change market dynamics is high in that particular market – and the link between the spreads at which ABS are traded in the secondary market and the lending rates which banks apply in the primary market of the credits that collateralise these securities is direct and tight. Second, there will be a portfolio rebalancing channel, as the expansion in liquidity that will result from the combined operations promotes a diversification of investment patterns in the investor community, and thereby an easing of financing conditions more broadly. Third, we believe the overall monetary policy package underpins our forward guidance and our determination to accomplish an expansionary stance over an extended horizon in keeping with our price stability mandate and our desire to see inflation stabilise around levels below but close to 2% over the medium term. Features and risk management of the new programmes Is the market for ABS, in particular, sufficiently ample to allow sizeable purchases? Our purchases will include a fairly wide range of simple and transparent ABS collateralised by loans to the real economy. The total stock of eligible securities which is currently outstanding – held in investors’ portfolios or retained by the originating banks – is already sizeable. We are confident that it will grow as a result of our presence in the market. Over time, as our purchases contribute to a normalisation in trading conditions, secondary market and issuance activity will expand in those segments that are currently inactive. As the experience of other central banks that have engaged in outright purchases of structured products can demonstrate, market size and purchasing volumes are to a certain extent co-determined and endogenous. Will the new initiatives magnify the Eurosystem’s exposure to risk? Outright purchases will increase the size of the ECB’s balance sheet, but the additional risk exposure will be limited. Under the ABS purchase programme we will be purchasing senior and guaranteed mezzanine tranches. Regarding senior securities, we would buy only those assets that are eligible for Eurosystem operations. So, we have ample experience with managing and understanding the risks associated with this asset class. The assets to be purchased would satisfy high standards of transparency and simplicity and are also characterised by low default risk. The large degree of credit enhancement that originators have to build into a structured financial transaction for its senior tranches to attract the high rating that will make it eligible under our programme will function as a further protective layer against losses. As for the guaranteed mezzanine tranches, their intrinsic credit risk would be comparable to that of the guarantor, be it a national or supranational entity. Covered bonds share important features with ABS, and therefore are an obvious complement to an ABS-centred programme. First, the link that is established on the issuing bank’s balance sheet between the covered bond, on the one side, and the loans that back the covered bond, on the other, is reasonably tight. As the prices for covered bonds are bid up, we expect banks to respond to the market incentives by originating more saleable covered securities, and thus more loans to collateralise them. Second, outright interventions in this market will complement ABS purchases by reinforcing the portfolio rebalancing channels of transmission and generating positive spill-overs into other markets and securities. This will further ease funding and credit conditions and will help the transmission of monetary policy. The Governing Council has emphasised that the combination of measures announced between June and September will have a sizeable impact on the ECB balance sheet, which is expected to move towards the dimensions it used to have at the beginning of 2012. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches With the purchase programmes, we are starting a transition from a monetary policy framework predominantly founded on passive provision of central bank credit to a more active and controlled management of our balance sheet. Conclusion The Governing Council remains fully determined to counter risks to the medium-term outlook for inflation. Therefore, we stand ready to use additional unconventional instruments within our mandate, and alter the size and / or the composition of our unconventional interventions should it become necessary to further address risks of a too prolonged period of low inflation. Let me add however that the success of our measures critically depends on a number of factors outside of the realm of monetary policy. Courageous structural reforms and improvements in the competitiveness of the corporate sector are key to improving business environment. This would foster the urgently needed investment and create greater demand for credit. Structural reforms thus crucially complement the ECB’s accommodative monetary policy stance and further empower the effective transmission of monetary policy. As I have indicated now at several occasions, no monetary – and also no fiscal – stimulus can ever have a meaningful effect without such structural reforms. The crisis will only be over when full confidence returns in the real economy and in particular in the capacity and willingness of firms to take risks, to invest, and to create jobs. This depends on a variety of factors, including our monetary policy but also, and even most importantly, the implementation of structural reforms, upholding the credibility of the fiscal framework, and the strengthening of euro area governance. Originally, you had also chosen “inflation differentials in the euro area” as one of the topics of today’s hearing. I hope you will understand that given the important decisions we took in July and September, I have focused my remarks on our monetary policy measures. Nevertheless, I of course stand ready and would be very interested to further discuss the matter of persistent inflation differentials, especially given their link to the structural reform agenda. I am now looking forward to our discussion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Carolyn Wilkins: Monetary policy and the underwhelming recovery Remarks by Ms Carolyn Wilkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the SFA Society Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 22 September 2014. *      *      * Introduction Good afternoon. Thank you for inviting me. I’m delighted to be here today with this group of accomplished investment professionals. What I will speak about today intertwines your professional world with mine. Let me start with what we’ve all observed: the recovery from the global financial crisis has been underwhelming, to say the least. It has left us debating what kind of growth we can reasonably expect after so much disappointment. It has also left us debating how central banks should conduct monetary policy without compromising financial stability. During the crisis, central banks and governments took unprecedented action. They worked together to prevent the failure of systemically important financial institutions, and to provide exceptional monetary and fiscal stimulus. These policies were successful in preventing the worst. But even this forceful policy response could not prevent a severe and protracted global recession. Massive amounts of wealth were destroyed. The values of equities and housing plunged. The loss to global output was roughly $10 trillion by the end of last year. All told, the crisis left the global economy with 62 million fewer jobs.1  The recovery has had repeated false starts and still faces considerable headwinds. Global growth has averaged only around 3 per cent over the past two years. That’s well below the average prior to the crisis, and it is unlikely that 2014 will be much better. Financial markets are reflecting these lowered expectations. That’s part of the reason why long-term interest rates in the major advanced economies, including Canada, are very low. Today I’m going to talk about three important matters for central banks. First, to conduct monetary policy, we need to know how much of this slow growth is cyclical and how much is structural. Second, to calibrate our policy we need to know how these factors, taken together, are affecting the neutral rate of interest. And third, making judgments about the impact of these factors is not an exact science. As you know, there is a lot of uncertainty. That is why we take a risk management approach to achieving our inflation target. Disentangling cyclical and structural factors So how much of this slow growth is cyclical and how much is structural? History teaches us that balance-sheet recessions such as the world has just seen are typically followed by growth that is much slower than in the wake of a normal recession. The legacy of a financial crisis is a heavy burden for any country, and paying down debt impedes normal economic growth for a long time.2 This makes the task of disentangling the cyclical from the structural more difficult, but it needs to be done in order to determine the rate of non-inflationary                                                  1  This estimation of job losses is relative to trend. See “Global Employment Trends 2014: The Risk of a Jobless Recovery,” International Labour Organization, Geneva, 2014. 2  This pattern has been well documented by Harvard professors Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff, among others. 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches growth. As inflation targeters, the rate of potential output growth matters a lot to us. It is a critical input to the appropriate path for policy rates. Lost potential from the crisis Cyclical factors have clearly been playing a starring role in this underwhelming recovery. During the crisis, demand plummeted and so did output. As workers left the labour force and firms cancelled capital investments or went out of business, potential output growth declined as well. We are still facing headwinds from the deleveraging of households, fiscal consolidation and uncertainty. We estimate that potential output in Canada is about 3 per cent below where it would have been without the recession. That’s roughly $3,500 per household. In the United States, where the crisis hit harder, estimates of lost potential range from 5 per cent to 13 per cent – that’s US$6,500 to US$18,000 per household. Demographics and labour supply We also have structural factors weighing on potential. The population is aging, there are risks that some working-age people who left the labour market may not return, and there are concerns that technology is not going to deliver the leaps in productivity that we have seen in the past. Let’s start with demographic trends. Globally, over the next two decades, the number of people aged 65 and over will rise by more than 80 per cent, from 600 million to 1.1 billion. Canada is no exception to this trend. The baby boomers are starting to retire, and so the proportion of the population that is of working age is shrinking. Early retirement is also taking people out of the labour force. For Canada, this has subtracted about 0.45 percentage points from potential GDP growth over the last five years. A new wrinkle is that working-age people are also leaving the labour force. This was discussed at length last month by central bankers at Jackson Hole. The decline in the participation rate of young and prime age workers reflects the cyclical effects of a weak job market. But these cyclical effects could become structural. After a long search, if you don’t think you are going to find a job, at some point, you become discouraged and you stop looking. The longer you stay out of the labour force, the more likely it is that your skills have deteriorated and your attachment to the job market has weakened. This is what economists mean when we talk about hysteresis. Productivity growth We know that with a relatively smaller labour force, a nation’s capacity for growth will depend on the productivity and creativity of its workers and businesses. Trend productivity growth in advanced economies has declined over the past decade and a half – and Canada has lost ground compared with the United States and some other countries. Pessimists argue that the high rates of productivity growth seen in the post-war era or the late-1990s are history.3 Optimists say that technological progress in areas such as nanotechnology, computing and genetic engineering will once again generate strong productivity gains.4  At the Bank of Canada, we take a balanced approach when we factor all of this into our views on productivity. We expect business investment to pick up, which will lead to labour productivity growth that is a little higher than it was before the crisis. However, it will only be about two-thirds of its peak of around 2 per cent in the late 1990s. A similar decline is also expected to occur in the United States and the euro area.                                                  3  R. J. Gordon, “The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, and Reflections.” 4  J. Mokyr, “Secular Stagnation? Not in your life,” Chapter 6 in Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and Cures, a VoxEU.org Book edited by C. Teulings and R. Baldwin (London, UK: CEPR Press, 2014). Also Joel Mokyr’s comments on “Growth, Innovation and Stagnation”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Bottom line for potential The bottom line is that potential output growth in Canada and other industrialized economies will be lower than it was in the years leading up to the crisis. Our most recent estimate for Canada is that it will average just below 2 per cent over the next two years. This is a percentage point lower than average potential growth in the decade prior to the crisis. We will update this estimate in our next Monetary Policy Report in late October. We believe that some of the potential lost during the crisis will be restored through higher business investment and firm creation. But opinions vary on this. You may have read about a more extreme hypothesis, the idea of “secular stagnation.” This is the theory that there is chronically deficient demand in the global economy stemming from persistent headwinds and structural factors that predate the crisis. This is not the Bank of Canada’s baseline view. We expect the cyclical factors restraining growth to continue to dissipate over the next few years. We are already seeing the positive effects on growth in Canada and the United States. Implications for the neutral rate Let me turn now to what this all means for the neutral rate of interest.5 The gap between the policy rate and the neutral rate serves as gauge of the degree of monetary stimulus in the economy. It helps us to calibrate monetary policy. The neutral rate is to economists what dark matter is to physicists. We are convinced it exists, it plays a central role in our models and analysis, but we can’t directly observe it. So it’s important to be clear about the concept and the uncertainty around it. The neutral rate I am talking about here is the real risk-free rate of interest that enables the economy to operate at full capacity with stable inflation after cyclical forces have dissipated. It is the interest rate that generates just enough savings to finance investment in the long-run. Since savings can flow across borders, the neutral rate in Canada is influenced by both domestic and foreign factors. We posted on our website today a background paper on the neutral rate that lays this out very clearly. Let me walk you through the highlights. Real interest rates have fallen worldwide over the last few decades, including in Canada. Given this decline and with such low interest rates today, it is reasonable to think that the neutral rate is lower than in the past. There are a number of structural factors related to investment and savings that explain why. Currently, investment is being held back by weak confidence and uncertainty about demand. These are cyclical factors, and hardly surprising given the duration of the crisis. The structural undercurrent here, though, is about the speed limit of the global economy. With the lower expected growth in potential output that I just discussed, we can expect lower returns to investment. With lower returns, investment will be weaker than it otherwise would be. When firms are investing less, their reduced demand for funds puts downward pressure on interest rates. The financial crisis also appears to have had a persistent effect on the capital-formation risk premium. As Robert Hall points out, this helps to explain why high profits and low interest rates are not boosting investment to a greater extent.6                                                   5  The notion of a natural or neutral rate of interest was first used by Knut Wicksell. See K. Wicksell, Interest and Prices: A Study of the Causes Regulating the Value of Money (London: Macmillan and Company for the Royal Economic Society, 1936; original edition published in Sweden in 1898). 6  R. Hall, “Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy from the Financial Crisis,” Hoover Institution and the Department of Economics, Stanford University, National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual, April 2014. 
4 BIS central bankers’ speeches At the same time, effective business credit spreads in Canada today are around 15 to 45 basis points higher than they were before the crisis. Wider spreads are likely to persist because of tougher financial regulations and other factors.7  The neutral rate is also being affected by the level of global savings, which has risen significantly in the last decade and a half. There are a number of factors at play, and they are expected to persist. For example, many emerging-market economies (EMEs), especially in Asia, are pursuing policies that contribute to high savings rates. At the same time, elevated oil prices mean large current account surpluses in many countries that export oil. These savings are being invested in advanced economy assets, especially those denominated in U.S. dollars. EME reserves have increased tenfold to US$8 trillion since 2000. New financial sector regulations are also reinforcing increased demand for safe assets in order to meet higher collateral requirements and liquidity buffers.8  All told, we think that the neutral rate of interest is lower than it was in the years leading up to the crisis because of these structural developments. We estimate that the real neutral policy rate is currently in the range of 1 to 2 per cent. This translates into a nominal neutral policy rate of 3 to 4 per cent, down from a range of 4 1/2 to 5 1/2 per cent in the period prior to the crisis. The neutral rate serves as an anchor for our models and analysis, but it is not a fixed beacon because the structural factors that influence it can change over time. Relative to this longer-term concept of neutral, the policy rate in Canada is stimulative.9 We need this stimulus to close the output gap and maintain inflation sustainably at target. But even with a closed output gap and inflation at target, the policy rate may not be at neutral. As long as the factors leaning on growth persist, a policy rate below neutral would be required to maintain inflation sustainably at target. In the absence of this policy stimulus, the output gap would re-emerge and inflation would fall below target.10  Some of the headwinds appear to be dissipating, but there is considerable uncertainty about how long they will persist. Let’s not forget that advanced economies’ debt doubled from roughly 160 per cent of GDP to 320 per cent between 1980 and 2010, and will take a long time to unwind. In fact, the global savings rate is expected to increase over the next five years.                                                  7  A joint analysis by the Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision attempts to quantify this adjustment. It suggests that a 3-percentage-point increase in banks’ common equity Tier 1 capital ratio would raise lending spreads by around 45 to 50 basis points. Estimates for Canada, prepared by the Bank of Canada, fall very close to this range. 8  O. Blanchard, D. Furceri and A. Pescatori, “A prolonged period of low real interest rates?” Chapter 8, Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and Cures, a VoxEU.org Book edited by C. Teulings and R. Baldwin (London, UK: CEPR Press, 2014). Also see: J. Cruz Lopez, R. Mendes and H. Vikstedt, “The Market for Collateral: The Potential Impact of Financial Regulation,” Bank of Canada Financial System Review (June 2013): 45–52. 9  Common global developments play a central role in determining longer-run neutral rates in all countries, but country-specific differences in structural factors do introduce some heterogeneity. Shorter-run concepts of neutral can differ even more because they are influenced by cyclical factors that can vary substantially across countries (for a discussion of alternative definitions of neutral rates, see Box 1 in Mendes, 2014). For example, using a shorter-run concept, Carney (2013) concludes that “the equilibrium real interest rate [in the U.K.] has been, and continues to be, negative.” Shorter-run definitions of neutral are more useful as normative measures of the currently warranted policy rate than as tools for gauging the degree of stimulus in the economy. Given the headwinds faced by the Canadian economy, shorter-run measures of neutral in Canada would currently be well below the 3 to 4 per cent range for longer-run neutral rates. This is reflected in the Banks’ policy stance. See R. Mendes, “The Neutral Rate of Interest in Canada,” Discussion Paper No. 2014–5, Bank of Canada 2014; and M. Carney, “The Spirit of the Season” (speech to The Economic Club of New York, New York, 9 December 2013). 10  For a more detailed explanation, see Technical Box 2, Headwinds, Tailwinds and the Policy Rate, Monetary Policy Report, July 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 As I said earlier, proponents of the secular stagnation interpretation of events believe that the factors restraining demand are a larger and more permanent feature of the global economic landscape. If they turn out to be right, the real neutral rate could actually be negative and monetary policy could be a lot tighter than we think it is. While we cannot completely discount this possibility, we believe that in Canada the real neutral rate is still positive and that, globally, monetary conditions are generally stimulative, although they vary across countries.11  Challenges for monetary policy Our estimates of potential and the neutral rate, and the models in which they are used, are critical inputs to our policy deliberations. They are not the end of the story, though. We also ask ourselves how various sources of uncertainty should influence these deliberations. And we clearly articulate the main upside and downside risks to our base-case outlook for inflation. That is what we mean when we talk about our risk-management approach to monetary policy. As the economy recovers and we get closer to full capacity, judgments about potential output and the remaining slack in the economy become more important. So do judgments about the neutral rate and the amount of monetary policy stimulus. Inflation could surprise on the upside if there were less slack and more monetary stimulus than we think. We watch developments in inflation carefully to distinguish between temporary and lasting effects. Fortunately, central banks have considerable experience dealing with inflation that is above target and can act quickly to rein it in. In fact, given household debt levels, we think that interest rate increases could have a larger impact than in the past. If inflation were to surprise on the downside and remain stubbornly below target, that could be harder to deal with. Given where the policy rate is today, there would not be much more conventional monetary policy could do. We have a greater appreciation of this risk now than we did before the global recession, when we were more concerned about the upside risks to inflation. If we were actually in a situation of secular stagnation, well, we would need to consider a different policy framework. One option that has been put forward would be to raise the inflation target in order to deliver negative real interest rates, since nominal interest rates can’t go below zero.12 Not only would we face the costs of higher inflation, we would also risk stoking financial imbalances.13  We are weighing the risks to financial stability posed by a low interest rate environment. We have made it clear that household imbalances are at the top of our list of vulnerabilities. But monetary policy is not the primary tool to address these risks. Regulation and supervision,                                                  11  The secular stagnation hypothesis posits that much of the current deficiency of demand is a structural feature of the economy. In order to explain why the structural deficiency of demand was not evident before the crisis, proponents of secular stagnation argue that it was masked by financially unsustainable growth prior to 2008. A more likely explanation is that deficient demand since the crisis has been due to deleveraging and uncertainty in many jurisdictions. In Canada, weak global demand is a more obvious explanation than secular stagnation. Moreover, the data suggest that as headwinds dissipate, growth is picking up and output gaps are closing in many economies, including Canada and the U.S. 12  O. Blanchard, G. Dell’Ariccia, and P. Mauro, “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy,” IMF Staff Position Note, 12 February 2010, SPN/10/03; P. Krugman, “Inflation Targets Reconsidered,” Draft Paper for ECB Sintra Conference, May 2014. 13  Some, including DeLong and Summers (2012) and Summers (2014), have argued that stimulative fiscal policies should be used to raise demand and counter adverse hysteretic effects on potential output. See J. Bradford DeLong and L. H. Summers, “Fiscal Policy in a Depressed Economy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Spring 2012): 233–297; Also L. Summers, “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,” Business Economics, Vol 49, No 2 (2014): 65–73. 
6 BIS central bankers’ speeches along with targeted macroprudential actions, are more effective lines of defence. These defences have been strengthened a number of times since 2008.14  Conversely, there are risks that a premature withdrawal of monetary stimulus could undermine the expansion. History provides us with a number of cautionary tales. A classic one is the tightening of monetary policy in 1937 that led the U.S. economy to falter as it emerged from the Great Depression.15 Monetary stimulus is important to the sustained recovery of demand and can potentially contribute to building supply by supporting investment in capital and increased labour force participation. Public policies such as structural reforms and fiscal stimulus play a more critical role. G-20 leaders have recognized the need to undertake measures to revive both demand and potential growth rates.16 Of course, decisions made by financial institutions, businesses and households are the most important determinants of our economic prospects over the long term. Conclusion To do our job right we need to judge how much of the underwhelming recovery is due to cyclical factors and how much to structural factors. The global economy continues to face headwinds associated with the balance-sheet recession. It also faces demographic changes, hysteresis in the labour market, and weak productivity growth. We aren’t buying the pessimistic view held by proponents of secular stagnation, although no one really knows how long the factors constraining demand are going to persist and how much damage they’ve done to global potential. Some countries have more baggage than others, so how long these factors persist will vary from country to country. But it is clear that potential growth rates in many economies are lower than they were prior to the crisis. Because of this, and given the high level of global savings, the neutral rate of interest is also lower. Our approach is to consider the main sources of uncertainty in our deliberations on how best to achieve our inflation target. This helps us avoid making big errors that are difficult to correct. When we do this, it is clear that continued monetary stimulus is needed to return the Canadian economy to sustainable growth and to maintain inflation at target. And, depending on the evolution of the data, it is possible that persistent headwinds will mean that some degree of stimulus will be required even after the output gap is closed to keep inflation at target.                                                   14  The Minister of Finance has tightened mortgage insurance rules, the Superintendent of Financial Institutions has developed stronger mortgage underwriting principles and the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation has improved its programs. 15  G. Eggertsson, B. Pugsley, “The Mistake of 1937: A General Equilibrium Analysis,” Monetary and Economic Studies (Special Edition), Vol. 24, No s-1 (December 2006):151–190. 16  At its summit in Sydney, Australia, in February 2014, the G-20 agreed to take measures to boost global growth by 2 per cent over the next five years, largely by removing impediments to growth such as product and labour market rigidities. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Deepali Pant Joshi: Protecting customers – safeguarding stability Speech by Dr Deepali Pant Joshi, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Tenth M.R.Pai Memorial Awards, held at Indian Merchants’ Chamber, Mumbai, 16 September 2014. *      *      * Introduction At the outset, I thank the All India Bank Depositors’ Association for inviting me to this – their Annual event. I am deeply honoured to be here today for the 10th M R Pai Memorial Awards. It is with a sense of great humility that I deliver this address. The memorial is a fitting tribute to Shri M R Pai, a crusader of Customer Rights. A Karma Yogi in the spirit of the Bhagwad Geeta, one who worked selflessly and without hope of reward, guided by the Gita’s maxim “Karmaniva Dhikaraste ma phaleshu kadachanam.” The Indian edition of Reader’s Digest featured him on the cover of their October 1995 issue under the title “M R Pai – Champion of the Consumer.” I had occasion to meet him when he visited the RBI colony at Prabhadevi in 1996. He founded the All India Bank Depositors’ Association (AIBDA) which he steered for decades. He published the book “Depositors’ Rights and Customer Service in Banks” Under the aegis of the AIBDA. This award, I understand, was instituted in the year 2004 posthumously to honour Shri M R Pai by Punjab and Maharashtra Co-operative Bank. It is apposite that the All India Bank Depositors’ Association has chosen to celebrate his life and commemorate his memory by conferring this award. I am delighted that this year’s award has been claimed in the same spirit by another relentless crusader of Customer rights, Ms Sucheta Dalal. I understand the process of selection is rigorous and I extend warm congratulations to Ms Dalal and Debasis Basu whose articles in Business Standard are often on consumer protection and Money life Foundation, on securing this prestigious award which is a recognition of their untiring efforts in the cause of the customer. RBI mission The RBI’s mission of safeguarding stability and protecting customers places Customer Protection at the core of our work. We are mandated in terms of Section 35A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, which explicates the Power of the Reserve Bank to give directions –  (1) Where the Reserve Bank is satisfied that –  (a) in the 178 [public interest]; or (aa) in the interest of banking policy; or (b) to prevent the affairs of any banking company being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interests of the depositors or in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the banking company; or (c) to secure the proper management of any banking company generally, it is necessary to issue directions to banking companies generally or to any banking company in particular, it may, from time to time, issue such directions as it deems fit, and the banking companies or the banking company, as the case may be, shall be bound to comply with such directions. This mandate clearly places the protection of customers’ best interests at the heart of the Central Bank’s work. The issue of services rendered by banks to the common person dates back to the R.K. Talwar Committee (1975) and the Goiporia Committee (1990). The Report of the first Narasimham Committee (1991) ushered in the financial sector reforms, which were expected to spur competition in the banking sector through deregulation and entry of 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  new private sector banks, which, in turn, was to ensure high quality customer service to meet the long pending aspirations of the bank customers. There is an increasing realisation, that competitive forces alone, the invisible hand of the market do not ensure fair treatment or adequate quality in service to the customers at a justifiable price, in a transparent manner. Regulatory intervention and oversight are necessary. In his seminal and oft quoted report, Dr. Rajan stated “Consumer Protection is important. Not every household is fully cognizant of the transactions they enter into. While the line between excessive paternalism and appropriate individual responsibility is always hard to draw in a developing country like ours, it may well veer to a little more paternalism in interactions between financial firms and less sophisticated households. It is important to improve Consumer literacy, the transparency of products that are sold and in certain cases limit sales of certain products in certain jurisdictions especially if these have prudential consequences.” Reserve Bank of India as the Central Bank of the country, is proactively engaged in initiatives to further Customer Service. First, by building a strong banking system which enables access to financial services for all. Second, to enhance and expand the reach of the Banking system both in quantitative and qualitative terms. RBI, through micro level supervisory processes and macro level assessments, institutes measures to increase Customer Awareness to ensure Customer Protection. As Central Bankers we are not alone, Customer protection is now recognized as an important function – indeed the Dharma of the Central Bank. The post-crisis financial sector is driven by a new paradigm of customer awareness, empowerment and protection. The financial crisis brought into sharp focus the importance of customer protection which underpins the stability of the financial system. Rapid increase in the use of financial services underscores the need for strengthening measures to protect the customers of financial services. We have the largest and most widespread network of Banks in Asia. Banks dominate the financial landscape of our country. The Financial intermediation process offers efficiency, rewards and optimal returns but also poses risks to the customers and hence the active regulatory initiatives on customer protection have gained traction and salience. Let us remember the Mahatma who enunciated that “A customer is the most important visitor on our premises. He is not dependent on us. We are dependent on him. He is not an interruption of our work. He is the purpose of it. He is not an outsider of our business. He is part of it. We are not doing him a favour by serving him. He is doing us a favour by giving us the opportunity to do so.” Greater and repeated reminders of this adage are needed. Firstly, there is a granularity of customers due to differences in age, income, education and awareness. Secondly, we must recognize that there is an asymmetry of bargaining power between the financial service providers and the customer. By and large, customers are always the weaker parties in need of protection and the vulnerable and poor customers in even greater need of protection, i.e.,LIC of India vs. Consumer Education & Research Centre (AIR 1995 SC-1811). While considering the validity of LIC policy under table 58 restricted only to salaried persons in government/semi-government or reputed commercial firms, the Supreme Court observed: “It is well settled law that if a contract or a clause in a contract is found unreasonable or unfair or irrational, one must look to the relative bargaining power of the contracting parties.” Thirdly customers need to be enabled to navigate the financial markets to make choices appropriate to their needs. There should be an ingrained Suitability clause in all the products sold by the financial service providers. Customers must be able to understand financial products appropriate to their needs and income streams and should be equipped with the knowledge and skills to assess measure and mitigate risks and make informed decisions about the suitability of financial products to their situation. As Dr. Chakrabarty put it, let me raise a fundamental issue here. The financial services sector is essentially driven by commercial intent and the actions of service providers and the 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  issue of consumer protection should be taken care of by competitive market forces. Why are we then discussing the issue of financial consumer protection? It is because the barriers to entry for the service providers in the financial sector, especially banking, are quite stiff. In view of regulatory restrictions on number of market players, consumers are forced to receive services from a limited set of service providers. Furthermore, in view of rampant information, illiteracy, the self-regulating market behaviour does not work especially for the poor and vulnerable and hence, ensuring consumer protection becomes a regulatory obligation. There is no acme of customer service. The present experience of the customer must be better than the previous experience of the customer. The bank’s front line staff should be sympathetic and empathetic. They must be adequately sensitized, trained and given exposure to interact with customers and deal with the issues raised by them. RBI customer service initiatives include the setting up of the Banking Ombudsman recognizing the need for an Ombudsman in larger public interest as a public good. To encourage a formal channel of communication between the customers and the bank at the branch level, banks were advised to take necessary steps for strengthening the branch level customer service committees with greater involvement of customers. Senior citizens are important, they are to be included in the branch level customer service committees. These should be as a mechanism of effective corporate governance. In the mid-term review of the Monetary and Credit Policy 2003–2004 a decade back, to review the level of public service provided by the Reserve Bank and banks, to evolve appropriate incentives to facilitate change on an ongoing basis, the Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit of Public Services was set up under DG, Dr. Tarapore. The Committee stressed the need to (i) benchmark the current level of service, (ii) review the progress periodically, (iii) enhance the timeliness and quality, (iv) rationalize the processes taking into account technological developments, and (v) suggest appropriate incentives to facilitate change on an ongoing basis. This led to the setting up of the Banking Codes and Standards Board of India. Annual Consolidation of all RBI instructions on Customer Service through a Master Circular on Customer Service in Banks, amendment of the Banking Ombudsmen Scheme in the year 2006 to make the alternate redress mechanism more efficient and easily accessible, our recent customer protection measures include: Simplification of KYC Measures – Measures taken for simplification: 1. Single document for proof of identity and proof of address  There is now no requirement of submitting two separate documents for proof of identity and proof of address. If the officially valid document submitted for opening a bank account has both identity and address of the person, then there is no need for submitting any other documentary proof.  Apart from passport, driving licence, voters’ ID card and PAN card, Aadhaar letter issued by UIDAI and Job Card issued by NREGA signed by a State Government official are also accepted as proof of identity/address. These are known as officially valid documents (OVDs) for KYC purpose.  To further ease the KYC process, the information containing personal details like name, address, age, gender, etc., and photographs made available from UIDAI as a result of e-KYC process can also be treated as an “Officially Valid Document”. 2. No separate proof of address is required for current address  If the current address is different from the address mentioned on the Proof of Address submitted by the customer, a simple declaration by her/him about her/his current address would be sufficient. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  3. Relaxation regarding officially valid documents (OVDs) for low risk customers  If a person does not have any of the “officially valid documents” mentioned above, but if is categorised as “low risk” by the banks, then she/he can open a bank account by submitting any one of the following documents:  (a) identity card with applicant’s Photograph issued by Central/State Government Departments, Statutory/Regulatory Authorities, Public Sector Undertakings, Scheduled Commercial Banks, and Public Financial Institutions;  (b) letter issued by a gazetted officer, with a duly attested photograph of the person. 4. Periodic updation of KYC Time intervals for periodic updation of KYC for existing low/medium and high risk customers have been increased from 5/2 years to 10/8/2 years, respectively. The requirement of positive confirmation at the interval of 3/2 years in respect of low/medium risk customers has been withdrawn. 5. Other relaxations  (i) In case a customer categorised as low risk is unable to submit the KYC documents due to genuine reasons, she/he may submit the same to the bank within a period of six months from the date of opening account.  (ii) Third party verification of KYC is allowed, which allows banks/FIs to rely on KYC/CDD carried out by other banks/FIs. Once the proposed Central KYC Registry is in place, customers would be saved from the trouble of submitting the KYC documents to each and every bank/FI whenever she/he opens an account with a different bank/FI.  (iii) KYC verification of all the members of SHG is not required while opening the savings bank account of the SHG and KYC verification of only the officials would suffice. No separate KYC verification is needed at the time of credit linking the SHG. Home loans-levy of foreclosure charges/pre-payment penalty In accordance with the recommendations of The Committee on Customer Service in Banks (Chairman : M. Damodaran), the foreclosure charges / prepayment penalty on home loans has been removed. This is expected to lead to reduction in discrimination between existing and new borrowers. Though many banks had in the recent past voluntarily abolished pre-payment penalties on floating rate home loans, there is a need to ensure uniformity across the banking system, banks will not be permitted to charge foreclosure charges / pre-payment penalties on home loans on floating interest rate basis, with immediate effect. In case of Dual Rate/Special Rate home loans, the provisions of our above mentioned circular will be applicable from the date the rate of interest on the loan becomes floating. Recommendations of Damodaran Committee on Customer Service in Banks – uniformity in intersol charges As “Intersol” charges are charges levied by the bank to cover the cost of extending services to customers by using the CBS / Internet / Intranet platform, the cost should be branch / customer agnostic in-principle. In order to ensure that bank customers are treated fairly and reasonably without any discrimination and in a transparent manner at all branches of banks / service delivery locations under CBS environment, banks are expected to follow a uniform, fair and transparent pricing policy and not discriminate between their customers at home branch and non-home branches. Accordingly, if a particular service is provided free at home branch the 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  same should be available free at non home branches also. There should be no discrimination as regards intersol charges between similar transactions done by customers at home branch and those done at non-home branches. • Charges levied by banks for sending SMS alerts Banks have put in place a system of SMS alerts so as to help customers in fraud mitigation and have been levying uniform service charges to various categories of customers. Considering the technology available with banks and the telecom service providers, it should be possible for banks to charge customers based on actual usage of SMS alerts. Accordingly, with effect from November 26, 2013, with a view to ensuring reasonableness and equity in the charges levied by banks for sending SMS alerts to customers, banks are advised to leverage the technology available with them and the telecom service providers to ensure that such charges are levied on all customers on actual usage basis. • Levy of penal charges on non-maintenance of minimum balance in inoperative accounts Consequent upon First Bi-monthly Policy Statement 2014–15 announced on April 1, 2014, banks have been advised that with effect from May 6, 2014, banks cannot levy penal charges for non-maintenance of minimum balances in any inoperative account. • Levy of foreclosure charges/prepayment penalty on floating rate term loans Consequent upon First Bi-monthly Policy Statement 2014–15 announced on April 1, 2014, with effect from May 7, 2014, banks are not permitted to charge foreclosure charges/ prepayment penalties on floating rate term loans sanctioned to individual borrowers. • Premature repayment of term/fixed deposits with “either or survivor” or “former or survivor” mandate In case of term deposits with “either or survivor” or “former or survivor” mandate, banks are permitted to allow premature withdrawal of the deposit by the surviving joint depositor on the death of the other, only if, there is a joint mandate from the joint depositors to this effect. The joint deposit holders may be permitted to give the mandate either at the time of placing fixed deposit or anytime subsequently during the term / tenure of the deposit. If such a mandate is obtained, banks can allow premature withdrawal of term / fixed deposits by the surviving depositor without seeking the concurrence of the legal heirs of the deceased joint deposit holder. Premature withdrawal would not attract any penal charge. • Acknowledgement of from 15-G/15-H With a view to protect interest of the depositors and for rendering better customer service, banks were advised in May 2013 to give an acknowledgment at the time of receipt of Form 15-G/15-H. This will help in building a system of accountability and customers will not be put to inconvenience due to any omission on part of the banks. • Settlement of claims of deceased depositor – simplification of procedure – placing of claim forms on bank’s website Banks have been advised once again that they should strictly comply with the instructions contained in our Circular dated June 9, 2005 for hassle-free settlement of claims on the death of a depositor. Further, with a view to facilitate timely settlement of claims on the death of a depositor, banks have been advised to provide claim forms for settlement of claims of the deceased accounts, to any person/s who is/are approaching the bank/branches for 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  forms. Claim forms may also be put on the bank’s website prominently so that claimants of the deceased depositor can access and download the forms without having to visit the concerned bank/branch for obtaining such forms for filing claim with the bank. • Unclaimed deposits/inoperative accounts in banks – treatment of certain savings bank accounts opened for credit of scholarship amounts and credit of direct benefit transfer under government schemes State and Central Governments had expressed difficulties in crediting cheques/Direct Benefit Transfer/Electronic Benefit Transfer/Scholarships for students, etc. into accounts/accounts with zero balance opened for the beneficiaries under various Central/State Government schemes but had been classified as dormant/inoperative due to non-operation of the account for over two years. Keeping this in view, banks have been advised to allot a different “product code” in their CBS to all such accounts opened by banks so that the stipulation of inoperative/dormant account due to non-operation does not apply while crediting proceeds. In order to reduce the risk of fraud in such accounts, while allowing operations in these accounts, due diligence should be exercised by ensuring the genuineness of transactions, verification of signature and identity, etc. However, banks have to ensure that the customer is not inconvenienced in any manner. • Timely issue of TDS Certificate to customers It had come to our notice that some banks were not providing TDS Certificate in Form 16A to their customers in time, causing inconvenience to customers in filing income-tax returns timely. With a view to protecting the interest of the depositors and for rendering better customer service, banks have been advised to provide TDS Certificate in Form 16A, to their customers in respect of whom they (banks) have deducted tax at source. Banks have been advised to put in place systems that will enable them to provide Form 16A to the customers within the time-frame prescribed under the Income Tax Rules. • Guidelines for the purpose of opening/operating bank accounts of persons with autism, cerebral palsy, mental retardation, mental illness and mental disabilities • Need for bank branches/ATMs to be made accessible to persons with disabilities Banks are advised to take necessary steps to provide all existing ATMs/future ATMs with ramps. Care may also be taken to make arrangements in such a way that the height of ATMs does not create an impediment in their use by wheelchair users. However, in cases where it is impracticable to provide such ramp facilities, whether permanently fixed to earth or otherwise, this requirement may be dispensed with, for reasons recorded and displayed in branches or ATMs concerned. Banks are also advised to take appropriate steps, including providing of ramps at the entrance of bank branches, wherever feasible, so that the persons with disabilities/wheel chair users can enter bank branches and conduct business without difficulty. Banks have been advised to report the progress made in this regard periodically to their respective Customer Service Committee of the Board and ensure compliance. • Talking ATMs with Braille keypads to facilitate use by persons with visual impairment Banks should make all new ATMs installed from July 1, 2014 as talking ATMs with Braille keypads. Banks should lay down a road map for converting all existing ATMs as talking ATMs with Braille keypads and the same may be reviewed from time to time by the Customer Service Committee of the Board. Magnifying glasses should also be provided in all bank branches for the use of persons with low vision, wherever they require for carrying out banking transactions with ease. The branches should display at a prominent place notice 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  about the availability of magnifying glasses and other facilities available for persons with disabilities. Dr. Rajan recently stated “we have to reach everyone, however remote or small, with financial services. It means financial literacy and consumer protection. I should emphasize the need for banks like the ones represented in this room to move beyond simply opening bank accounts to ensuring that poor customers are confident and comfortable enough to use them.” Banks would do well to heed this sage counsel. Customers should be able to understand not only simple financial products but also complex financial products. They should be equipped with the knowledge and skills to assess risks and make informed decisions about the suitability of financial products to their own individual situation. A well-functioning customer protection regime provides effective safeguards for retail financial services customers while empowering customers to exercise their legal rights and fulfill their legal obligations. 2. Banking Ombudsman Scheme (BOS) The Banking Ombudsman Scheme (BOS) was introduced in the year 1995 by the RBI for expeditious and inexpensive redress of customers’ grievances against deficiencies in banking services. Due to increasing levels of awareness and expectations of the customers of banks Gunnar Myrdal in Asian Drama terms “the revolution of rising expectations” and the range of new products offered by these banks. The BOS has undergone extensive changes. The administration of the Scheme vests with RBI since 2006. In May 2007, the BOS 2006 was amended to enable appeal against Award, to the Appellate Authority, the Deputy Governor in charge of the department. The BOS 2006 was amended extending its ambit to deficiencies in internet banking and non-adherence to the BCSBI Codes and the Code of Bank’s commitment to Customers. Though the necessary institutional arrangement for establishing standards and codes for banking services and grievance redress are in place, these rules need objective, timely and fair implementation. The Suitability clause, if implemented in letter and spirit by Banks will enable them to understand the specific expectations of diverse customer groups and to devise products, pricing and delivery strategies that are in alignment with these. Consumer issues in the new economic order are even more pressing the urgency of Customer Protection post-crisis in the developed countries and the concerns on consumer protection of the developing countries have led the G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors to formulate “Principles on Consumer Protection”. The presence of a credible and effective regulatory regime acts as a source of confidence and comfort in the financial system and is a safeguard of financial stability. This helps in attracting more participants to the marketplace, thereby making the financial system inclusive and efficient. The experience from the global financial crisis is that self-regulation, often, does not work. The presence of a strong, intrusive and hands-on regulator / supervisor gives the confidence that markets will operate as per sound principles and would be free from unfair and unethical practices. This trust forms the basis of functioning of the entire financial system and any dent in this trust can have a significant destabilizing influence. As Governor Reddy expressed and I quote, “Banking is a trust-based relationship and the banking licence from the regulator provides an assurance of trust to the public at large. To the banks, the banking licence provides the privilege of accepting uncollateralised deposits from the public. However, the acts of stealth banking, negative option marketing, misleading advertisements, information gathering from customers for cross selling of products and services, and tie-up arrangements are inconsistent with the concept of a trust-based relationship. The lack of transparency, coupled with the difficulty of consumers in identifying key information from the large volume of material and communication in fine print, leads to an information asymmetry, which renders the banker-customer relationship one of unequals.” 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  3. Retention of customers: All banks offer similar products (i) Accept Deposits (ii) Provide credit (iii) provide payments and remittance services (iv) foreign exchange facilities (v) provide financial instruments. In the process, banks extend services to their customers. Sadly, the friendly neighbourhood Banker is disappearing as is the feet on street, ear to the ground salesman, the distance between banks and customers is increasing. This is not a good thing. Branch Manager who was a friend, may not be aware of the number of customers of the branch, frontline staff may be ignorant of features of the varied products on offer. Technology emerged as the backbone of banking operations, revolutionizing service delivery through new platforms and channels. These developments created greater challenges for the customer in terms of service quality, non-human interface, unsolicited marketing of products, ever-increasing fine-prints etc. all of these disagreeable compounded due to lack of awareness of the average customer. Hence, knowing their customers and understanding their own product offerings must be the starting point of the Banks’ customer protection framework. As all banks broadly have the same products, it is only better customer service which sets one Bank apart from another. The cost of Customer acquisition is 8–10 times greater than of retention of current customer. Broadly, customer expectations while dealing with banks are a) professionalism, quick and efficient service b) transparent, fair and non-discriminatory dealings c) clear communication about charges/costs d) safety of their deposits in the account and e) To be listened to with courtesy and respect. Putting in place a formal customer retention framework would be a smart move. Twin Peak approach to customer protection The twin-peak approach focuses on customer protection. It distinguishes two agencies, one which focusses on Prudential Regulation and the other on Market Conduct/Customer Protection. Though the structure varies, the underlying thesis is to strengthen customer protection and ensure Financial Stability. Right to fair treatment is the most important right of Customers. TCF principles 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9   • Helping customers fully understand the features, benefits, costs and risks associated with the financial products and services they buy/avail • Minimizing the sale of inappropriate financial products/render undesirable financial services by encouraging best practices before, during and after sale of products/rendering services • Transparent and non-discriminatory pricing of products and services .The concept of Treating Customers Fairly needs to underpin the business model. Consumer protection – The RBI’s charter of customer rights Let me quote Dr. Rajan on the FSLRC at the SBI oration. Dr. Rajan succinctly explained, in laying out the need for consumer protection, raising the issue of whether products sold are suitable for the target customer, and putting the onus on the financial institution to determine suitability, the report has forced regulators to review their consumer protection frameworks. We at the RBI are indeed engaged in such an exercise, informed by the valuable guidelines in the FSLRC report. Reserve Bank of India, as announced in its first Bi-Monthly Monetary Policy in April 2014 evolved a draft Charter of Customer Rights after extensive consultations with all stakeholders, studying global best practices and domestic experience. The Charter of Customer Rights is simple and comprises five critical rights viz., a) Right to Fair Treatment, b) Right to Transparency, Fair and Honest Dealing, c) Right to Suitability, d) Right to Privacy and e) Right to Grievance Redress and Compensation Right to Fair Treatment I will not say more on this as the draft is in public domain as part of the consultative process for comment. “From the principle of “caveat emptor”, Latin for “buyer beware”, we have to move to the principle “caveat Venditor”, Latin for “seller beware.” 
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The current system of regulations that govern sale of financial products and services is based on caveat emptor as a doctrine. The caveat emptor principle has led to fundamental flaws in the customer protection architecture and has created large welfare losses for customers. Let me explain further, caveat venditor principle is a counter to caveat emptor and suggests that seller (banks) can also be deceived in a market transaction. This forces the seller to take responsibility for the product and discourages the seller from selling the products of inferior quality, “Caveat Venditor” vests the burden of effort of proving that the shortcoming deficiency of service was absent on the seller of the product. We have to reach everyone with Financial services as per the Prime Minister’s vision of the Jan DhanYojana and extend the highest degree of Consumer protection to all users of financial services but very specially, for the vulnerable poor. Profit is certainly essential and not an ugly word at all. Banks can and do charge for their services but we must again stress the need for reasonableness of service charges while accepting the need for profit margins and profitability of Banks. Market based returns over inflation must be offered to Customers. There is a pressing need to move to a customer protection regime where the provider is held accountable for the service sold to the buyer, by ascertaining that the products sold or the advice given was suitable for the buyer considering her needs and current financial situation, that is, the customer must have a “right to suitability”. Once the rights are enshrined in the Charter of Customer Rights, it will be mandatory for all banks to adhere to them. The framework governing customer protection should consist of fairness, transparency of rules and conditions, suitability of products that matches customer needs, ability to repay, existence of a grievance redress process, clear specifications of liability if things go wrong, simplicity of the product and duty to inform about changes in the product. Customer protection is very important both for all those of us who are literate and enlightened customers in this room and even more for those who are not in this room – the poor, the uneducated and the illiterate customers. With the increasing complexity of Banking and the growing chasm of the dangerous digital, this acquires even greater salience. The All India Bank Depositors’ Association, Money Life Consumer Activists, Complainants, Customer vigilantes all play a significant role in providing valuable inputs to RBI in furthering our initiatives in the area of Customer Protection. What we need are collaboration, commitment, credible action and concrete deliverables. Governor Rajan’s Five Pillar financial sector blueprint will chart the direction of development of our financial system in years to come. Pillar Four places a high priority on the Consumer Protection agenda. Among the areas of policy focus are the development of cost efficient delivery channels as Payment Banks and Small Banks that will enhance the outreach of financial services, expand the range of products and services to meet the distinct financial needs of the underserved and strengthen the institutional arrangements to enhance the capacity of providers of such financial services. Equally important will be the attention accorded to financial consumer education and protection in which the standards of consumer care are high and consumers have choices and are confident about making their financial decisions. The customer Charter of rights will go some way in enhancing financial literacy and financial capability of consumers to make well informed and responsible financial decisions and thus participate meaningfully and effectively in the financial system. 5C’s Framework to support our mission to safeguard stability and protect consumers: Customer– is at the heart of the Central Bank’s focus and must be the core of the Bank’s focus too; Confidence– working to help consumers have confidence in financial services, products and regulation; Compliance– monitoring and enforcing compliance with consumer protection rules; Challenge– being prepared to challenge firms and ourselves to get a better outcome for customers; in case of doubt, the customer is always right and 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11  Culture– promoting a consumer-focussed approach to the provision of financial services. This talk is titled Protecting Customers Safeguarding Stability as the two are inalienable. There has to be a synergy between financial inclusion, financial literacy and customer protection for sustainable financial stability. Appropriately, the All India Bank Depositors’ Association has selected Money Life Foundation for this year’s award for their zealous efforts and hard work in the area Customer Protection. Inclusion, Economic Growth and Stability – these are the watch words of the Central Bank. The macro economic framework and financial sector development necessitate financial deepening and a robust framework of Customer Protection for stability. We are at an inflection point. We have gone some way, yet much needs to be done in this area. The crusader’s work in the area of Customer Protection is never done, the bar of necessity must be raised higher. Thank you for a patient hearing! And again thanks to All India Depositors’ Association for having me here today. References 1. One Hundred Small Steps, Report of the Committee on Financial Sector Reforms. Raghuram Rajan Planning Commission Government of India. 2. Finance and Opportunity in India –Address by Dr Raghuram Rajan at the twentieth Lalit Doshi Memorial Lecture on August 11, 2014. 3. Dr. Y V Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India speech on the occasion of release of the Code of Bank’s Commitment to Customers at the RBI, Mumbai on July 1, 2006. 4. Report of the Committee on Comprehensive Financial services for small businesses and low Income households, Nachiket Mor, RBI 2013. 5. Dr KC Chakrabarty RBI Banque de France Seminar on Customer Engagement College of Agricultural Banking Pune March 22, 2013. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Rodrigo Vergara: Chile’s September 2014 Monetary Policy Report Presentation by Mr Rodrigo Vergara, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, of the Monetary Policy Report before the Honorable Senate of the Republic, Santiago de Chile, 3 September 2014. *      *      * The Monetary Policy Report of September 2014 can be found at http://www.bcentral.cl. Introduction Mr. Vice-president of the Senate, Senator Eugenio Tuma, honorable senators, ladies, gentlemen, Thank you for your invitation to the Board of the Central Bank of Chile to present our Monetary Policy Report. As is the norm each September, this Report coincides with the annual report from the Central Bank Board to the Senate, where we share our vision on the recent macroeconomic and financial developments in Chile and abroad, as well as their prospects and implications for monetary policy conduct. Chile’s economic outlook has seen important changes over the past few months. In particular, the slowdown in output has been more pronounced than anticipated and is expected to be also more persistent. A year ago, when we came to the Senate to present our vision of what would be the economy in 2014, we projected that it would expand in the 4 to 5 percent range. Today, as I will detail in a moment, we estimate that growth will be between 1.75 and 2.25 percent this year and between 3 and 4 percent in 2015, that is, less than our estimate for medium-term growth in our economy. This sharp deceleration is certainly worrying news, that should move us all, from political and economic venues, to combine our best efforts to restore the dynamism of the Chilean economy, especially considering that, as is our conviction, Chile has all the necessary tools at hand to ensure higher growth and thus improve the welfare of its inhabitants. In this context, the Central Bank has used monetary policy decisively and consistently with its mandate, always directing its efforts to achieving the price stability objective. We are also aware that monetary policy tools, however powerful, can smooth, but never flatten out, the economy’s cyclical fluctuations. What are the elements behind this weak economic growth? Our research identifies some factors that to some degree were expected – we have mentioned them in earlier Reports – and some unexpected ones, with effects that are yet to be assessed with accuracy. The expected factors include external developments. Chile is a small, open economy and, as such, is affected by the vagaries of the world economy. In this sense, and beyond the severe negative effects of the global financial crisis of 2008–2009, we must recognize that during the past decade the Chilean economy was blessed with a benign international scenario, with extraordinarily advantageous commodity prices and financial conditions. Notwithstanding, lately the high commodity price cycle has come to an end, hitting commodity-exporting countries including Chile. Meanwhile, although international financial conditions are still good, the process of monetary policy normalization in some large developed economies is expected to begin soon. We must not forget that copper, our main export, traded at nearly 4 dollars per pound for an extended period, and now it is closer to 3 dollars and may fall further in the long term. Moreover, during the last decade, coincidentally with higher prices and supply shortages, investments in mining have increased significantly around the world. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Chile was no exception. During the 1990s and early 2000s, mining investment averaged 2 to 3 points of the country’s GDP. Between 2006 and 2013, this figure rose to 5 points of GDP, peaking in 2012 at 6.5 percent of GDP. This phenomenon not only allowed the country to enlarge its mining capacity, but also created major productive linkages toward other sectors, including construction, trade, and manufacturing industries. The north of our country, especially cities such as Iquique, Antofagasta, and La Serena, has seen strong development and growth thanks to the positive impact of this phenomenon. However, this investment cycle, as has been noted on numerous occasions, has entered a matured stage, resulting in a decline in the number of projects under way. This is also true of other metal-exporting economies like Australia and Peru, although differing in intensity and timing, and is symptomatic of this phenomenon. However, the aforementioned maturation of the global cycle of copper investment is not the only reason behind the slowdown in mining investment. Delays, postponements and cancellations have also been attributed by industry participants to domestic problems related to water shortages and high energy costs, to excessive delay in the definition of projects and legal issues with some of them, as well as to problems with communities and increased costs. Among the factors behind the deceleration, there is also the fact that reconstruction works after the earthquake and tsunami of February 2010, including the associated fiscal boost, have tended to recede as the process is completed, explaining also part of the economic slowdown. Last, but not least, in the past few years, these and other factors have pushed economic growth above its potential. This made it necessary and appropriate to pursue a slower pace of growth, more sustainable over time. Overall, output and expenditure have weakened beyond expectations, taking us and all economic agents by surprise for the intensity and persistence of the slowdown. Already in last June’s Report we said that part of the drop in investment could not be attributed to the variables that traditionally determine this component of domestic demand. The negative surprise in output has to do with some of the developments that we envisioned a few months ago contributing less to growth than we thought then. For example, the economic recovery of our main trading partners has been somewhat slower than expected, especially in Latin America. Downward corrections to mining and energy investment projects planned for 2014 have been sharper than estimated, as reflected in the latest survey of the Capital Goods Corporation. In addition, the depreciation of our peso, although an important incentive for the export sector, in the short term has negatively affected the imported components of domestic expenditure. Along with this, it is worth noting the decline in economic expectations in recent months, which, on one hand, are a reflection of this scenario of slower growth, but on the other, may end up negatively affecting domestic demand. Expectations for investment and consumption have been falling for quite some time already, and more sharply in the most recent past. The Economic Perceptions Index (IPEC) and the Monthly Business Confidence Indicator (IMCE) have posted continuous declines this year. As of July, the two are below their neutral levels (figure 1). Besides, they show significant deterioration in some specific items, most notably those related with the convenience of buying durable goods, the perception about employment and the appropriate level of inventories. Meanwhile, the Business Perceptions Report published by the Bank in August revealed that firms perceive an increase in uncertainty, which has influenced both their own and their customers’ investment and spending decisions. Increased uncertainty naturally results in investment projects being pushed back (the “wait-and-see” option in specialized jargon), which could partly explain the reduction in investment. As I said, monetary policy has responded strongly and decisively to the worsening of our domestic scenario, generating significant monetary impulse. By mid-2013 we expressed the 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  need to adopt a more expansionary monetary stance that would ensure that inflation would converge to the target. Accordingly, since October last year we have lowered the monetary policy rate (MPR) by 150 basis points, keeping an expansionary bias for monetary policy. This, together with the performance of the internal and external macroeconomic scenarios, has heavily affected the structure of market interest rates. In particular, long-term rates are in or close to their all-time lows (figure 2). I must stress this because long-term interest rates are the ones that most influence investment. What is remarkable is that today they are even below the rates prevailing in 2008–2009, that is, even lower than they were at the height of the global financial crisis, when the MPR was down to 0.5 percent and unconventional monetary stimulus had to be added to the economy. Mortgage lending interest rates are also below where they were at the time and very close to their historic lows. At the same time, the lower cost of bank funding has been transmitted to the lending rates faced by firms and households. These rates have fallen by as much as 140 basis points since October last year. However, adjusted for inflation, lending has decelerated, particularly in commercial and consumer loans, influenced by the more cautious behavior of both suppliers and demanders of credit, as is apparent in our June Bank Lending Survey (BLS) and our August’s Business Perceptions Report (IPN). The cuts we have already made to the MPR have helped to smooth the business cycle, and, as we have mentioned before and now again in the Report I am presenting, a still stronger monetary impulse will likely be necessary in order to ensure compliance with the inflation target. In particular, given the present conditions, and barring a big change in the economic scenario, we believe that the monetary policy adjustments the market expects, which are implicit in the various expectations indicators at the closing of this Report – end of August – , will suffice to achieve the inflation target and help revive our economy. Monetary policy is an important and significant tool to tone down the cyclical fluctuations of the economy. Its countercyclical use is a privilege that we have earned after years of policy conduct that has strengthened the credibility of the Central Bank. But it is also important to note that powerful does not mean almighty. It allows to mitigate, but not fully offset, the natural fluctuations of a small, open economy like Chile. More importantly, if we wish the Chilean economy to attain higher growth rates in the medium term, it will be necessary to implement measures to encourage investment in both physical and human capital and promote productivity growth, all elements which, incidentally, are beyond the scope of monetary policy. This Monetary Policy Report contains a revision by the Board to its medium-term growth assumption for Chile over the coming years. This assumption is important from the point of view of monetary policy because, combined with other elements, it allows to estimate the size of capacity gaps and the resulting inflationary pressures. After assessing all the data at hand, we estimate that Chile’s medium-term growth is in the 4 to 4.5 percent range, less than we previously thought. The slower growth foreseen in investment and total factor productivity explain a large part of this revision. Medium-term growth declines are a natural process as the economy attains higher per capita income levels. Still, we believe that Chile has available some measures that could moderate this phenomenon. As I said, part of the revision has to do with the expected slowdown in investment. One argument that is usually put forward to explain the lower investment is rising energy costs and difficulties to materialize investments, despite having all permits required by the relevant institutions. From the Central Bank we have stressed time and again how important it is for the country’s development to have well-defined policies that will allow over time to cut down the cost of such an important input. The Government recently launched an energy agenda with certainly ambitious goals, and hopefully we will see advances in that direction, which should translate into further development of our country. Another way to raise our potential output is by investing in infrastructure works. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  In the past few years, our economy has shown a decline in total factor productivity. The two policies I just mentioned – energy and infrastructure – , aside from their incidence in investment, could also result in higher productivity. Regarding employment, a recurrent topic in our country’s policy debates is female participation in the workforce. Despite some increases in recent years, it is still below the average of OECD economies (figure 3). As our population ages and grows at a slower pace, the larger female labor force participation can be a significant ingredient to boost our medium-term growth. Another ingredient could be extending the working life span of individuals, a trend that is gaining importance in many countries as the fraction of population over 65 is growing rapidly and is still able to contribute their bit to the economy. Finally, the challenges relating to increasing labor productivity that everybody recognizes are mainly to improve our educational and training systems. Now, let me describe the macroeconomic scenario that we see as the most likely for the coming quarters, and its associated risks. Macroeconomic scenario Annual headline inflation has remained above 4 percent, but with moderate variations in the past few months. This was more visible in the evolution of the CPIEFE – the CPI excluding food goods and energy prices – reflecting, on one hand, that the pass-through of the peso depreciation to inflation has been a significant development, but declining in intensity as time passes and, on the other, that the weak performance of the economy is already easing the pressure on prices. Accordingly, we continue to estimate that the current high level of inflation will be temporary, a vision that is shared by market agents, as inflation expectations one and two years ahead have remained around 3 percent (figure 4). As I said at the beginning, the biggest news in several months comes from domestic demand and output, which posted a quite weaker performance than our forecasts. In the second quarter GDP grew 1.9 percent while domestic demand dropped 0.9 percent annually (figure 5). Expenditure’s poor performance permeated its every component, where worth noting was the fast deterioration of the most persistent ones, such as non-durable consumption and investment in construction and engineering works. By sectors, trade, especially wholesale, fell in annual terms, while a large number of manufacturing branches posted meager results. Only those most linked to the export sector show marginally more favorable figures. The evolution of expenditure has also driven a reduction in imports, causing a sharper adjustment to the current account (figure 6). In fact, while a year ago the annual deficit of the current account amounted to 4 percent of GDP and was expected to increase further, at the end of the second quarter it was at 2.4 percent of GDP and is now expected to end the year at 1.8 percent of GDP. This level, plus the peso depreciation and its effects on exports, mean that we can look at this variable’s future behavior with ease. Early third-quarter partial indicators show a still weak economy, but we must not overreact to monthly data, which tends to be very volatile (figure 7). Thus, we must not be surprised if our growth figures remain low because, as I said, we are experiencing a process of sharper, more persistent economic slowdown. In this sense, our growth forecast revision for this year takes this into account and assumes that, towards the end of this year, we will see some recovery, though small and gradual. Turning to the labor market, the unemployment rate is slightly higher than early in the year, but still low by historic standards. Total employment continues to rise in annual terms, but at a slower pace, and the salaried component has been stagnant for some months. Other indicators, such as available job vacancies, have dropped and unemployment insurance claims have increased (figure 8). Thus, it is natural to expect a rise in the unemployment rate in the coming months. Still, nominal wages continue to grow, which could delay the 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  convergence of inflation and hinder the adjustment of the labor market to the current cyclical conditions of our economy. As I mentioned, the worsening of our domestic economy has occurred within a context where the monetary impulse has increased substantially. We have cut 150 basis points off the MPR in the past year and the market interest rate structure has diminished accordingly. The change in the macroeconomic scenario has also reflected in exchange rate movements, in both nominal and real terms. The CLP posted a 5.8 percent depreciation between the close of this Report and last, mostly during the past few weeks. Although part of this depreciation responded to the global strengthening of the dollar, the rise in the CLP/USD parity exceeded that of other emerging market currencies. This obeyed to less favorable cyclical conditions and a more expansionary monetary policy in the country. It must be noted that Chile’s macroeconomic policy framework includes, among other features, a monetary policy based on inflation targeting and exchange rate flexibility. Thus, during slowdown periods, when the pressure on prices diminishes, policy becomes more expansionary in order to achieve the inflation target, that is, for the inflation rate not to fall below the target range. This boost to monetary policy results in a higher exchange rate, which permits the economy to have a faster, optimal adjustment via the expansion of tradable sectors. In other words, the exchange rate increases are a natural, desired response to the business cycle, lending a helping hand in the economic adjustment. We have been faithful to this predicament, as reflected in the significant depreciation of our currency in recent times. We do not view this as a problem, because despite some unwanted effects in the short term – including higher inflation – it is part of the solution to have the economy reactivate more rapidly and efficiently. We have stressed, also, how Chile’s interest rates have adjusted significantly downward in this scenario. This contrasts sharply with what would occur in other times or today in other emerging economies, where exchange rate pressures would rapidly translate into higher interest rates. External credit conditions, aside from temporary ups and downs, have remained favorable from a historic perspective, although the risk of a reversal is still present. Lately, Chile’s sovereign and corporate risk premiums have increased somewhat, but are still below their year-ago levels. The situation is similar in other emerging economies. Long-term interest rates have receded in the developed world since June, with unprecedented performance in the case of the U.S. given its stronger economy and expectations that the benchmark rate will begin to rise by the middle of next year. The terms of trade have also been favorable since June, and they even increased marginally with respect to June’s forecasts, mainly owing to a higher copper price because of tighter supply. The baseline scenario works with a copper price forecast of 315 dollar cents per pound in 2014 and 305 in 2015. The growth outlook of our trading partners lost some strength since June, and we continue to expect higher growth in 2015 than in 2014. In the developed economies, growth has been slightly revised downward for this year. The worsened figures in Japan combined with a slower recovery in the Eurozone, Germany included, where consumer and business confidence has declined, partly because of the geopolitical conflicts in the region. The United States regained strength in the second quarter, thanks to the good performance of private consumption and investment, and better expectations. In Latin America, the growth forecast has been lowered for this year and next in most countries, although with some heterogeneity. In China, government policies have managed to stabilize growth. Our baseline scenario assumes that our trading partners will grow an average 3.6 percent in 2014 and 2015, two tenths of a point less than foreseen in June (table 1). The baseline scenario assumes that the slowdown in the domestic economy will be more persistent than previously expected. Thus, as anticipated, the GDP growth forecast for this 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  year is adjusted to between 1.75 and 2.25 percent, below the June estimate. In 2015, consistently with the low basis of comparison and limited economic dynamism, we expect GDP to grow between 3.0 and 4.0 percent annually. The recovery, though moderate, is based on a greater monetary stimulus and lower market interest rates; stronger fiscal stimulus; increased trading partners’ growth; a real depreciation of the peso; and improved private expectations. As already noted, for this projection, the Board assumes that the medium-term growth of the Chilean economy is between 4 and 4.5 percent. The domestic demand growth forecast for 2014 has also been corrected downward, particularly for investment. This change responds to actual second-quarter indicators that fell short of the forecast, and to the Capital Goods Corporation’s investment projects that were revised downward in the last survey. In contrast, a stronger impulse from public expenditure is expected, particularly from investment. On the private consumption side, we expect it to keep growing for the rest of the year at a slower pace than was forecast in June (table 2). Annual CPI inflation, still affected by high monthly variations early in the year and the direct effects of the recent depreciation of the peso will remain above 4 percent throughout the remainder of 2014. By 2015, in line with the lower inflationary pressures that are inferred from the cyclic evolution of the economy and the high basis of comparison, annual inflation of both the CPI and the CPIEFE will have a quick descent to 3 percent. Then it will hover around 3 percent until the end of the forecast horizon, this time the third quarter of 2016 (figure 9). This inflation trajectory is based on the assumption that the indirect effects of the nominal and real depreciation of our currency will be more than offset by the state of the capacity gaps over the projection horizon. The Board’s assessment yields that the current level of the real exchange rate (RER) is consistent with the cyclical state of the economy and the internal and external financial conditions, although it is slightly above the range of its estimated long-term values. As a methodological assumption, it considers that the exchange rate will have a slight appreciation in real terms over the long run, as the cyclical conditions of our economy normalize. About the MPR, the changes in the domestic macroeconomic scenario have lowered its expected level compared with June. As a working assumption, we estimate that the MPR will follow a path comparable with what can be inferred with different expectations measures available at the closing of this Report. These measures suggest that the MPR will see additional cuts going forward, that will take it to the vicinity of 3 percent before the end of the year (figure 10). The baseline scenario reflects those events that are estimated to be the most likely to occur with the information at hand at the closing of this Report. There are risk scenarios, however, which if materialized, may reshape the macroeconomic environment and, therefore, may modify the course of monetary policy. On this opportunity, having evaluated the alternative scenarios, the Board estimates that the risk balance for inflation is unbiased, and for output it is unbiased in 2014 and downward biased in 2015. Abroad, the risks foreseen in earlier Reports remain. Although the growth outlook in China has stabilized lately, its future performance continues to pose a risk, particularly relating to the Chinese financial system and real estate sector. Moreover, we cannot rule out that vulnerabilities in other emerging economies may originate new episodes of volatility. In the Eurozone, the macrofinancial situation continues to create uncertainty, which compounded with geopolitical tensions in the continent aggravates the risk of a slower recovery in the region. In the United States, the tapering of unconventional monetary stimulus has proceeded as expected, but the financial markets could suffer significant stress episodes if events occur that might anticipate the timing of the announced increases in the Fed funds rate. In particular, in the present context of low long-term interest rates and limited sovereign premiums, there could be a drastic reversal causing important tension. This could have 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  effects on external funding costs and currency parities, with a heavy impact on emerging economies. Overall, the most likely scenario continues to assume that the US economy will bring a new boost from abroad and a more favorable scenario in the medium term. At home, one risk is domestic output and demand growing less than expected. As noted, the two have weakened beyond projections, coinciding with a widespread worsening of expectations. The baseline scenario estimates that this worsening will reverse gradually, which partly explains the growth forecast for consumption and investment in 2015. However, if such reversal does not occur, there may be a sharper and stronger adjustment in the labor market, which would negatively affect consumption and output. Furthermore, a worsening of business expectations could intensify the investment adjustment. Such a setting could also trigger a more intense rebalancing towards the tradable sector, thus moderating the domestic slowdown. Meanwhile, although a weaker domestic economy could amplify capacity gaps and ease inflationary pressures, we cannot rule out that its effects on the exchange rate may offset the price effects, at least temporarily, thus delaying the convergence of inflation. Let me now share with you some concluding thoughts. Final thoughts Domestic output and demand have been weaker, and more persistently so, than we expected a few months back. The sharper fall in investment coupled with a more marked deceleration of private consumption, so we lowered our growth forecast for this year below the range we projected in June. Annual inflation, on the contrary, has been in line with expectations and we continue to see its present high level as temporary. As from June, the Bank has cut the monetary policy rate by 50 basis points, taking it to 3.5 percent, and has reiterated that it will consider the possibility of making further reductions to the MPR in line with the evolution of domestic and external macroeconomic conditions and its implications on the inflationary outlook. No doubt the results and projections presented today show a weak performance of the Chilean economy. We have made significant corrections to our output forecast that respond to the combination of external and internal factors, some of them foreseen, some unexpected. Within the latter, it is obvious that the widespread deterioration of private sector expectations has played a major role. The true magnitude of such role is difficult to determine, but it is certainly big, particularly when it comes to projections. Monetary policy has played its part and it will continue to do so, by adding momentum, but it cannot be expected to solve every problem of our economy by itself. As I said, the medium-term growth we see today as the most likely is less than what we thought a while ago. Factors like the reduction in investment projects, the decline in productivity, some demographic issues and the convergence to higher per capita income are behind this change. And there are structural factors that we could potentiate in order to sustain higher medium-term growth in the country. Chile’s advances in the last thirty years are huge. Poverty indexes have dropped dramatically and we have improved our living conditions remarkably. The key to our success has been the solid base that we have built with the combined efforts of each and every Chilean citizen. But there is still a lot to be done. Alongside our development over these three decades stand die-hard inequalities that we have failed to resolve as a society. In a way, this is one of the problems that come with our very success. The society – notably our growing middle class – demands ever more and better services, along with more opportunities. As a rule, these are legitimate demands, which must be met with policies that prevent losing what we have gained and entangling us in a dead end situation. This is called the “middle-income trap” in the literature. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  I am an optimist, and I am convinced that our country has the right institutions to help us out of these challenging times. Over the years we have combined our efforts to make reforms, that are deep and long-lasting. Actually, our country is recognized around the world, precisely for its strong institutions. The capacity of our leaders to reach agreements is proof of such strength and, therefore, we have appreciated the agreement led by the Finance minister, Congress representatives and political leaders around the tax reform. The question we must ask ourselves, putting aside our individual positions, is how we can all move forward to create a better country. Naturally, discrepancies will arise about the reasons for the slowdown. We believe, however, that a fruitful use for our time is to think about ways to reactivate our economy and, more importantly, how to boost growth into the medium to long term. Beware also with being over-optimistic or over-pessimistic. When things go well we see no limit and indulge in the we-are-so-good fantasy. But when the table turns we become pessimistic and see no possible solution. It’s neither this nor that. The country we have built, though not perfect, is an example among emerging economies. There is a long way ahead, but let us not underestimate what we have achieved. Mistrust will not bring the solution. The only way is to work hand in hand, which is what has brought us so many good results as a society. Aside from cyclical factors, where there are elements beyond our control, attaining higher stages of development in a broad sense, depends upon us. Among the many challenges noted by numerous studies are to reduce energy costs, improve infrastructure and provide quality education. Our objective is not only to boost growth; it must also guarantee that the benefits are felt by every individual. We, as the Central Bank, have reiterated our commitment with price stability, stating that we will take every step necessary for the inflation forecast over the policy horizon to be aligned with the 3 percent target. As we have said time and again, that is the main contribution that monetary policy can make to the country’s development and welfare. Without a good macroeconomic framework, development in other areas becomes elusive. Of course, in macroeconomic stability, the Central Bank plays an essential role. Thank you very much.   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9    Figure 1Business and consumer perception (*)(index, pivot=50)(*) Value above (below) 50 points indicates optimism (pessimism).Sources: Adimark and Icare/Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez.304050607030405060700405060708091011121314IMCEIPECFigure 2Long-term interest rate(Central Bank instruments, percent)Source: Central Bank of Chile. 012345678901234567890304050607080910111213145-year BCU10-year BCU10-year BCP5-year BCP
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches    (*) Starting in January 2014, the new annual indices with base 2013=100 are used, so they are not strictly comparable to previous data. Sources: Central Bank of Chile and National Statistics Institute (INE). Figure 3Labor force participation by gender(percent)Source: OECD.3040506070809030405060708090969800020406081012Men, ChileMen, OECDWomen, OECDWomen, ChileFigure 4Inflation indicators (*)(annual change, percent)(*) As from January 2014, new indexes are used with annual base 2013=100, so they are not strictly comparable with earlier figures.01234501234511Jul.12Jul.13Jul.14Jul.CPICPIEFEEES one year aheadEES two years ahead
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11    Figure 5GDP and domestic demand(annual change, percent)Source: Central Bank of Chile.-12-6061218-12-6061218091011121314GDPDomestic demandFinal demandFigure 6Current account (*)(percent of GDP)(*) Accumulated in moving year.Source: Central Bank of Chile.-6-4-20246-6-4-202460814
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches    Figure 7Demand indicators(annual change, percent)(*) Quarterly moving average.Sources: National Car Association of Chile (ANAC), Central Bank of Chile and National Statistics Institute (INE).159131721-40-20020406011121314New car salesCapital goods importsRetail salesFigure 8Labor market indicators(thousand persons, percent)(*)Quarterlymovingaverageofindividualswhoclaimedandreceivedunemploymentinsurancepayment.Thisseriesisanticipated by 4 months.Sources:  National Statistics Institute (INE),  Superintendence of Pensions and Central Bank of Chile. 456789108010012014016018020008091011121314Unemployment insurance (*)Unemployment rate
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 13    Figure 9Sources: Central Bank of Chile and National Statistics Institute (INE).(annual change, percent)CPI inflation (*)(annual change, percent)(*) Gray area, as from the third quarter of 2014, shows forecast.CPIEFE inflation (*)-4-20246810-4-2024681007080910111213141516June 2014 Report-4-20246810-4-2024681007080910111213141516Sept.2014 ReportFigure 10MPR and expectations(percent)Source: Central Bank of Chile.23456234561213141516MPRFBS, 2nd half August 2014EES, August 2014Forward IPoM septiembre 2014Forward, September2014 Report
   14 BIS central bankers’ speeches    Table 1International baseline scenario assumptions20132014 (f)2015 (f)2016 (f)Report, Mar. 14Report, Jun. 14Report, Sept. 14Report, Mar. 14Report, Jun. 14Report, Sept. 14Report, Sept. 14GDP growthTrading partners' GDP3.53.73.63.43.93.93.83.9World GDP at PPP3.13.53.33.23.83.73.74.4United States2.22.72.42.12.93.13.03.2Eurozone-0.41.21.00.81.51.71.71.8Japan1.51.51.61.01.11.01.51.2China7.77.37.37.37.27.27.27.0India4.45.45.45.46.36.26.26.5Rest of Asia (excl. Japan, China and India)3.94.14.14.04.54.44.54.8Latin America (excl. Chile)2.62.32.01.73.43.02.63.3LME copper price (US$cent/lb)332300310315285290305300Brent oil price (US$/barrel)109106108106101103104101Terms of trade-3.2-0.9-0.5-0.2-1.1-1.5-0.8-0.5(f) Forecast.(annual change, percent)(levels)(annual change, percent)Sources: Central Bank of Chile based on a sample of investment banks, Bloomberg, Consensus Forecasts, the IMF and statistics bureaus of respective countries.Table 2Domestic scenario(annual change, percent)20122013 (e)2014 (f)2015 (f)Report, Jun.14Report, Sep.14Report, Mar.14Report, Jun.14Report, Sep.14Report, Sep.14GDP5.44.14.13.0-4.02.5-3.51.75-2.253.0-4.0Domestic demand6.93.43.43.31.70.13.4Domestic demand (w/o inventory change)7.14.24.23.32.41.03.2       Gross fixed capital formation12.20.40.40.8-0.7-4.11.8      Total consumption5.65.45.44.13.42.63.6Goods and services exports1.14.34.33.23.22.43.8Goods and services imports5.02.22.22.4-1.1-3.94.0Current account (% of GDP)-3.4-3.4-3.4-3.6-2.5-1.8-2.2Gross national saving (% of GDP)21.720.520.519.519.919.819.7December CPI1.53.03.03.04.04.12.8December CPIEFE1.52.12.12.83.73.42.5Sources: Central Bank of Chile and National Statistics Institute (INE). (e) Estimate. (f) Forecast.
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Janet L Yellen: The importance of asset building for low and middle income households Speech (via prerecorded video) by Ms Janet L Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the 2014 Assets Learning Conference of the Corporation for Enterprise Development, Washington DC, 18 September 2014. *      *      * Thank you for this opportunity to show my support for the work all of you do on asset-building, and to say a few words on this vitally important topic. The financial crisis and the Great Recession demonstrated, in a dramatic and unmistakable manner, how extraordinarily vulnerable are the large share of American families with very few assets to fall back on. We have come far from the worst moments of the crisis, and the economy continues to improve. But the effects of the recession are still being felt by many families, particularly those that had very little in savings and other assets beforehand. To help make this point, I’d like to cite a few numbers from the Federal Reserve’s 2013 Survey of Consumer Finances, published earlier this month. The Survey is conducted every three years and this new edition provides one of the first good looks at how families in different economic circumstances have fared in the recovery. For lower-income families, what we find is sobering. The median net worth reported by the bottom fifth of households by income was only $6,400 in 2013. Among this group, representing about 25 million American households, many families had no wealth or had negative net worth. The next fifth of households by income had median net worth of just $27,900. These numbers represent declines from 2010. One reason is that income has continued to fall for these families. Another likely reason for this decline in net worth is the lingering effects of the housing crisis. Home equity accounts for the lion’s share of wealth for most families and many of these families have not yet recovered the wealth they lost in the housing crisis. The housing market is improving and housing will remain an important channel for asset building for lower and middle income families. But one of the lessons of the crisis, which will not be news to many of you, is the importance of diversification and especially of possessing savings and other liquid financial assets to fall back in times of economic distress. Yet for lower and middle income families, financial assets, including 401 (k) plans and pensions, are still a very small share of their assets. According to the 2013 survey, the bottom half of families by income held only 8 percent of all financial assets held by households. A larger lesson from the financial crisis, of course, is how important it is to promote asset-building, including saving for a rainy day, as protection from the ups and downs of the economy. I surely hope that our nation will not face another crisis anytime soon as severe as the one we recently experienced. But for many lower-income families without assets, the definition of a financial crisis is a month or two without a paycheck, or the advent of a sudden illness or some other unexpected expense. Families with assets to draw on are able to deal with these developments as bumps in the road. Families without these assets can end up, very suddenly, off the road. According to the Board’s recent Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking, an unexpected expense of just $400 would prompt the majority of households to borrow money, sell something, or simply not pay at all. The Federal Reserve’s mission is to promote a healthy economy and strong financial system, and that is why we have promoted and will continue to promote asset-building. One way we do this is through the Community Development programs at each of our 12 Reserve Banks, and through the Federal Reserve Board’s Division of Consumer and Community Affairs in 
2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Washington. As a research institution, and a convener of stakeholders involved in community development, I believe the Fed can help you in carrying out your mission, to encourage families to take the small steps that over time can lead to the accumulation of considerable assets. Thank you for the chance to be a small part of this conference, and for your commitment to a cause that I strongly support. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Yves Mersch: Towards a new collateral landscape Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the 2nd Joint Central Bank Seminar on Collateral and Liquidity, hosted by the ECB and the Deutsche Bundesbank, Hamburg, 17 September 2014. *      *      * Introduction Ladies and gentlemen, It is a pleasure to open the second day of the Second Joint Central Bank Seminar on Collateral and Liquidity, hosted by the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Deutsche Bundesbank. I will reflect on the developments we are seeing in what is often referred to as the “new collateral landscape” and, in particular, consider the role central banks have played and can continue to play in order to help shape this new landscape. In this regard I will concentrate on the 1) eligibility, 2) availability and 3) mobility of collateral assets, as these elements represent some of the key subjects in the unfolding collateral landscape. Looking back at developments in recent years, it is clear that the financial crisis and the accompanying regulatory reforms have assigned a more prominent role to collateral and placed greater emphasis on high-quality assets in general. We have seen a clear shift away from the use of unsecured funding in favour of secured funding in the money markets. This structural change alone has created new issues and challenges and it is having a significant impact on demand for collateral assets and the way monetary policy is implemented and transmitted. One of the key topics of discussion two years ago at the First Joint Central Bank Seminar on Collateral and Liquidity, was the growing demand for collateral. At that time, concerns were emerging that collateral was becoming scarcer, with expectations that demand would substantially outpace supply. These concerns were mainly fuelled by upcoming regulatory changes, the details of which were not fully elaborated at that time. Another prominent topic was the importance of collateral for central banks. In response to the crisis, many central banks had broadened their collateral frameworks to support their counterparties in accessing central bank funding given the problems with the availability of market funding. Taking the various elements together, there was general agreement that demand for collateral assets would indeed increase in the forthcoming years and hence collateral would become relatively scarcer, although an absolute collateral scarcity was unlikely. A subsequent study carried out by the Basel Committee on the Global Financial System (the CGFS) and published in 2013 reconfirmed this view, noting that while this increase in demand could lead to “temporary shortages in some countries”, concerns about an absolute shortage of high-quality collateral assets appeared unjustified, given that the supply of collateral assets had risen significantly since the end of 2007. Today, almost two years after the First Joint Central Bank Seminar, a new set of issues related to this relative scarcity of collateral is coming to the forefront. The regulatory framework is becoming clearer, but concerns are being raised about the impact of the new post-crisis regulatory regime on the financial system. Eligible collateral First, I would like to focus on the aspects related to the eligibility of assets for use as collateral in central bank credit operations. As you well know, collateral eligibility criteria are defined by central banks first and foremost to protect central banks, and ultimately taxpayers, from the credit risk inherent in their credit operations with commercial banks. The Eurosystem is very clear on this aspect and the 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  “adequacy” of assets for use as collateral is stipulated as a condition for lending in Article 18.1 of the Statute of the European System of Central Banks. The legal interpretation in this respect is clear and consistent. This concept of adequacy focuses on the “qualitative” aspect of assets that may be used as collateral with the Eurosystem. The adequacy of collateral in this respect is ensured via the following pillars: (i) market valuation should be the rule whenever possible, (ii) proper legal due diligence both as regards the asset to be accepted as collateral and also as regards the collateralisation technique used (iii) there should be minimum credit quality requirements and stringent rules and performance monitoring for all systems used to assess the credit quality of eligible assets and (iv) risk control measures, normally in the form of haircuts. Another point I would like to emphasise is that the Eurosystem has been working to mitigate inherent pro-cyclicality in its collateral framework by extending it, by aiming at calibrating risk parameters over a medium-term horizon, avoiding strong reactions to temporary market movements, and eliminating cliff effects and broadening its acceptance of credit risk assessment systems. I would also highlight that the Eurosystem’s collateral framework which should cater for a level playing field in the euro area through a Single List of eligible assets, is an important factor in promoting the standardisation and harmonisation of relevant laws in Europe. The Eurosystem often has to face the fact that different aspects of securities laws in Europe are not yet properly harmonised. The Eurosystem eligibility criteria often de facto shape national and European rules. In the discussion on high-quality securitisation, the eligibility criteria of the Eurosystem could be a good starting point for future regulation. Availability of collateral Moving on, I would like to speak about the proportion of high quality assets that is effectively available to market participants. With the greater reliance on collateralised funding and regulatory reforms undertaken in response to the financial crisis, it is clear that the share of banks’ assets that are encumbered is rising. This intensifies the need for greater visibility regarding the amount of high-quality assets actually available for use as collateral or for regulatory purposes. In a recently-published study, the ECB compared data for the overall global supply of high-quality assets with the share of such assets effectively available to the market. On the basis of existing data, the study concluded that the overall global supply stands at the equivalent of around €41 trillion. However, a significant proportion of this overall supply, representing at least 25%, was identified as being blocked on safe-keeping accounts of investors or central banks for policy-related purposes – so-called “idle securities”. The availability of assets was also found to be constrained by shortcomings related to settlement arrangements, bringing the total for available high quality assets to an amount closer to the equivalent of €29 trillion – some €11 trillion less than the figure I referred to at the outset. Overall this still leaves a sufficient buffer of high-quality assets available for market participants. Currently, collateral usage is the equivalent of around €10 trillion and it is expected that the increased demand due to mandatory CCP clearing and other regulatory reforms would be at most in equivalent of between €2-4 trillion. Nonetheless, we need to take into account that the available assets may not be equally available to all market participants in all regions. It is therefore important to monitor trends and developments in this area. In this respect, securitisation could be the appropriate relief. The recent joint paper by the ECB and the Bank of England (BoE) on the need for regulatory changes in the treatment of asset-backed securities (ABS) is also to be considered here. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  The ECB is currently exploring aspects related to collateral velocity – in other words the rate of use and reuse of collateral. Some studies1 have estimated that collateral is reused around three times on average, however, there are indications that this rate has declined since the onset of the financial crisis. As such, further work could provide a clearer picture across a wider range of assets and markets, with triparty collateral management systems serving as a good starting point to better grasp the rate of reuse in secured financing markets. Another important element that affects the availability of collateral assets is settlement arrangements and, here again, the Eurosystem is working with the market to see how enhancements to settlement arrangements could overcome existing inefficiencies. Given that settlement arrangements influence both the availability and mobility of collateral, I will move on to the topic of mobility and address settlement arrangements in parallel. Mobility of collateral An important function of collateral in financial markets is that it should have the capacity to “change hands” when needed. Thus, collateral should be mobile. Inefficiencies in settlement arrangements, however, including at the level of financial market infrastructures, reduce the amount of assets that can be quickly mobilised and, therefore, the overall availability of collateral assets. The Eurosystem, like other central banks, therefore supports and fosters initiatives that contribute to improving the availability and mobility of collateral, without overlooking the need to preserve transparency and legal certainty. Let me mention first the initiatives within the Eurosystem itself – TARGET2-Securities (T2S) being the most notable. The launch of T2S will make securities settlement – including collateral mobilisation – safer and more efficient for market participants and central banks alike. With the migration to T2S, a number of operational barriers which currently exist for cross-border settlement will be removed and operational friction will be reduced, allowing collateral to move more easily from where it is, to where it is needed. T2S will be an important piece in the “mosaic” of post-trade settlement. T2S will overcome the technical difficulties encountered today in quickly transferring collateral assets. The common and extended settlement timetables across T2S markets will also support more efficient mobilisation and management of collateral assets and, in this way, T2S is a crucial step to a better functioning financial market, at least from an operational point of view. The Eurosystem has also taken initiatives in relation to the services for mobilisation of collateral for its own credit operations. One of the most significant developments in this respect is the introduction of support for cross-border triparty collateral management services which will go-live towards the end of this month. Triparty collateral management services, as many of you well know, allow institutions to manage their assets via a triparty agent and are ultimately targeted towards optimising the use of clients’ assets. With the incorporation of these services into the Eurosystem framework on a cross-border basis, they will become operationally accessible to all Eurosystem counterparties, regardless of the location of the counterparty or the respective triparty service. This has raised a set of issues, primarily related to legal implementation, which also needed to be addressed. Once live, this enhancement will offer Eurosystem counterparties the ability to manage their overall collateral holdings in a more flexible and efficient manner and to flexibly switch their collateral between central bank refinancing and interbank market financing. Central banks of course have not been alone in taking initiatives over the last few years. On the market, we have seen huge progress in the range and sophistication of services on offer to clients. A new report from Basel covers developments in collateral management services                                                 1  See, for example, “Velocity of pledged collateral: analysis and implications”, Working Paper No 11/256, IMF, November 2011. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  across G20 countries and takes stock of the existing and upcoming services in this field.2 The many benefits gained from the innovation of service providers and the collaboration among them can be welcomed by central banks, as they allow for better information on collateral, better access to collateral and better mobility of available securities. Indeed, it is doubtful whether market participants would cope with temporary shortages of collateral arising from the regulatory reforms without the innovation that helps in the distribution of collateral. On the other hand, the increased sophistication of such services also implies increased complexity, increased operational and legal risks and, most notably, increased interdependencies stemming from new linkages between service-providing firms. A shortage of collateral or an inability to transfer collateral promptly can in some cases be an early indicator of liquidity problems or an even deeper set of issues. Close cooperation with competent supervisory and oversight authorities is therefore warranted, as the legal heterogeneity still impedes a fully functioning internal market. Conclusion Let me conclude. As I mentioned at the outset, we have already observed a significant change in the collateral landscape over the last few years and it is a landscape that is continuing to evolve. In particular, key regulatory reforms have yet to make a real impact in the market and innovation in post-trade arrangements will be further pursued by the public and private sectors alike. Although the overall global supply of high-quality assets appears substantial, existing regional imbalances mean that we cannot become complacent. We must also continue to be vigilant regarding issues affecting availability and mobility, and take actions that address the factors that hamper the fluid transfer of assets, without mistaking liquidity and solvency issues for market inefficiencies. In Europe, the T2S project has made significant progress and, when implemented, it will be a significant step forward. T2S allows for more efficient cross-border collateral flows so that collateral in one country will be easily accessible in other countries. This also offers possibilities for establishing linkages between T2S Central Securities Depositories (CSDs) and those from other geographical areas, which could ultimately lead to the creation of a more global network for the mobilisation of collateral assets. This type of global reach will make it more attractive to connect to Europe. In view of the planned discussion on bringing the right collateral to the right place at the right time, I will leave you with these suggestions for further reflection and I look forward to receiving feedback on your deliberations in due course. I would like to end by wishing you an enjoyable second day of the seminar, with lively and fruitful discussions and I look forward to further cooperation among central bankers on the topic of collateral in all its forms in the months and years ahead.                                                 2  See the CPMI report on collateral management services published on 8 September 2014. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  S S Mundra: Re-emphasizing the role of compliance function in banks Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Centre for Advanced Financial Research and Learning (CAFRAL) Conference of Chief Compliance Officers in RBI, Mumbai, 27 August 2014. *      *      * Assistance provided by Ms Ranjana Sahajwala in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 1. Shri G. Gopalakrishna, Director, CAFRAL; Shri P.R. Ravi Mohan, Chief General Manager-in-Charge, Department of Banking Supervision, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and the conference participants! It is a pleasure for me to deliver the keynote address at this Conference of senior representatives of the compliance departments of commercial banks. Across the globe, it is an accepted fact that compliance is an area that warrants considerable attention. In recent times, the emergence of compliance function as an area of greater focus is an acknowledgement of the damaging impact of non-compliance, not only on an entity’s own reputation but, more broadly, also on the confidence in the system. Regulators, supervisors and international standard setters have become increasingly cognizant of the fact that merely enacting rules and regulations is a futile exercise unless these are complied with, both in letter and spirit, by the regulated entities. Not surprisingly, on account of a bigger push from the regulators/supervisors, the compliance function has assumed massive significance within the bank’s internal structure and organization. In my address today, I intend to talk about the relevance of compliance function within the bank’s overall business strategy, operations and conduct and re-emphasize some of the key elements of the compliance framework that we would want to see in practice in our banks. Background 2. It has been some time now since the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) first broke in 2008, extending its impact across the globe over time. Indeed, complete recovery of the financial system from the strenuous impact of the Crisis is yet to be accomplished. The years since the Crisis have extensively been dedicated by international standard setters and domestic authorities to both enhancing and reorienting financial sector regulations to ensure the sector’s resilience in the face of present and future problems. However, even while standard setters and regulators have remained engaged in plugging the regulatory loopholes, several instances of misconduct on the part of banks continue to come to light, which keep reminding us of the need to refocus on the issue of “compliance” in banks. Let me, therefore, begin by highlighting some of these recent instances of misdemeanors by banks in compliance-related matters which have had debilitating consequences in the form of massive penalties. Global episodes 3. i) In 2012, JP Morgan Chase & Co was involved in the so-called “London whale” trades in the bank’s “Synthetic Credit Portfolio” comprising of credit default swaps and related instruments. The bank’s trading strategy, which intended to serve as a hedge against credit risk, was unscrupulously used by its traders to build risky positions, thereby raising doubts about the efficacy of the internal compliance process. In a scathing indictment of the internal control and compliance machinery, Jaime Dimon, the CEO of J. P. Morgan remarked, “Chief Investment Office, particularly the Synthetic Credit Portfolio, should have gotten more scrutiny from both senior management, and I include myself in that, and the Firm-wide Risk control function. … Make sure that people on risk committees are always asking questions, sharing information, and that you have very, very granular limits when you’re taking risk. …. In the rest of the company we have those disciplines in place. We 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  didn’t have it here.”1 The bank eventually lost more than US$ 6 billion and ended up paying US $920 million in penalties for settling probes by the UK and US investigators. As the losses piled up, the bank also misled investors and public through incorrect disclosures and withheld information from the regulators. ii) Also in 2012, HSBC Holdings was hauled up by regulators of three jurisdictions for Anti-Money Laundering (AML)/Combating Financial Terrorism (CFT) violations in transferring money illegally through its subsidiaries. Several lapses were identified in HSBC’s AML compliance which included ignoring internal warnings on inadequacy of internal monitoring systems, mis-categorization of Mexico as a “low risk” country leading to transactions being exempt from detailed monitoring, etc. A fine of US$ 1.9 billion was imposed on HSBC Holdings. iii) Another gross misdemeanour that surfaced in 2012 involved long term manipulation of the LIBOR rate by multiple banks. The investigations revealed that the rate contributions made by banks to determine the sacrosanct benchmark rate, which is used to settle trillions of dollars of loans and transactions worldwide, was being consistently and deliberately wrongly reported by several banks (Deutsche Bank, Societe Generale, Citigroup, Royal Bank of Scotland, Barclays, UBS, J P Morgan Chase), over a period of time, for monetary gains, in violation of market standards and codes. The manipulated submissions were made with the intention to mislead and present a healthier outlook than the actual position of banks’ credit quality, profitability and ability to raise funds. Penalties ranging from US$ 1 to 3 billion were imposed on the banks. iv) In May 2014, the Federal Reserve Board (FRB) imposed a US$100 million penalty on Credit Suisse for unsafe and unsound practices as well as a failure to comply with the banking laws governing its activities in the US. A “cease and desist” order requiring the bank to promptly address deficiencies in its oversight, management, and controls governing compliance with U.S. laws has also been issued. v) More recently in August 2014, Standard Chartered Bank has been penalised US$ 300 million by the Department of Financial Services, US for its failure to remediate AML compliance problems, as required in the 2012 settlement with the New York State Department of Financial Services (NYDFS). The bank had failed to review high-risk transactions even two years after the 2012 settlement, where it had agreed to reform its practices. Other sanctions and the requirement of further enhancing due diligence for AML compliance have also been imposed. Way back in 2012, NYDFS had observed that the bank was permitting US$ transactions with certain restricted countries and had also hidden such transactions from the regulators. It was alleged that the bank’s actions left the US financial system vulnerable to terrorists, corrupt regimes and deprived law enforcement investigators of crucial information used to track all manner of criminal activity. The bank agreed to pay a negotiated penalty with an express agreement to reform its practices with regard to monitoring of high-risk transactions, which it failed to do till 2014. Domestic incidents 4. Closer home, instances of non-compliance have also troubled the Indian banking sector. Let me recount some instances: i) A few years ago, in 2007–08, several banks were found involved in mis-selling complex derivative products to unsophisticated and naïve customers, blissfully unaware of the risks involved in these products. Guidance on customer suitability and appropriateness provided in                                                 1 Report of JPMorgan Chase & Co. Management Task Force Regarding 2012 CIO Losses (http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/ONE/2272984969x0x628656/4cb574a0-0bf5-4728–9582–625e4519b 5ab/Task_Force_Report.pdf) 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  RBI’s comprehensive guidelines on derivatives were ignored by banks in their pursuit of business and profits. Penalties were imposed on several banks. ii) In 2013, several Indian banks were penalised by RBI for non-adherence to certain KYC/ AML requirements such as customer identification procedure, risk categorization, periodical review of risk profiling of account holders, periodical KYC updation, KYC for walk-in customers, etc. iii) Non-compliance with set rules, both regulatory and internal, has also resulted in a rise in the number of frauds in banks. In July 2014, RBI imposed penalties on 12 banks for their non-compliance with regulatory guidelines in the conduct of the loan and current accounts of M/s Deccan Chronicle Holdings Ltd. These lapses on the part of banks facilitated the company in defrauding the banks. iv) More recent instances of some banks having been embroiled in frauds and misappropriation relating to the fixed deposits created by them have come to light. These frauds could be attributable to a possible lack of adequate due diligence and non-adherence to internal norms and procedures. 5. The above examples of compliance failures not only raise issues of confidence and business ethics and cast a negative reputational impact, but also lead to deleterious outcomes in the form of losses, fines and penalties, strictures and restrictions. The reputational risk emanating from events of non-compliance and the consequent imposition of penalties needs to be viewed seriously. Increasing significance of compliance 6. Post crisis, considerable progress has been made in enhancing and refining regulatory/supervisory standards, the gradual implementation of which will be achieved in stages till 2019. An important aspect of the reform measures is a greater focus on ensuring compliance with the standards across jurisdictions on a sustained basis. The compliance function is where all this comes together – ensuring that all applicable rules, regulations and standards are adhered to and implemented coherently, consistently and in the right spirit. 7. At the global level, international standard setters such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and the Financial Stability Board (FSB) have now put in place peer review mechanisms to ensure that national jurisdictions comply with international standards in right measure and spirit. These are in addition to the existing assessments of compliance of jurisdictions to international standards done by the International Monetary Fund (IMF)/World Bank, under the Financial Sector Assessment Programs (FSAPs). Within national jurisdictions, regulators/supervisors and financial sector entities have realized the significance of the compliance function in ensuring good conduct of business at the entity level and facilitating a safe and sound banking system at the systemic level. Consequently, assessment of compliance is increasingly being focused on in supervisory oversight. Is compliance a specific risk area? 8. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, in its guidance “Compliance and the Compliance function in banks”, issued in April 2005 states “the compliance function is an independent function that identifies, assesses, advises on, monitors and reports on the bank’s compliance risk, that is, the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, material financial loss, or loss to reputation a bank may suffer as a result of its failure to comply with laws, regulations, rules, related self-regulatory organization standards, and codes of conduct applicable to its banking activities”. 9. What is the “compliance risk” referred to above? Is it an independent risk that banks need to manage just as they manage credit risk, market risk or operational risk? Is it a subset of another risk or is it simply a function that needs to be performed as part of banking 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  business? In the era of traditional banking business, simple products, and intense regulation, compliance was relatively simple. Banks had to comply with the provisions of the specific Acts and regulations set by the regulators. Compliance then could be identified simply as a function to be discharged as part of business. However, with globalization, liberalization, increased adoption and integration of IT in the business processes along with the introduction of new, innovative and complex products, the compliance function has gained in stature and significance. While compliance may still not be considered an independent “risk” function, over the last few years, it has definitely evolved as an independent function in banks that impacts other risk/s. 10. Compliance is generally considered to be a part of operational risk. Under Basel II, operational risk is defined as “the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from external events. This definition includes legal risk, but excludes strategic and reputational risk” (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 2006, p. 144). Legal risk itself is defined as “including, but…not limited to, exposure to fines, penalties or punitive damages resulting from supervisory actions, as well as private settlements” (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 2006, p. 130). From this definition of legal risk one can see that compliance risk forms part of it and consequently is also considered to be a part of operational risk under Basel II/III. What does compliance entail? 11. Let me now elaborate upon what compliance function really entails. In the present day context, compliance function encompasses several dimensions. I will discuss some of these in detail: i) Prudential and regulatory compliance Prudential and regulatory compliance includes compliance with directives and guidance of the regulator. For banks, this includes regulations emanating from the various departments of RBI, for example, regulations relating to income recognition, asset classification, provisioning, restructuring, capital adequacy, liquidity, disclosures, priority sector lending, exposure norms, etc. For banks whose activities transcend the other segments of the financial sector(whether carried out departmentally or through subsidiaries) compliance with applicable regulations of other domestic regulators, viz. Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), Insurance Regulation and Development Authority (IRDA), Pension Fund Regulation and Development Authority (PFRDA) also form part of prudential and regulatory compliance. For banks that have overseas operations in the form of branches, subsidiaries or joint ventures, compliance with prudential and regulatory norms of host country regulators is also important. ii)  Integrity and market conduct In order to ensure the integrity of the financial system and to guard against its misuse for illegal purposes, compliance with AML and CFT rules has assumed great significance globally. The AML/CFT rules are based upon the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) recommendations. It is incumbent upon banks to diligently ensure compliance with these rules. AML/CFT compliance in banks is assiduously assessed by regulators/supervisors to ensure that the safety and soundness of the institution and whole of the financial sector is not being compromised on account of non-compliance with these rules. Market conduct guidelines are also issued by various self-regulatory organizations within the financial sector. In India, we have the Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI), Indian Banks Association (IBA), Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India (FEDAI), Fixed Income Money Markets and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA), etc. that provide guidelines/guidance on various aspects relevant to the structuring of banking products. Such guidance, being based on good market conduct, also needs to be complied 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  with. I must also sound a note of caution here. The inability of the financial market players to ensure fair treatment to consumers and their indulgence in unfair market practices has forced some of the jurisdictions to create a separate market conduct regulator. This has happened in UK, France, Australia and South Africa and there is no reason why it could not be replicated in India, if we did not mend our ways quickly. A separate regulator would mean additional regulatory and compliance burden for the banks. This should give you an added incentive to comply with the current regulations. iii) Legal compliance Compliance with various applicable laws and rules relating to the setting up of banks, tax laws and other legal enactments form an important part of compliance. In India, for example, compliance with the applicable provisions of the Banking Regulation Act 1949, Reserve Bank of India Act 1934, Foreign Exchange Management Act 1999, etc. is mandatory. iv) Internal compliance The prudential and regulatory compliance requirements, market conduct and integrity standards, and legal compliance requirement coupled with bank specific issues all culminate in various internal rules and policies. In recent times, there has been a growing trend towards encouraging banks to create their own internal control framework through a network of policies and procedures that would be best suited to meet the specific needs of the organization. It is crucial for banks to ensure that internal compliance is adhered to with the same commitment as required for ensuring prudential, regulatory as well as legal compliance. No doubt, the primary position relating to internal compliances rests with the business area/unit within the bank. However, a pro-active role by the compliance function will provide strong impetus to internal compliance as well. RBI guidelines on compliance function in banks 12. In 2007, RBI issued guidelines to banks on the compliance function based on the Basel Committee guidance. The guidelines articulated the minimum requirements for putting in place an effective compliance function in banks. The guidelines also intended to guide bank-led “Financial Conglomerates” in managing their “Group wide compliance risk”. Acknowledging the significant differences among banks with regard to their scale of operations, their risk profiles and organizational structures, the guidelines exhorted banks to organize their compliance functions and set priorities to manage their compliance risks. 13. The guidelines stipulate that the compliance function has to necessarily be an integral part of governance framework along with the internal control and risk management process. Further, for the function to be effective, it is necessary that compliance is not merely viewed as a responsibility of an individual or a department, but is supported by a healthy compliance culture within the organization. The guidelines clarify that the compliance function should have the right of direct access to the Board of Directors or to the Audit Committee/other Committee of the Board. Further, the Board or the Audit Committee or the special Committee of the Board could meet with the head of compliance at suitable intervals to assess the extent to which the bank is managing its compliance risk effectively. Thus, there is equal emphasis on ensuring independence of the compliance function and ensuring that it pervades all activities of the enterprise. 14. The guidelines provide for having in place a Board approved compliance policy, a clear structure for the compliance department/unit, quality, tenure and location of compliance staff and the responsibility of the Board and senior management in ensuring an effective compliance culture in the bank. Banks need to nominate Chief Compliance Officers to function as the nodal point of contact between the bank and the regulator. 15. It is heartening to note that all banks in India now have in place dedicated compliance personnel, a compliance unit or a full-fledged compliance department depending 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  upon their size and business. In many banks, the compliance unit/department is a separate unit with interaction/cooperation mechanisms for interaction with the risk management department and direct reporting lines to the Board/Committee. I only urge proactive action from the compliance department personnel and support from bank managements in nurturing a thriving compliance culture within their respective organizations. RBI assessment of efficacy of compliance process in banks 16. As I mentioned earlier, compliance assessment is an integral part of supervisory oversight. Over the last few years, increasing attention is being paid by RBI on the extent, nature and quality of compliance by banks to various applicable rules and regulations; both under the annual financial inspection (AFI) process as well as the recently introduced risk-based supervision (RBS) process. In both approaches, compliance assessment plays an important role in the final rating assigned to a bank. i) Compliance review under AFI Under the AFI process, a detailed review of the compliance function, its working and the status of bank’s compliance with extant statutory, legal, regulatory, market conduct and other applicable Acts is undertaken. Based on the key deficiencies, a Monitorable Action Plan (MAP) is prepared for each bank in consultation with the bank, laying down action points, clear deliverables and timelines. The progress made by the bank in achieving compliance is closely monitored by RBI. ii) Compliance review under RBS Starting 2013, the supervision of several banks is being undertaken under the RBS approach. One of the key assessments made under RBS is the extent of a bank’s compliance to the existing statutes, regulations and norms. Specific information relating to a bank’s compliance with various laws, rules and regulatory guidelines is called for from the bank (Tranche 3 information), which is assessed off-site, supplemented by a subsequent on-site review. Based on the compliance risk identified, a Risk Mitigation Plan (RMP) is prepared for each bank in consultation with the bank, laying down the roadmap for mitigating identified risks with clear timelines. RMPs are rigorously monitored by RBI. Conclusion 17. Let me conclude by underscoring the need for a sound compliance function in a bank. The compliance function is at the center of value creation in a bank, strengthening public confidence, preserving and enhancing its reputation, and maintaining the integrity of its business and management. In effectively performing this function, in my view, compliance needs to be supported unconditionally through engagement from the top, which includes the Board and the senior management. The “tone from the top” would set the pace for a sound compliance culture that values honesty and integrity. This would also entail strengthening the edifice of the function, which includes a well-rounded compliance structure with appropriate IT and quality HR resources in terms of number of qualified staff, training and skill development, independence, interaction with other areas and clear and direct reporting. Another crucial element for the success of compliance function is inculcation of strong ethics within the organization, which can override profit motive and business target considerations. 18. Finally, from the regulator’s perspective, compliance is absolutely non-negotiable. Full compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations is a must. This belief has to find roots at the top and steadily percolate to all levels in a bank. Going forward, the compliance function in banks will need to play a greater and more proactive role in business operations as well as risk management. Let me remind that the cost of non-compliance has been steadily rising as seen from the instances I recounted earlier. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  Before I close, I would like to once again thank CAFRAL and Shri Gopalakrishna for inviting me to this Conference and wish the deliberations all success. Thank You! 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Norman T L Chan: What does it take to develop a Global Offshore RMB Hub? Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Treasury Markets Summit 2014, Hong Kong, 15 September 2014. *      *      * 1. A very warm welcome to all of you to this year’s Treasury Markets Summit. 2. The theme of today’s Summit is: “Development of Hong Kong as the Offshore Renminbi Hub”. This is indeed a very timely topic as we have just marked the 5th anniversary of the launch of the pilot scheme for the use of renminbi (RMB) in cross-border trade transactions in the summer of 2009. We of course started the RMB banking business back in 2004, but until 2009 our business was restricted to the development of personal accounts for Hong Kong residents and use of credit cards. The major milestone was clearly the start of offshore RMB trade settlement and other businesses for corporates five years ago. 3. So what have we accomplished in the last five years? It is probably fair to say that very few of us could have envisaged the rapid progress that we have achieved in turning Hong Kong into the global offshore RMB business hub in such a short time. In terms of deposits, including Certificate of Deposit (CDs), we have grown from around RMB90 billion in end-June 2010 by nearly twelve times to RMB1.1 trillion now, which makes us the largest offshore RMB liquidity pool in the world. In trade settlement, Hong Kong banks handled a phenomenal amount of RMB2.9 trillion in the first half of 2014, as compared to the total amount of Mainland’s external trade settled in RMB of RMB3.3 trillion in the same period. Hong Kong has also become the largest issuance hub of offshore RMB bonds or Dim Sum bonds, with a total of 93 issuances in the first six months of this year, amounting to RMB130 billion in value. The total amount of outstanding RMB bonds issued in Hong Kong amounted to RMB380 billion at end-June this year. In addition, the forex and financial derivative markets for RMB have grown steadily over these few years, which, according to SWIFT, have raised RMB from the 20th position of the most used payment currency to the 7th position lately. Most strikingly, the value of payments that go through our RMB Real Time Gross Settlement system has registered a phenomenal growth, reaching an average of around RMB700 billion each working day. 4. I won’t bore you further with the numbers as I am sure you are very familiar with them. Surely it is useful for us to pause, look back, take stock and try to think of ways in which we can continue to excel as we go forward from where we are. So without further ado, let me quickly turn to the main theme of my remarks this morning: “What does it take to build a successful global hub for offshore RMB businesses?” The key to success, if I may summarise it, lies in the acronym: “PIPs”. 5. “PIPs” stands for “Policy Headroom, Infrastructure and People/Products”. Let me cover these three elements in the reverse order. For People and Products, I have said many times that for any financial centre to thrive and out-compete other centres, the crucial building block would be its people and products. It goes without saying that a world class financial centre must have the right people designing and distributing the right products that serve the needs of the financial consumers. This is an important and core component of the soft power that I have been talking about in the last few years. It is a key attribute that differentiates a global hub from the other financial centres. People and Products fall into the area in which the financial industry, including the individual firms, practitioners and industry bodies like the TMA, can and should play a dominant role. I am sure that you will agree with me 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches that policy makers and regulators, while having the responsibility to safeguard financial stability and to accord appropriate protection to financial consumers, are not really well suited to get too involved in gauging market demand and designing financial products that would best meet the requirements of the consumers. 6. Having said that, policy makers and regulators do have a crucial role to play in respect of Policy Headroom and Infrastructure, which are the first two elements of “PIPs”. Let me elaborate further. 7. Clearly there could not be any offshore RMB markets if the Mainland did not make a move in 2009 to change its policy of not allowing the use of RMB in cross-border trade and other transactions. But of course, the Mainland authorities were and still are understandably wanting to open up the capital account on an incremental basis, taking one step at a time. When one looks back at the last five years, the scope and breadth of the cross-border flow of RMB have been progressively and steadily expanded. While we have come a long way from 2009 and there have been many policy changes in this period that help the offshore market to move forward, I would like to highlight four major milestones of policy headroom expansion that made it possible for the incremental development of RMB markets offshore. The first one is the RMB trade settlement pilot scheme I mentioned at the beginning. Then comes the relaxation in the use of RMB for foreign direct investments into the Mainland and outward direct investments by Mainland corporates starting in 2011. Then channels for RMB portfolio investment flows have also been created, such as the RMB Qualified Foreign Institutional Investors (RQFII) scheme, so that offshore investors can invest in the onshore bond and equity markets. The fourth and most recent milestone is the Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect Programme, which will enable Hong Kong and overseas investors to invest in A-shares listed in Shanghai through Hong Kong, and Mainland investors to invest in Hong Kong shares through Shanghai. This marks a significant step in the liberalisation of the Mainland’s capital account, and will increase the flows of RMB between the onshore and offshore markets and propel the development of offshore RMB business in Hong Kong to new highs. As far as the HKMA is concerned, we have used our best endeavours to work with the People’s Bank of China (PBoC) and other relevant Mainland authorities to continually expand the policy headroom that would enable Hong Kong to continue to thrive as the global hub for offshore RMB businesses. 8. Lastly, let me turn to the second element of the key to success in developing into a global offshore RMB hub, i.e. market infrastructure. I can think of four key components: (i) efficient clearing and settlement systems, (ii) robust and yet market friendly regulatory regime, (iii) financial benchmarks (such as CNH fixings) and (iv) liquidity. In the interest of time, I would skip the first three components and just focus on the fourth. As we all appreciate, in terms of financial market development, liquidity is essential. We also know that liquidity breeds further liquidity. Without ample market liquidity, it is hard for any financial centre to flourish or maintain a competitive edge. We of course are acutely aware of the importance of promoting market liquidity, especially in the early stages of our development of the CNH market. It was against this background that the HKMA has all along taken a proactive approach in seeking to strengthen the liquidity of the CNH market in Hong Kong. In June 2012, the HKMA launched a Repo facility to provide one-week funds for banks in Hong Kong as a backstop to facilitate banks’ liquidity management. However, the facility was for T+2 settlement and did not fully address the needs of the banks. In order to assist bank treasurers to better manage their liquidity, the HKMA shortened the settlement of the repo to T+1 in January 2013 and again to T+0 in July 2013. 9. Today, I am pleased to announce that, in preparation for the imminent launch of the Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect, the HKMA will implement two additional 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 measures as backstop facility to assist banks in Hong Kong in managing their RMB liquidity: (a) In addition to what the BoC HK, as the RMB Clearing Bank, is providing to the Participating Banks through intraday overdraft, the HKMA will provide an intraday Repo facility of up to RMB10 bn to banks in Hong Kong. The HKMA will charge a fee, based on the actual time used during the day, for the use of the facility. The purpose of the HKMA intraday liquidity facility is to promote more efficient RMB payment flows between banks; and (b) The HKMA will also designate a number of banks active in the CNH market as Primary Liquidity Providers (PLPs). Banks that are designated as PLPs are committed to using and developing Hong Kong as the global platform for supporting their offshore RMB businesses. They are also committed to expanding their market-making activities in CNH market. In return, the HKMA will offer a repo line to each of the PLPs so as to facilitate more efficient liquidity management when they carry out market-making and other business activities in the CNH market. This bilateral repo line can be used by the PLPs as intraday or overnight liquidity management purposes. The HKMA is now finalising the list of PLPs and the necessary documentation. We hope to be able to announce the list of PLPs very shortly. 10. Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude by saying that the competitive edge of a successful financial centre depends crucially on its soft powers, not just on hard infrastructure. Hong Kong is uniquely well positioned to take advantage and play a pivotal role in the new era of China’s growth story and in the internationalisation of RMB. Hong Kong enjoys both first-mover advantages as well as many irreplaceable structural advantages, given Hong Kong’s very close links with the Mainland in trade, investment and finance under the “One Country, Two Systems” principle. However, there is absolutely no room for complacency. As this new era of RMB internationalisation has just begun, we still have a long, long way to go as the offshore RMB markets continue to grow and mature, while the capital account controls in Mainland China are being gradually relaxed or lifted. In the early stages of this new era, the primary task of Hong Kong is to develop the CNH market and at the same time work with other financial centres such as Sydney, London or Paris to grow the pie, leading to win-win outcomes. As we move into the more mature stages of the internationalisation of RMB, the available policy headroom should be quite ample for the markets to flourish. At that time, the 2nd and 3rd elements of PIPs, i.e. Infrastructure and People/Products, would matter a great deal more if Hong Kong wishes to retain its competitive edge over the others. It will be up to our industry, financial firms and market practitioners to out compete the other centres in terms of product innovation and distribution of various financial products and services that best serve the needs of their clients. I am sure that the TMA, with the support of its members and the financial industry, will continue to play a leading role in developing the professionalism of the practitioners and in facilitating product innovation. Thank you. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5   
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Yves Mersch: For a European capital markets union – securing stability, overcoming fragmentation Closing keynote speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the Zeit Konferenz “Banken & Wirtschaft”, Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Frankfurt am Main, 10 September 2014. *      *      * Dr Esser (Managing Director, ZEIT Verlagsgruppe), Dr Raettig (Vice-President, Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Frankfurt am Main), Ladies and Gentlemen, I would first like to thank you for inviting me to deliver the closing speech of this high-calibre conference. I would do an injustice to the participants in the previous two panel discussions if I attempted to sum up the day’s deliberations. Instead, I’d like to conclude by linking together financial market policy, which has already been discussed at length today, our monetary policy and the overall functioning of Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union. A common currency in a union of states such as the European Union can only work in the long term if financial market policy, economic policy and fiscal policy interact at European level and in the Member States within the framework of common rules. In this way, the independent central bank is given the opportunity to fulfil its monetary policy mandate. Unfortunately we are quite some distance from this ideal condition. The crisis has shown us just how much the various policies affect each other. It has shown how easily bad budgetary management, excesses in the financial markets and a steady loss of competitiveness can reinforce each other. I am convinced that Europe has understood this. But I’m not sure if it is ready to draw all necessary conclusions. Without doubt, some changes for the better have taken place since the beginning of the crisis: most of the Member States and in particular the programme countries have made significant efforts to put their budgets in order and improve their competitiveness. With the banking union we are now taking a decisive step at European level. It will increase the stability of the banking system in the euro area and protect taxpayers in the future more effectively against expensive bank bailouts by linking risk and liability more closely. However, the economic recovery is still some way off: in the last quarter, the economy stagnated in the euro area. Unemployment is still at 11.5%. Prices in August rose by only 0.3%, but inflation expectations are anchored. All in all, these figures should give us cause for concern. They point out that Europe is still not out of danger. The patient is in a sense still poorly and unfortunately relapses cannot be ruled out. Financial market policy, fiscal policy and economic policy are still insufficiently harmonised, because all too often the political courage is lacking to push through the necessary but sometimes unpopular measures in the face of resistance. I am convinced that this is an important reason for the current economic weakness. As a result, the ECB’s monetary policy cannot optimally fulfil its mandate. To change this, we need to further improve the functioning of Economic and Monetary Union. In other words, we need to draw the right conclusions from the crisis. All three policies mentioned – financial market policy, fiscal policy and economic policy – are essential to this process. Ambitious structural reforms are just as important as good 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  housekeeping. But as we are talking about financial market policy today, I want to focus on the completion of Europe’s internal market for capital. We should not stop at the banking union. It is an important step. But the current situation in the euro area demands that we consider even more seriously how financing channels, especially for small and medium-sized enterprises, may be opened up beyond the banking system. This would also benefit the implementation of our monetary policy. That’s why today I wish to speak out in favour of developing the banking union into a comprehensive capital markets union. Monetary policy in times of uncertainty and fragmentation A capital markets union would be an important step towards a better allocation of capital in the euro area and thus towards higher growth and employment in Europe. To understand how such a move could support the recovery in the euro area, it is advisable, however, to begin by considering our own monetary policy. The current economic climate is unquestionably making monetary policy action very difficult. Low growth, high unemployment and very low inflation rates call for a very accommodative monetary policy in order to ensure price stability over the medium term. The ECB has been meeting this demand for quite some time. I understand why investors in this country, mindful of their savings accounts, are viewing this policy critically. But it is true for savers as well that too low an inflation level for too long would hold back economic development in the euro area and thus the return on savings. In addition, the Treaty requires the ECB to maintain price stability in the euro area – and this applies in both directions: the people of the euro area should be protected against any spurt in inflation and against deflation. Over ten years ago the ECB defined price stability as an annual inflation rate of below, but close to, 2% in the medium term. For this year, however, we can expect price increases of only 0.6%, for 2015 only 1.1% and for 2016 only 1.4%. This clearly shows why our current very accommodative monetary policy stance is not only economically appropriate, but also a necessary measure to fulfil our treaty obligation. The Governing Council is unanimous on this point. At the heart of this accommodative strategy is undoubtedly the fact that the ECB has steadily cut the interest rate on the main refinancing operations to its lowest possible point in recent years. However, the still existing functional deficits of the financial markets are hindering an optimal transmission of the monetary policy signals coming from this very low interest rate. Small and medium-sized enterprises in particular still aren’t feeling enough of the monetary policy accommodation. We call this an impaired transmission mechanism. That’s why the Governing Council unanimously adopted in June a series of measures which will improve the transmission of our monetary policy: first, we decided to continue to conduct our main refinancing operations as fixed-rate tender procedures with full allotment for as long as necessary, and at least until December 2016. Banks will therefore receive as much liquidity as they need as long as they can offer adequate collateral. Second, we have reduced the interest rate on the deposit facility to below zero for the first time and cut it further last week. By the way, this is not to punish the banks, as I have often read. Rather, we are giving them an incentive not to park liquidity at the central bank, but to pass it on in a productive way to the real economy. In an environment in which it is already difficult for businesses to gain access to capital for their own investments, it is important that banks also provide sufficient funds for profitable projects. Third, we have decided, within a framework of eight targeted longer-term refinancing operations, to make available long-term liquidity to banks for a period up to 2018 – in proportion to their credit volume relative to the real economy. Thus, banks are encouraged to 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  lend to enterprises in the euro area. At the same time, the uncertainty about the liquidity situation of banks is reduced, so that banks can increasingly lend each other money again, even across the borders of the Member States. The focus of this instrument on the real economy is particularly illustrated by the fact that not only in the first step is the existing loan portfolio crucial for the allocation of liquidity, but also in the second step the trend over the period of the transaction will be considered. Thus, banks are required to expand further their lending to business and households in the coming months and years. To reinforce these measures, the Governing Council decided last week to start purchasing asset-backed securities (ABS) as well as covered bonds, such as Pfandbriefe, in October. The details of these two programmes will be announced after the Council meeting in early October. The decision to start buying ABS is the first result of intensive preparations that are still ongoing. For me it is clear that these measures are aimed at the monetary policy transmission channel. They should not be equated with a broad programme of quantitative easing (QE), nor with overtures to it. Moreover, the economic logic of the Anglo-Saxon QE programmes cannot be applied one to one to a bank-financed economic system like that of the euro area. Also, QE effectiveness would be questionable in the light of the eroded yields of marketable securities. The surge in the markets for interest-bearing securities would also strain the soundness of our balance sheet, should we make large-scale purchases in such an environment. And it goes almost without saying that the purchase of government bonds would raise considerable institutional, instrumental and legal issues. Although some are apparently pushing in this direction, this option would only be considered on two conditions: 1. if prices stay at their current very low level for too long, and 2. strict compliance with our monetary policy mandate. But back to the market for ABS. We have been looking at this closely for some time. We believe that it could be an important channel for increased lending to small and medium-sized enterprises. Because of their size, SMEs cannot generally issue bonds. If banks now get a chance to securitise loans to SMEs, and to sell them to other investors, a major obstacle to long-term lending to these enterprises is removed, namely the risk of non-payment and the low liquidity of these loans in difficult times. A functioning ABS market can therefore make an important contribution to ensuring that our monetary policy has an impact right across the real economy. This brings me back to my initial hypothesis – namely that monetary policy in the euro area may work better if other policy areas play their part. Because the dynamics of the ABS market are significantly influenced by the regulatory framework. And there is still work to be done here. Let me say quite clearly: no one wants to have the complex, opaque products of the pre-crisis years. Also, repackagings of the umpteenth tranche of a financial derivative should be things of the past. No one wants to promote a certain class of product just for its own sake. And securitised sub-prime mortgages in the United States certainly made an inglorious contribution to the emergence of the financial crisis. But the regulatory framework should be appropriate for the actual risk. And in this respect there are significant differences between current and previous securitisations and between the experiences in the US and those in Europe. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Since the start of the 2007–08 financial crisis, the default rates of European ABS were on average between 0.6% and 1.5%. In the US over the same period, they were on average 9.3% to 18.4%. European SME ABS are even further below these default rates, at about 0.1%. The current rules lump all ABS together and are much too conservative. They effectively question their existence. Under the current regulatory conditions simple, transparent ABS built on real assets face almost as many problems as much more complex financial products. The ECB has therefore, in cooperation with the Bank of England, made a number of proposals for a better functioning securitisation market in the European Union. That this approach has been welcomed in principle by the governments of the Member States is shown by the joint working paper of the finance ministries in Berlin and Paris. The proposals are derived in part from the quality and transparency demands that the central banks place on ABS, which can be deposited as collateral in monetary policy operations. And because we, as a central bank, have to protect our balance sheet, these demands have always been very high. The ABS market is therefore a good example of how financial market policy can benefit our monetary policy and can also contribute to the recovery in the euro area. Thus, two goals of good financial market policy in the European context can be named: it should be growth-friendly and it should support a successful implementation of monetary policy. There is, of course, a third goal, which goes back to before the financial crisis: maintaining financial stability and mitigating systemic risks. From the banking union to the capital markets union For the banking sector, this triad has been understood and implemented to a large extent, although some work still remains to be done. The banking union with the Single Supervisory Mechanism at the ECB is a milestone in the history of European integration. Our comprehensive balance sheet valuation and our stress test will bring about greater transparency and a healthier banking system in the euro area. The Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) will play its part too. It will lessen the risk that taxpayers in future will have to foot the bill to rescue banks in trouble. In addition, it will continue to tackle the fragmentation by sustainably reducing the interdependence of banks and governments. At the same time, with the Single Supervisory Mechanism under construction, it’s becoming clear that the banking union is not a system closed in on itself. Rather, Europe’s banking supervision is also dependent on standards in other areas that are as uniform and transparent as possible. Some of you may be aware of the discussion about the definition of so-called “bad loans” in the context of the comprehensive assessment. Banking supervision, which has to work permanently with 18 different national regulatory regimes is neither particularly efficient, nor can it achieve the goal of comparable cross-border bank balance sheets in the long run. Thus, in the banking sector the question arises of how far we need to think in future beyond the banking union in order to achieve a functioning internal market for financial services. To answer this question, in my opinion three dimensions play a role. The first dimension is the opening of the market itself. In this regard, we have already achieved a great deal within the EU. The second dimension is the introduction of common uniform regulatory standards for the internal financial market. The third dimension consists of common institutions which enforce these regulatory standards. How much integration do we need therefore beyond the banking system? For example, isn’t it a one-sided approach only to tackle fragmentation in respect of the banking system, and how do we handle the shadow banking system in this context? If banking supervision is becoming European, can payment systems continue to be monitored nationally? How do we manage to give small and medium-sized enterprises access to capital markets beyond the banks, if those markets are fragmented and regulated in a non-uniform way? 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  All these questions call for a coherent response. In my view, this response could be the further development of the banking union and of the piecemeal regulation of the financial system into a real capital markets union at European Union level. Financial markets are complex and a capital markets union would affect a large number of different areas. Allow me therefore, in conclusion, to draw attention to three points. First, we must be certain that a stringent regulation of the banking system does not lead to a shifting of bad risks into the non-banking sectors, without ensuring that they cannot cause systemic damage there. Apart from the fact that the term “shadow banking” is a particularly unfortunate one, I regard transparency as being very important here. At the same time, only those areas should be regulated which can in fact trigger systemic risk. Innovations in the financial sector should not be blocked per se. Second, many financial instruments are not uniformly European and are sometimes insufficiently comparable because of a lack of standards and a lack of transparency. I have already mentioned the problem of ABS. The lack of proper information in this area is a problem for SMEs’ access to credit. Here and in relation to many other financial instruments, regulatory actions can help to support the market. As I also mentioned, the joint paper by the Bank of England and the ECB may provide a good basis here. Third, in the field of payment systems and securities settlement there are also challenges that a capital markets union must address: despite much progress over the past decade in payment systems, securities settlement in the euro area remains fragmented, inefficient and not very customer-friendly. This is not just a problem for smaller businesses, for whom adapting to different conditions in the Member States often entails high costs, but also for the integration and functioning of the internal market as a whole. Possible solutions include harmonised European market infrastructures for retail and large-value payment systems and the processing of securities transactions, as well as a coordinated and more harmonised monitoring of critical market infrastructures. In all these areas, in which the Eurosystem is competent, relevant initiatives were launched several years ago and have already made significant progress. In retail payments, for example, since August 2014 there has been no distinction between national credit transfers and direct debits of businesses and individuals, and cross-border ones. This, and the fact that the IBAN has become a part of our daily lives, shows how far we have progressed in the field of retail payments. The Single Euro Payments Area, SEPA, is an important European integration project from which all businesses and individuals in Europe benefit directly. A comparable degree of integration would be also desirable for card payments, so that they are not discriminated against by virtual border posts within Europe. In the long term, there should be no “roaming charges” for European payments. Progress has been made, but many challenges remain before the euro area can become a “single euro payment and settlement space”. These include barriers that result from differences in market practices and standards as well as tax, accounting and legal systems in the Member States. The removal of these barriers lies outside the competence of the Eurosystem. Other players must also take steps to make the capital markets union a reality. These are just three examples, but a genuine capital markets union could go much further, of course. Differences in all these areas nurture fragmentation and could be addressed within the capital markets union project. In addition, there is also the question of the actors which could play a part. What functions could be performed, for instance, by the European supervisory authorities EBA, ESMA and EIOPA, whose activities and tasks are currently being checked in Brussels? And not least, we must identify the areas in which the EU can take the initiative and those in which the Member States can be active. I am very aware that these ambitious proposals cannot be implemented overnight. But the fact that the future President of the European Commission has already taken up the idea 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  makes me optimistic. The challenge in the coming months will be to create a political awareness of the enormous economic importance of this highly technical area. Ladies and Gentlemen, Late last year, Helmut Schmidt, the publisher of Die Zeit and former German Chancellor, said that it’s not written in any Bible that the European Union will last until the end of the 21th century in its present form. It was an expression of concern, but he hoped that he would be wrong. This logic also works the other way around: because the global environment in which we operate has changed radically and because Europe is today facing quite different challenges on the world’s markets than it did 20 or 30 years ago, the Union also has to steadily adapt. It is good that Die Zeit has today brought us together here, in the spirit of Helmut Schmidt, to discuss these developments in financial market policy. And I am convinced that the capital markets union could play an important part in making Europe fit for the global challenges that the former Chancellor has been analysing for many years. Thank you for your attention. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Salvatore Rossi: Finance for growth Speech by Mr Salvatore Rossi, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy, at Banca Popolare di Sondrio, Sondrio, 12 September 2014. *      *      * Growth Italy has long strayed from the path of economic growth. Common sense tells us this is so and the data confirm it. In the last six years the recession has doubled the rate of unemployment and eroded 11 percentage points from per capita GDP. But our problems go back much further than that: in 2008, on the eve of the financial crisis, the average amount of goods and services produced by Italian workers was basically unchanged from 1995. In the same period other countries, spurred by the technological paradigm shift of ICT, had seen their productivity rates soar. The strong growth in employment that was nevertheless recorded in Italy in the pre-crisis years, favoured by the introduction of more flexible work contracts, proved insufficient to offset the effect of the stagnation of productivity on households’ disposable income. At the outbreak of the crisis, for the average household this was at the same level as in the mid-1990s and only the progressive reduction of the saving rate had enabled modest growth in consumption. The diminishing ability to generate income heralds a decline in living standards, both with respect to this country’s past and to the world’s main players. This is all the more worrying when one considers that in forty years’ time the ratio of people of working age (20–69) to elderly retirees will have halved, from 4 to 2. Even just to maintain per capita living standards at their current levels would require an increase in labour productivity of 25 per cent. More jobs, more output: but how to achieve both together? Certainly, the recession has been keeping Italian consumers and investors in a state of suspension for too long now, more because of uncertainty and poor confidence than a lack of income. Stimulus must therefore come from macroeconomic policy. At European level, monetary policy is already acting as a spur and is stepping up its action.1 At national level, fiscal policy can only change the mix: fewer taxes, less unproductive expenditure. Most of the government’s efforts should go to tackling the long-standing failings of our society, those that condition Italy’s entrepreneurial spirit. Jobs and productivity are only formed within businesses. The State cannot create them directly and would not know how to. The rules of good business have been neglected in Italy for almost half a century: by many entrepreneurs reluctant to expand their firms, and by public and political opinion prone to defending small and large rents. A good business is one that researches and develops new products and new methods, and pursues new markets. In the globalized economy, dominated by technologies that convey information and alter consumer tastes at the speed of light, the small, mature firm that is typically Italian does not have a very bright future; sometimes it does not even have a present. Of the main European countries, Italy is the one with the widest productivity gap between small and medium- large businesses.2 Businesses start out small everywhere, but                                                 1 ECB (2014). 2 Based on data provided by the Structural Business Statistics of Eurostat, in 2010 added value per employee in Italian firms with more than 250 workers was approximately three times that of firms with fewer than 10 workers; in equivalent firms in Spain it was double that of firms with fewer than 10 workers, in Germany one and a half times, and in France more than one fourth greater. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  then they either die or grow rapidly. In Italy, if they do not die, they remain in the small-size limbo for a long time: the proportion of small, mature firms (those in operation for at least ten years) is over 50 per cent here, compared with 45 per cent in Spain and 40 per cent in the United States and France.3  Encouraging new start-ups, convincing existing entrepreneurs to expand their firms by separating them from the founding family’s fortunes, rewarding courage and inventiveness, and discouraging rents: these are the priorities of economic policy in Italy today. Reforming the bloated fiscal and legislative systems and unravelling the tangle of red tape that litters the path of entrepreneurs would enable Italy to move up several places in the global Doing Business rankings and spark a virtuous circle between favourable expectations that then become self-fulfilling; it would free the energies that this country still has in abundance. Finance4 In the meantime, however, the recession is burning up resources and hopes. In the political debate reported in Italy’s daily press, the hunt is on for the culprits of the failed economic recovery of these months. Banks are a recurring target, accused by some of denying credit to firms and households, thereby impeding the country’s exit from the crisis. But for such an accusation to make sense, first the fact has to be established and then, to use the legal terms, it must be proved that there was negligence or malice aforethought, in other words that banks – currently lumped together in a general category – are refusing to lend to the economy either because they would rather use the money available for unspecified financial adventures (malice) or out of incompetence or laziness (negligence). Let’s look at the facts by taking two snapshots of the situation of bank lending, one at the end of June 2008, immediately before the financial crisis erupted fully, and the other at the end of June 2014. In this period total outstanding bank loans to Italian firms declined from €860 billion to €830 billion, a lower level certainly, but not by much. In the initial phase of the crisis, however, credit had risen to over €910 billion in December 2011, so the reduction with respect to the peak was €80 billion. As a share of GDP (53 per cent), though, bank lending today is still higher than, say, in Germany and France. Lending to households, instead, expanded in the six years, from €520 to €600 billion. In the meantime, wholesale funding, primarily by foreign banks and large international investors, fell dramatically, from almost €800 to €550 billion, mainly owing in the last three years to the loss of confidence in Italy following the global markets’ reassessment of our sovereign debt. Banks have managed to combat the drying up of foreign funding by increasing domestic retail funding and above all by participating in the long-term refinancing operations of the European Central Bank. Without these, the credit squeeze would have been much more severe. This was not the main cause of the deterioration, however. Due to the persistence of the recession between 2008 and 2013 the total stock of non-performing loans to firms and households increased by just over €100 billion to €320 billion or by 16 per cent of total outstanding loans. As far as it is possible to understand from a comparison of data that reflect very different national definitions, this is higher than the average level in Europe. The outcome, partly owing to increased reserve requirements, has been a dramatic fall in bank profits, while the riskiness of firms’ new credit demand has increased sharply.                                                   3 Criscuolo, Gal and Menon (2014). 4 This section reprises and develops a line of thinking elaborated on in recent months by Visco (2013, 2014), Rossi (2013), and Panetta (2014). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Furthermore, in recent years the banks have had to strengthen their capital bases. They were prompted to do so even more than by regulations and supervisors5 by the recession itself (in that capital must be proportional to the riskiness of assets) and by the markets, where confidence in the banks most exposed to more risky sovereigns was faltering. Over the six years Italian banks expanded their core tier one capital by €50 billion, from €134 billion to €184 billion. This capitalization drive was sustained by raising equity on the market while at the same time retaining earnings – an arduous combination, as potential subscribers of the capital increases had to be offered the prospect of good future returns. The banks’ shareholders were called on to bear the brunt of the problems of debtor firms, with loan write-downs totalling nearly €140 billion. From the banks’ standpoint, the situation can be summarized as follows: before the crisis bank credit was abundant because funding on the wholesale markets (mostly abroad) was easy and because given low borrower risk no massive loan loss provisions were required. With crisis and recession, both of these conditions vanished, so the rational course for a bank, in the interest first and foremost of the savers who entrust their resources for prudent investment, is to slow or reduce lending to the firms perceived as riskier and step up investment in other, less risky and more profitable assets, such as government securities. Banks’ deleveraging was intensified by the sharp decline in credit demand from the less risky firms, many of which cut back or suspended planned investments. This straightforward analysis excludes the highly imaginative theory of “malice aforethought”. Let us now consider a second hypothesis, namely “negligence”, i.e. the banks’ culpable incapacity for sagacious, farsighted assessment of individual borrowers’ creditworthiness. Here, judgment must be more nuanced. The heterogeneity of behaviour among banks makes generic, summary judgment inadvisable. If we nevertheless intend to consider the system as a whole, it would seem to me that Italy is in the grip of a perverse interaction between the structural characteristics of the corporate system and those of the financial system. In too many cases Italian firms are not only small but financially fragile and bank- dependent. Their financial leverage rose prior to the crisis and is now high by international standards (44 per cent). Two thirds of their debt is bank debt. These features are more pronounced among the smaller firms, precisely those most severely affected by the tightening credit supply. For that matter, the typical features of Italian small businesses – diminutive size, little commitment of shareholder capital, lack of transparency – make it nearly impracticable for them to access the bond and equity markets directly, even if they wanted to (which they rarely do). For its part, the Italian financial system is notoriously bank-centred. At the end of last year bank loans accounted for 40 per cent of the total financial liabilities of households and firms (financial debt plus corporate equity), compared with 15 per cent in the United States, 23 per cent in France, and 30 per cent in the United Kingdom. Only Germany, another “bank-centred” economy, had a share comparable to Italy’s. Equity investment by venture capital and private equity funds, which specialize in start-ups and stimulating the growth of small businesses, amounts to 0.2 per cent of GDP in Italy, as in Germany, or half as much as in France and a fifth as much as in Britain. For many years the Italian banking system favoured the family-based, fragmented structure of its business customers because this gave them positional rents, sheltering them from competition from other sources of funds, namely the financial and equity markets. Now the banking system has become polarized: on the one hand, major players that tend to                                                 5 Many European banks brought forward their adjustment to the new Basel 3 regulatory framework and then readied themselves for the comprehensive assessment exercise under the Eurosystem’s Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  concentrate on the largest customers, using quantitative risk measurement methods; and on the other, a vast array of smaller banks, serving mainly small customers whose accounts are often inadequate and opaque, and accordingly require direct knowledge of the business. Such knowledge can be gained in two ways – by personal relationships or by analytical tools for assessing the firm’s technology and market characteristics. Both are useful, but each has a specific drawback. Personal relationships are more approximate and riskier, analytical tools costlier; in particular, as the latter have variable as well as overhead costs, they may be prohibitive where the business and the loan are very small. Add the consideration that in the event of default the inefficiency of Italian civil justice sometimes makes it uneconomic even to initiate a credit recovery action, so that banks will write off virtually the entire amount of a small non-performing loan, even if the expected loss, measured objectively, is limited. This practice impacts on banks’ lending decisions and the interest rates they charge. This situation would appear to constitute a “market failure”. The private sector parties, borrowers and lenders, are incapable of making the credit mechanism work efficiently because each responds to incentives and disincentives that clash with the general interest. Small businesses want to stay as “opaque” as possible; indeed, they are accustomed to understating their actual earnings for tax reasons. And in some instances banks do not procure adequate facilities or methods for evaluating firms, it being more convenient, and in the short run less costly, to rely on personal relationships. The outcome is adverse selection and credit rationing.6 In some of the most pathological cases there have been outright bank failures. In short, if the hypothesis of “negligence” is well founded, it applies to both sides of the credit market. This vicious circle, in which ultimately everyone loses and nobody gains, must be broken. It is a life-or-death question for the many Italian SMEs that, while severely strained by recession, still retain their markets, innovative capacity and technological assets, and have the potential to recover. Half of our GDP is produced by small to medium-sized firms with fewer than 250 employees. These SMEs must be helped to grow, not left to die when they are not in fact terminally ill. First of all, they should be enabled to get off the IV support of bank credit alone and learn to raise funds in the market as well. This will take time. In the short term no more than a fraction of bank credit can be readily replaced. So this market failure must be remedied, to the benefit of all, by public intervention. But what form should that intervention take? In any case, public intervention must be respectful of the market and compatible with the budget constraints. The main tools available are government guarantees7 and securitization. A very substantial contribution could also come from legislative and regulatory intervention to shorten credit recovery time by making bankruptcy procedures simpler and more efficient, and the securities collateral system more flexible.8  Public guarantees offset the information shortfall between lenders and SMEs without taking the former’s place in assessing creditworthiness and without being a burden on the budget in the immediate, but only after bankruptcy is announced and within the limit of the ratio of insolvencies to the total guarantees granted. A good example is already provided by the Central Guarantee Fund operating under the aegis of the Ministry for Economic Development, which partially guarantees banks that grant loans to small firms and participates in the latter’s screening. Since 2009 the Fund has granted guarantees on loans amounting to more than €40 billion. The scale of the Fund’s operations could be further increased.                                                 6 See, among others, Panetta (2014) and the classic Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) cited therein. 7 Agenda possibile (2013), Panetta (2014). 8 Haselmann, Pistor and Vig (2010). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Securitizations serve essentially to distribute the risk inherent in bank loans to SMEs among a large number of bank and non-bank institutional investors. In view of the small size of the loans, it is necessary to create asset-backed securities, i.e. packages of loans in the form of bonds, of which it is not too difficult to assess the quality, and place the various tranches with different investors according to their risk appetite. Operations can be carried out by the originator banks themselves or by other financial entities. These instruments could also be backed in part by public guarantees. Notable among the possible investors are insurance companies, which are often hard put in the present phase of the cycle to find desirable investments for their technical provisions in terms of risk/return and maturity. To develop such a market some regulatory problems must be overcome, firstly at international level. The global financial crisis has discredited instruments such as ABS, which were abused by pushing their complexity and opacity to the limit. But the abuses can be forbidden without eliminating the instrument itself, which retains its rational basis. The ECB has launched a very large programme for the purchase of simple and transparent ABS in order among other objectives to facilitate the financing of SMEs. The Bank of Italy and Ivass are following the matter closely. With great rapidity this summer Ivass drafted amendments to the regulations on insurance companies’ investments consistent with the new legislative provisions introduced recently to increase the competitiveness of the Italian economy. The new prudential regulations, aimed at achieving greater diversification of risk, will also allow insurance companies to grant credit directly subject to well-defined limits and conditions. The second public consultation, made necessary by the innovations introduced during the conversion of the competitiveness decree law, is drawing to a close; Ivass will shortly issue the new regulations. However, markets able to channel large volumes of financial resources from non-bank investors to SMEs cannot easily be created from one day to the next. Even when the regulatory questions have been settled, there will still be the problem of the information asymmetry between borrower firms and investors. Those who, better than others, know or understand the present and prospective conditions of firms, first and foremost the banks that originated the loans, therefore have an essential role to play. It must not be forgotten, however, that in Italy, as I mentioned earlier, the main problem regarding the functionality of the system lies in firms’ financial fragility. The most important task of public action is therefore to push firms towards equity financing rather than additional borrowing, using every possible means, regulatory and fiscal. But bank borrowing too can be made more rational by examining its technical forms. For example, traditional overdrafts are so widespread in Italy that they stand out by international standards. The fact that they do not establish a time limit for the credit actually granted creates problems for the calculation of interest and lessens their eligibility as collateral; in order to accept such loans as collateral, the Bank of Italy has recently asked for the inclusion of specific contractual clauses. Using finance to the advantage of growth The question of what are the determinants of economic growth in the long term has been at the centre of economic analysis since this came into being as a separate science. More than half a century ago attention was focused on productivity and technical progress as the decisive factors for growth, demoting the accumulation of physical capital, which had previously been considered the motor of capitalist growth.9 Today a new conceptual leap is being attempted, moving up the scale of causes and effects; searching, in other words, for what determines productivity and technical progress, and finding it in the ability of a firm, an                                                 9 Schumpeter (1934), Solow (1956, 1957). There then followed numerous theoretical and empirical refinements of Solow’s model, such as Romer (1990), Grossman and Helpman (1991) and Aghion and Howitt (1992). 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  economy, a society to “learn” continuously,10 in dynamism, in endogenous inventiveness, in the taste for intellectual and entrepreneurial challenges.11 Such ability may be found embedded in the culture and customs of a nation, as a result of a favourable historical confluence. Or it can be constructed, fed, by reasoned political action, as well as by entrepreneurs’ creative impulse. This is a complex task that involves all the different aspects of associative life, first and foremost the educational system; and not only this, but also the legal system, the condition of competition and the efficiency of the public administration. And finance? The financial system can be an engine of prosperity or a cause of backsliding. The history of economies, both old and new, has given us examples of one and the other situation. The whole world is still reeling from the destructive potential that finance revealed six years ago. It chooses how and where to distribute the resources: the incentives that orient these choices influence economic growth.12  To be able to make these choices correctly, the financial system must “know” the corporate system. But what does financial system mean? For an Anglo-American it basically means markets, and the whole world of analysts, consultants, speculative investors and institutional investors that wheel about them. For a European, and even more for an Italian, it means banks. Markets and banks have different ways of knowing the firms that require finance. Markets can only gather and process data. Banks, in addition to data, can acquire direct knowledge of firms. A mass of studies and analyses in the last quarter of a century have argued that a broad and sophisticated financial system is essential for economic growth. It is a literature that is considerably influenced by the Anglo-American model, which sees markets as the heart of the system. After the “big chill” brought on by the global crisis, the basic assumption – the importance of finance for growth – has not been eroded, but there have been increasing qualifications and some rethinkings, for example on the recognition of an important role for intermediation, especially in getting credit to SMEs.13  In Italy, as we have seen, the share of sources of funding other than bank credit is particularly small and should certainly be encouraged to grow. Our traditional banking activities can find new life, however, in a virtuous rediscovery of the mission to get to know firms, in particular the smallest ones. All the mechanisms for gathering and analysing data on firms need to be strengthened, including the ways in which that in formation is publicized and shared. Banks must increase their level of technical knowledge, including expertise in products, production methods, markets, about the firms applying for loans, particularly in this recession, when loan applications tend to be for generic purposes and less tied to investment plans, which are easier to evaluate objectively.14  We are moving towards a different financial system from the one we are used to. Policies, laws and practices must be geared to allowing firms – especially innovative ones – to have more of their own capital, paid in by the owners or from specialized funds, but also raised on the capital market.15 For this reason Italian SMEs must take a decisive step towards ensuring                                                 10 As Stiglitz and Greenwald say (2014), starting from Arrow’s lesson (1962), “learn to learn, learning”. 11 Phelps (2013). 12 Levine (2014). 13 See, for example, Beck (2013) and CBI (2012). 14 Bain & Company and IIF (2013). 15 According to our calculations, today in Italy there are 500 enterprises that meet the criteria and would benefit by being listed on the stock exchange. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  that information about their status is reliable and widely available. The level of bank debt will have to be reduced. Banks in turn must accelerate a change that has already begun for some of them. They too are entering a new phase in which it is essential for them to be very well capitalized because of the risks of which we are now all well aware: they must therefore satisfy the general conditions of profitability, transparency and good governance that will allow them to obtain funding at competitive rates (to pass on to lending rates, reducing them) and, if necessary, to raise new capital rapidly and in sufficient quantity. Besides improving their capacity to understand which companies to lend money to, they must also add financial consultancy to their traditional lending activities, thus helping firms to decide the best level and composition of their financial liabilities and supporting their entry to the markets. These new services could build income streams that would at least offset the loss of a part of traditional banking activities. Conclusion We Italians told ourselves from the outset that we were not to blame for the global financial crisis, and it was true: on the eve of the flare-up, we had a financial and a banking system that were largely immune to the problems famously discovered in the Anglo-American systems. Our fault was another: over the preceding decade we allowed the economy to lose strength until it stopped growing, without taking steps to counter a trend whose deep and long-term nature we ignored despite warnings from some quarters. The outcome is before our eyes: we are one of the economies worst hit by the recessive effects of the financial crisis. We worry about the timing and strength of the recovery, about how our country will fare in ten years’ time, about the employment prospects and future well-being of the generation on the threshold of adulthood. A prosperous society knows how to ensure a constant improvement in the quality of life of its members. First and foremost by promoting employment, that is by creating the conditions so that anyone who wants to work, especially at the start of adult life, can find or create a job that is not too unpleasant or ill-paid and that as far as possible fulfils their vocation. Working allows people to plan their future, to access a variety of high quality goods and services, and to grow as a person. This is what we should understand by “development”: a constant, innovative increase in the variety and quality of everything that makes life better, starting from a secure environment, cultural heritage and natural landscape. A well-designed statistical system can calculate national income in such a way as to include the quality of goods and services and not only their quantity. In any case, a static vision of a society that can be crystallized in an eternal present, maintaining resources and production capacity unchanged, is naive and has repeatedly been disproved by history. Stasis is not possible: either we go forward or we will decline, and only in the former case can we mitigate social inequalities.16  Economic policy today in the advanced countries must first distinguish the vicissitudes of the economic cycle from structural trends and act on both with the appropriate instruments. Employment is the first challenge. An important role in promoting employment and participation in the labour market and aiming for levels and trends in pay that reconcile competitiveness with workers’ aspirations falls to both macroeconomic policies, aimed at restoring steady expansion of aggregate demand and the economy, and structural policies designed to remedy the age-old defects of the labour market and more generally of the                                                 16 Picketty (2014). 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  economic system, which pre-dated the crisis and were merely aggravated by its assault.17 Structural problems and policies are particularly significant in a number of countries, including our own. For our economy, the return to sustained development cannot be taken for granted, nor is it easily within our reach. Italian history from the Renaissance to the present has witnessed alternating periods of rapid progress and sometimes long phases of stagnation and decline. However, we have no lack of energy, ideas and projects. The financial system is central to the allocation of resources among alternative uses whose contribution to the productivity of firms and the system must be evaluated; this, as I have tried to show in these remarks, is another area of forthcoming structural changes to be assimilated and encouraged. Confidence must be restored on all fronts, the tapestry of legislation, practices, and principles that govern economic activity must be regenerated. The process has begun. We must all become convinced that defending thousands of narrow individual interests, even when they are legitimate, has to take second place where the ability of a national community to generate its own progress is at stake. References Agenda possibile (2013), “Relazione del Gruppo di lavoro in materia economico-sociale ed europea istituito il 30 marzo 2013 dal Presidente della Repubblica”, www.quirinale.it/qrnw/statico/attivita/consultazioni/c_20mar2013/gruppi_lavoro/2013–04-12_ agenda_possibile.pdf. Aghion. P. and P. Howitt (1992), “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction”, Econometrica, 60(2). Arrow, K. (1962), “The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing”, Review of Economic Studies, 29. Bain & Company and IIF (2013), Restoring financing and growth to Europe’s SMEs, www.bain.com/Images/REPORT_Restoring_financing_and_growth_to_Europe%27s_SMEs.pdf. Beck, T. (2013), Finance and growth: too much of a good thing ?, www.voxeu.org/ article/finance-and-growth . CBI (2012), Financing for growth, http://www.cbi.org.uk/media/1673105/cbi_ financing_for_growth.pdf . Criscuolo, C., P. N. Gal and C. Menon (2014), “The Dynamics of Employment Growth: New Evidence from 18 Countries”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 14, OECD Publishing. Draghi, M. (2014), Unemployment in the euro area, www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2014/html/sp140822.en.html. ECB (2014), Introductory statement to the press conference (with Q&A), 04/09/2014, www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2014/html/is140904.en.html. Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (1991), Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, MIT Press.                                                 17 This was the main point of discussion at the latest meeting organized by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City on 22–23 August 2014 at Jackson Hole. See, in particular, the speeches by Yellen (2014) and Draghi (2014). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  Haselmann, R., K. Pistor and V. Vig (2010), “How law affects lending”, Review of Financial Studies, 23(2). Levine, R. (2014), Finance, long-run growth, and economic opportunity, http://www.voxeu.org/article/finance-long-run-growth-and-economic-opportunity. Panetta, F. (2014), Un sistema finanziario per la crescita, http://www.bancaditalia.it/interventi/intaltri_mdir/finanza_rossi/rossi_141113.pdf. Phelps, E. (2013), Mass Flourishing, Princeton University Press.  Piketty, T. (2014), Capital in the 21st Century, Harvard University Press. Romer, P. (1990), “Endogenous Technological Change”, Journal of Political Economy, 98 (5). Rossi, S. (2014), Finanza e crescita dopo la crisi, www.bancaditalia.it/interventi/intaltri_mdir/ finanza_rossi/rossi_141113.pdf . Solow, R. M. (1956), “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 70 (1). Solow, R. M. (1957), “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 39(3). Schumpeter, J. A. (1934), Theory of Economic Development; Stiglitz, J. and Weiss, A. (1981), “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information”, The American Economic Review. Stiglitz J. and B. Greenwald (2014), Creating a Learning Society: A New Approach to Growth, Development, and Social Progress, Columbia University Press. Visco, I. (2014), Considerazioni finali sul 2013, www.bancaditalia.it/interventi/integov/2014/ cf_13/cf_13/cf13_considerazioni_finali.pdf VV. AA. (2013), Agenda possibile, Report by the Group on Socio-economic and European Matters set up on 30 March 2013 by the President of the Republic of Italy, www.quirinale.it/qrnw/statico/attivita/consultazioni/c_20mar2013/gruppi_lavoro/2013–04-12_ agenda_possibile.pdf. Yellen, J.L. (2014), Labor Market Dynamics and Monetary Policy, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20140822a.htm. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Kikuo Iwata: Japan’s economy and monetary policy Speech by Mr Kikuo Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Ishikawa, 10 September 2014. *      *      * Accompanying slides can be found at the end of the speech. Introduction It is my pleasure to have the opportunity today to exchange views with administrative, financial, and business leaders in Ishikawa Prefecture. I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan’s Kanazawa Branch. The Bank of Japan decided on the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) in January last year. The Bank then in April introduced aggressive monetary easing called quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) to achieve the price stability target. The Bank has been pursuing QQE since then. One year and five months have passed since the Bank introduced QQE, and the policy has been having its intended effects so far. The impact of QQE is expected to become stronger going forward, making it particularly important for the Bank to ensure the public fully understands its policy. Today, before exchanging views with you, I would like to explain the current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy. I will then talk about the background behind QQE. I.  Current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy A.  Economic activity Let me start by explaining the current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economic activity. Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately as a trend, although a decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike can be observed. The GDP statistics released this week show that after growing strongly at a rate of 1.5 percent quarter-on-quarter in the January–March quarter, real GDP fell substantially, by 1.8 percent, in the April–June quarter (Chart 1). Because of the large decline in the April–June quarter, there appears to be some skepticism whether the economic recovery remains intact. However, since the increase in demand in the January–March quarter was very large as consumers brought purchases forward, it was only to be expected that the subsequent decline in demand and hence in real GDP in the April–June quarter would also be large. What matters is the mechanism underlying the economic recovery and not temporary factors, and the Bank judges that the virtuous cycle of economic activity remains firmly intact in both the household and corporate sectors. Let me first touch on the virtuous cycle in the household sector and then move on to the virtuous cycle in the corporate sector. Household sector Looking at the environment facing the household sector, the labor market continues to improve steadily. The unemployment rate in July registered at 3.8 percent, while the active job openings-to-applicants ratio was 1.10, and both have thus returned to the levels prior to the global financial crisis (Chart 2). The employment conditions DI in the June Tankan Survey – the Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan – shows that more and more firms, particularly in the non-manufacturing sector, feel that there is a labor shortage. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The year-on-year rate of increase in the number of regular employees has been around 1.5 percent (Chart 3). With the labor market becoming tighter, hourly cash earnings of part-time employees have been increasing on a year-on-year basis. Moreover, scheduled cash earnings have increased slightly, indicating that the impact of base pay raises in the annual wage negotiations this spring is starting to appear in the data, and non-scheduled cash earnings and summer bonuses have increased. Against this background, the year-on-year rate of change in monthly cash earnings of full-time employees has been positive. As a result, the annual rate of increase in the nominal wage per employee has gradually accelerated. Finally, employee income – that is, nominal wages multiplied by the number of employees – has been growing at around 2 percent year-on-year for some months, and the rate of growth further accelerated in July. With the employment and income situation improving steadily, private consumption has remained resilient as a trend, and the effects of the decline in demand following the consumption tax hike have gradually begun to wane. In interviews, some firms expressed the view that since the front-loading of purchases – especially of durable goods such as automobiles – had been very large, the subsequent decline was also likely to be prolonged. However, many department stores and food supermarkets, for example, report that the margin of the decline in demand has been narrowing gradually. Looking ahead, the labor market is likely to continue tightening as the economy continues to recover and, as I will discuss later, corporate profits are expected to improve and inflation expectations are likely to increase. Therefore, the year-on-year rate of increase in nominal wages is expected to gradually show a clear uptrend. Against the backdrop of these employment and income developments, the virtuous cycle of economic activity in the household sector is expected to remain in place. Nevertheless, the Bank will continue to carefully examine how the decline in real income that the consumption tax hike has brought about affects households’ spending behavior. Corporate sector Next, I will explain the virtuous cycle in the corporate sector. Exports have shown some weakness and the recovery in exports has been delayed. That being said, as I will explain later in more detail, exports are expected to head for a moderate increase. Despite the sluggishness in exports, the virtuous cycle in the corporate sector has remained in place. In fact, corporate profits have continued to improve. Looking at listed companies’ results for the April–June quarter of this year, consolidated profits have continued to rise, mainly due to the good performance of overseas sales, and have generally been at favorable levels. Business sentiment has also remained favorable on the whole, although it temporarily deteriorated – particularly in the non-manufacturing sector – due to the effects of the decline in demand following the consumption tax hike. Business sentiment among large manufacturing firms has remained on an upward trend despite the weakness in exports, reflecting the fact that profitability continues to be favorable. With corporate profits continuing to improve and business sentiment being generally favorable, business fixed investment, particularly in the non-manufacturing sector, has increased moderately. Moreover, even in the manufacturing sector, which had been lagging, a clear recovery in business fixed investment can be observed (Chart 4). With corporate profits continuing their improving trend, business fixed investment is projected to follow a moderate increasing trend as the effects of monetary easing grow stronger through the decline in expected real interest rates. The June Tankan survey shows that aggregate investment in fiscal 2014 is scheduled to increase. Therefore, the virtuous cycle of economic activity in the corporate sector is expected to remain intact against the backdrop of the improvement in corporate profits and favorable business sentiment. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Outlook for and concerns about economic activity Japan’s economy is expected to continue its moderate recovery trend, since the virtuous cycle of economic activity in both the household and corporate sectors is likely to remain in place, as I just mentioned. At the July Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM), the Bank conducted an interim assessment of the April 2014 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report) through fiscal 2016. Looking at the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts, real GDP is projected to grow at 1.0 percent in fiscal 2014, 1.5 percent in fiscal 2015, and 1.3 percent in fiscal 2016 (Chart 5). Regarding the outlook for economic activity, a potential concern is developments in exports. As I just mentioned, Japan’s exports have shown some weakness. The recent weakness in exports is essentially due to cyclical factors, mainly the sluggishness in emerging economies. At the same time, the unexpectedly large slowdown of the U.S. economy in the January–March quarter of this year due to the unusually severe winter weather seems to have affected exports with a lag, putting downward pressure on them through early spring. In addition, a possible structural factor why the recovery in Japan’s exports has lagged behind the recovery in overseas economies that may have played a certain role is the accelerated relocation of production overseas by Japanese manufacturing firms. Looking ahead, with structural problems such as fiscal and current account deficits persisting in some emerging economies, economic growth in emerging economies, and particularly growth in domestic demand, is expected to remain subdued for the time being. On the other hand, growth in the advanced economies such as the U.S. and European economies is expected to accelerate, while the Chinese economy is expected to continue to register stable growth. Growth in these economies will likely spread to emerging economies, so that the growth rate of overseas economies overall is expected to accelerate gradually. This is also confirmed by the World Economic Outlook Update published in July by the International Monetary Fund: global economic growth, which slowed to 3.2 percent in 2013, is projected to accelerate gradually to 3.4 percent in 2014 and 4.0 percent in 2015 (Chart 6). Therefore, the cyclical factors responsible for the weakness in exports so far are likely to gradually disappear and exports are expected to head for a moderate increase. In addition, from a somewhat longer-term perspective, the correction of the excessive appreciation of the yen in the past will mitigate downward pressure on exports by decelerating the pace of relocation of production overseas. B.  Price developments Let me turn to price developments. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh food) excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike was plus 1.3 percent in July. Thus, Japan’s economy is on course to achieving an inflation rate of 2 percent – the price stability target – as expected (Chart 7). When assessing price developments, it is important to bear in mind that monthly figures for the CPI tend to fluctuate and that trend inflationary pressure is determined by two factors: improvements in the output gap and rising inflation expectations. To assess trend inflation, it is necessary for the Bank to carefully examine these two factors. As I mentioned, Japan’s labor market has tightened, and firms’ excess capacity has almost disappeared as capacity utilization has increased. As a result, the output gap has been improving moderately and recently reached around 0 percent (Chart 8). Moreover, as I will explain later, medium- to long-term inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is expected to accelerate moderately, along with increasing wages, against the backdrop of rising inflation expectations as well as improvements in the output gap, given that Japan’s economy is expected to continue growing at a pace above its potential. Specifically, the inflation rate is expected to be around 1¼ percent for some time, since upward pressure from energy-related goods, particularly petroleum products, will likely wane. Subsequently, with the output gap remaining positive 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  and medium- to long-term inflation expectations rising, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to follow an uptrend again and reach about 2 percent around the middle of the current projection period from fiscal 2014 through 2016, that is, in or around fiscal 2015. Looking at the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts in the interim assessment of the Outlook Report at the July MPM, projections for the year-on-year growth rate in the CPI (excluding fresh food) are plus 1.3 percent for fiscal 2014, plus 1.9 percent for fiscal 2015, and plus 2.1 percent for fiscal 2016, after excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hikes (Chart 5). II.  Conduct of monetary policy A.  What is QQE? For the remainder of my speech I would like to focus on several points concerning the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. The QQE policy the Bank has been pursuing since April last year has two major pillars (Chart 9). The first pillar is a commitment to achieve the 2 percent price stability target as swiftly as possible. Specifically, the Bank clearly pledged that it would achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. The second pillar consists of underpinning the first pillar – the commitment – with specific actions. As the wording quantitative and qualitative indicates, these actions involve an expansion of the quantity and changes in the quality of assets on the balance sheet of the Bank. The quantitative aspect refers to the substantial increase in the amount of money provided by the Bank to the financial system, that is, the increase in the monetary base, through purchases of various assets, in particular Japanese government bonds (JGBs). The qualitative aspect refers to the purchase of riskier assets. The Bank started to include purchases of government bonds with longer remaining maturities. In order to affect risk premiums on assets, the Bank has also increased the amounts of purchases of exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). B.  Transmission channels of QQE Many of you may be interested in the channels through which QQE with its two pillars affects the real economy and to what extent the effects of QQE have spread through the economy. Let me explain the transmission channels of monetary easing. A key transmission channel is the lowering of expected real interest rates (Chart 10). Expected real interest rates are nominal interest rates actually observed in financial markets or over the counter less the rate of inflation people expect. While nominal interest rates can be observed, expected real interest rates are the rates economic entities anticipate taking into account price changes. QQE aims at putting downward pressure on nominal interest rates through large-scale purchases of long-term government bonds and purchases of other assets while raising the expected rate of inflation. The aim is therefore to lower expected real interest rates, that is, nominal interest rates less the expected rate of inflation. If economic entities’ expected real interest rates fall, this will stimulate demand in the real economy in a number of ways (Chart 11). For example, when real interest rates decline, people will shift their portfolios from cash, deposits, and fixed-income securities – which will have become relatively less attractive – to equities and tangible assets such as land and housing, or to foreign currency-denominated assets with higher returns. The resulting rise in equity prices and the appreciation of foreign currencies will stimulate private consumption through wealth effects. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  In addition to the decline in expected real interest rates, other factors such as an increase in consumption, a rise in stock prices, and the depreciation of the yen, will encourage firms to be more proactive in their business fixed investment. The depreciation of the yen is also expected to give rise to an increase in exports. With an increase in demand through these channels, the shortage of demand in the economy will be eliminated, prices will rise, and overcoming deflation will be in sight. Further increases in production due to growing demand will lead to an increase in labor income through improved labor market conditions and, in turn, further raise private consumption. The resulting increase in corporate profits will lead to an increase in firms’ business fixed investment. This chain of developments leads to a virtuous cycle in the economy. C.  Effects of QQE In the economy, monetary policy has so far been having its intended effects through the transmission channels I have explained. On the one hand, nominal interest rates, including long-term government bond yields, have been stable, while, on the other hand, economic entities’ inflation expectations have been rising on the whole, as I will explain in a moment. Therefore, expected real interest rates – that is, nominal interest rates minus the expected rate of inflation – have been declining. This, in turn, has boosted private demand, such as consumption and investment, raising aggregate demand in the economy as a whole. Economic growth in fiscal 2013 jumped to 2.3 percent following slow growth between only 0 and 1 percent in the two preceding years. Against this background, the year-on-year rate of change in consumer prices has been increasing as a trend toward around 2 percent – the price stability target. Corporate sector output has been increasing in response to the rise in aggregate demand, and labor demand has been increasing accordingly. Since nominal wages have been on an uptrend along with the increase in the number of workers, employee income as a whole has been rising, underpinning domestic demand. Therefore, QQE has been having its intended effects, and the effects of monetary easing are expected to further strengthen with the virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending being sustained. When talking about these developments on previous occasions, I have sometimes heard the concern that real wages may actually be declining, since nominal wages cannot keep up with the increase in inflation. In response, I have been saying that it is necessary to be patient and to watch the policy effects over a period of time, since the effects unfold in a certain order. From firms’ perspective, it is not easy to reduce the number of regular workers once increased and it is difficult to reduce wages once raised. Therefore, in general, increases in employment tend to start in the form of additional non-regular workers being hired, and wage increases tend to take the form of increases in special cash earnings such as bonuses or in non-scheduled cash earnings. While the year-on-year rate of change in scheduled cash earnings had been on a downtrend reflecting the increase in the share of part-time workers in total employment, scheduled cash earnings stopped declining in May this year and started to increase in June. Real wages had been declining until recently. However, excluding the direct effects of the April consumption tax hike, the year-on-year rate of change in real wages turned positive for full-time workers in June and for part-time workers in July (Chart 12). Once future economic prospects and the outlook for firms’ profits become more favorable as the virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending continues, it is likely that wages will rise steadily in line with or above the rate of inflation. For this to happen, it is important to 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  continue with the appropriate conduct of monetary policy measures to achieve the price stability target in a stable manner. D.  Inflation expectations and prices As mentioned earlier, in order to put downward pressure on expected real interest rates it is necessary to work on people’s inflation expectations. Under 15 years of protracted deflation, there was a growing share of younger people who had never experienced inflation, and the view that prices will not rise had become entrenched in people’s mindset. Dispelling such a deflationary mindset and changing people’s expectations so that they expect moderate inflation is quite a difficult challenge. That is why the current large-scale monetary easing had become necessary. Various surveys and market indicators point to a general uptrend in people’s inflation expectations (Charts 13 and 14). This can be attributed to the fact that the impact of QQE on inflation expectations has been spreading. In addition, this uptrend also reflects an increase in the number of people who had been reluctant to believe that Japan would experience inflation until they saw it and who are now adjusting their expectations. Such skeptics have adjusted their expectations due to the rise in actual inflation reflecting the improvement in the output gap. This tendency is likely to become stronger going forward. The rise in inflation expectations, moreover, has the effect of directly raising actual inflation through an additional channel distinct from the boost to aggregate demand through lower expected real interest rates. Specifically, when people expect future inflation, their price and wage setting will be based on such expectations, thus adding inflationary pressure. In this context, it is useful to refer to the concept of the Phillips curve, which illustrates the relationship between economic activity and inflation. Recently, inflation has clearly been above the level suggested by the Phillips curve derived from data for the period of deflation (Chart 15). In addition to a move along the Phillips curve due to the improvement in economic activity, this may reflect an upward shift in the Phillips curve due to upward pressure on the curve itself stemming from the rise in inflation expectations. E.  The depreciation of the yen and inflation On this basis, the Bank believes that the price stability target of 2 percent will be achieved, as I mentioned earlier. Of course, there are some skeptical voices. For example, some argue that the current rise in inflation is the result of a rise in the price of imports, especially energy, due to the depreciation of the yen, so that once such exchange rate effects dissipate, the pace of inflation should slow down. However, statistical analysis for the period prior to the introduction of QQE shows no significant relationship between changes in the exchange rate of the yen and inflation in Japan (Chart 16). That is, a depreciation of the yen does not necessarily lead to inflation. Let me briefly explain why this is the case. Assuming that all else remains equal, a rise in the prices of imports due to a depreciation of the yen or other factors indeed creates upward pressure on prices. At the same time, however, the resulting negative income effect will reduce the demand for imports and other goods and services, which, in turn, will exert downward pressure on the prices of imports and other goods and services. For example, if gasoline prices rise, you may try to drive less or reduce your purchases of other products. A clear relationship between the yen-dollar exchange rate and the year-on-year rate of change in consumer prices can only be observed in the short period after the introduction of QQE (Chart 17). This suggests that current inflation has not been brought about merely by the depreciation of the yen. Instead, it appears that QQE has triggered certain mechanisms resulting in price increases that were not seen during episodes of monetary easing in the past. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  How a rise in prices of specific goods and services reflecting, for example, a depreciation of the yen ultimately affects aggregate demand and aggregate prices depends on the interaction of the various mechanisms. Thus, there is no one-to-one relationship between changes in the prices of specific goods and services and the price level overall. In other words, one cannot forecast macro-level changes simply by adding up micro-level changes. In the end, to forecast price developments at the macro level, analyses from a macro perspective are necessary. Specifically, it is essential to examine the output gap, that is, how much demand there is relative to the supply capacity of the economy as a whole. The main factor underlying the current level of inflation is the growing demand in the economy as a whole, and the effects of monetary policy played a certain role in the growth in demand. Because of such demand pressure, firms have been able to smoothly pass on increases in costs as well as the consumption tax hike to higher sales prices. F.  QQE and strategies to raise the growth potential With monetary policy having its intended effects and the output gap improving, firms have gradually started to face supply constraints such as shortages in labor and capital stock that had not surfaced under deflation. Japan’s unemployment rate increased from 3–4 percent in the mid-1990s to 5–6 percent in the 2000s, despite the fact that the working age population has been shrinking since 1996. On the other hand, more recently, the economy has been facing a labor shortage, which, given the decline in the number of workers, is what one would expect under normal circumstances. Thus, one could say that Japan’s economy is gradually returning to a much more normal situation, in which the unemployment rate falls as the number of workers shrinks. Due to the decline in the working age population, as well as a slowdown in productivity growth and sluggish business fixed investment, Japan’s potential growth rate is estimated to have declined to around 0.5 percent. Now that the improvement in the output gap has brought challenges on the supply-side to the fore, this is a good time to make efforts to raise the growth potential by increasing the capital stock and pursuing growth strategies such as measures to respond to the decline in the working age population and to promote innovation through regulatory and institutional reforms. The reason I refer to the importance of strengthening growth potential here is not that it is a necessary condition for achieving the price stability target. The price stability target of 2 percent can be achieved through the appropriate conduct of monetary policy, regardless of the level of potential growth rate. If aggregate demand grows due to monetary easing, workers will work more efficiently, while the improvement in business sentiment will lead firms to take risks and invest in capital stock and to promote technological innovation. This, in turn, is likely to raise the growth potential to some extent. However, such monetary easing alone will not be sufficient to achieve the government’s target of “real economic growth of about 2 percent on average for 10 years” and can only provide a supplementary boost to Japan’s growth potential. To achieve the government’s target, it is necessary to raise Japan’s growth potential by pushing ahead with drastic structural reforms through a growth strategy. In a deflationary recession, it is difficult to push ahead with such structural reforms, since there is bound to be strong resistance against policy measures that, for example, seek to increase competition through deregulation, due to the severe economic pain such measures would bring about. Therefore, monetary policy to overcome deflation and maintain inflation at about 2 percent in the medium to long term is a necessary condition to promote structural reforms in order to raise the potential growth rate. This has been my view even since before I became Deputy Governor of the Bank. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Based on these considerations, the Bank will continue to strive to pursue appropriate monetary policy measures on its own accord to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. Concluding remarks In concluding, let me touch on the economy of Ishikawa Prefecture. Ishikawa Prefecture is a manufacturing region and there are a number of firms that have unique technologies of worldwide prominence. In addition, there are many vigorous small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in Ishikawa Prefecture, and the prefecture has a disproportionate share in the list of 300 of Japan’s Exciting Monozukuri (Manufacturing) SMEs released by the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry. Moreover, with regard to human resource utilization, Ishikawa Prefecture comes first in Japan in terms of the employment rate of women, and the overall employment rate is also relatively high. The economy of Ishikawa Prefecture has been recovering moderately, although it has been affected by the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike. With the employment and income situation improving, private consumption has been moderately picking up as a trend. Business fixed investment has increased as corporate profits have improved steadily. Meanwhile, public investment has been at a high level, and housing investment appears to have stopped weakening, despite the decline in demand following the consumption tax hike. Reflecting these developments in demand, industrial production has been hovering at a high level and the employment and income situation has improved. Therefore, a virtuous cycle of economic activity has been operating. Given this assessment of the regional economy, I hope that the extension of the Hokuriku Shinkansen line to Kanazawa in March 2015 will further boost economic activity in the region on both the tourism and the business front. With regard to tourism, an increasing number of visitors are expected to come to this region, and there has been an increase in the building and renovation of hotels and other commercial facilities to respond to this increase in demand. Regarding business, firms have been launching initiatives such as developing new sales networks and tapping new customers as well as promoting the relocation of enterprises to the region from outside the region. Moreover, I have heard that – taking advantage of the clustering of the textile industry in this region – industry, the prefectural administration, and academics in coordination have launched initiatives to develop new materials made from carbon fibers. I have also heard that initiatives aiming to promote new industries such as aircraft-related industries and medical and nursing services have been implemented. I sincerely hope that, with the extension of the Hokuriku Shinkansen line to Kanazawa, the region will enjoy further growth in the future through the strengthening of joint efforts between the public and the private sector in a wide range of areas to boost the economy of the region. Thank you.    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11  
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 13  
   14 BIS central bankers’ speeches  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 15  
   16 BIS central bankers’ speeches  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 17   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Benoît Cœuré: Interview with Cinco Días Interview by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, with Cinco Días, conducted by Mr Bernardo de Miguel, published on 10 September 2014. *      *      * Q: The ECB’s projections envisage less growth and lower inflation. Is there anything else in the pipeline if the measures adopted so far fail? A: New measures were adopted on Thursday and I cannot speculate on what can be done in the future. The ECB staff projections for 2014 and 2015 have been revised downwards, both in respect of growth and inflation, and the Governing Council is also seeing risks to growth being on the downside. Growth lost momentum in the second quarter and we want to prevent this weakness feeding into a fall in investment and creating a vicious circle. Furthermore, we have recently seen a change in inflation expectations, which have moved further away from 2%. Q: Isn’t it a little late to realise that, after a year of inflation below 1%? A: We have to decide on the basis of the data. And until the summer, growth in the euro area was expected to accelerate. Then came other, more worrying data showing that it was at risk of losing momentum. Q: However, the measures were not adopted unanimously by the 24 members of the Council. Who voted against? A: We don’t comment on that. You know that from January onwards we will begin to publish accounts of our meetings. But even for that it has been decided not to give details of the voting. Q: To avoid the vote being interpreted in terms of the country of origin of each Council member? A: Personally, I would be in favour of publishing all the details, since governors are independent and should vote in the interest of the euro area, but I realise that there are also very good reasons for not doing so. Q. Might there be resignations from the Council like in 2010 and 2011 when the programmes to purchase public debt were approved? A: At that time the euro area was under great pressure due to the severity of the crisis. There was a risk of a euro break-up and the ECB was facing very difficult decisions in this respect. We are not in a comparable situation today. We have a low growth, low inflation and little credit. They represent major challenges, but are part of the normal monetary policy debate. I see no big differences among governors when it comes to analysing the situation. The discussion on Thursday was focused more on whether it was advisable to wait for more data before reacting. But I don’t see any substantive differences at this point in time. Q: Draghi has called on governments to go for fiscal expansion and reforms – it sounded almost like a desperate plea. A: Mario Draghi’s speech at Jackson Hole in August and the conclusions of the Governing Council last Thursday reflect the seriousness of the situation. The euro area faces risks to its economic growth on such a scale that it’s necessary to use all available tools to support the economy. And that means using the instruments on the demand side and the supply side. On the demand side, you have monetary policy. And what the ECB has announced shows that we are committed to taking steps and that we have instruments we are ready to use. You have also fiscal policy, in those countries that have space to expand it. But what matters 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches most are the structural reforms, because without them no supply or demand measure will have an effect. Q: Is that message aimed at France and Italy? A: We are not asking anything from anyone in particular. There is nothing of a give and take here. The ECB is independent and does not enter into this kind of bargaining. We do what we think we have to do and we expect others to do their job. We are just highlighting the conditions for it to be effective. For example, in our view, the countries that want flexibility in applying the Stability Pact should announce reforms beforehand, because flexibility is useless if it isn’t backed by reforms. Fiscal policy should be used to support aggregate demand – but within the framework of the Stability Pact, and that’s an important “but”. The Pact creates confidence. And stretching it or infringing it until it is no longer credible would undermine confidence and, in the end, be counterproductive for growth. In other words, flexibility without damaging the credibility of the rules. Q: Germany does not seem to share this need for fiscal stimulus. A: Our measures will be much more effective if we see structural reforms and a fiscal position appropriate for the euro area. This should be discussed and evaluated at the euro area level. It is normal for the ECB to say this because it monitors the situation across the euro area and is interested in its stability and growth. Q: Its measures have flooded the market with liquidity. But it will be difficult to have a demand for credit if there are no jobs or if employment is at wage levels of the 1980s. A: People will end up getting work if companies manufacture good products and provide good services and there are customers to buy them. Monetary policy can help by providing sufficient liquidity and by steering that liquidity to where it is most needed. This is what the targeted longer-term refinancing operations adopted in June and the measures announced last Thursday, namely the programme to purchase asset-backed securities from the private sector, are aimed at. We want there to be sufficiently ample liquidity and for the ECB’s balance sheet to move back towards previous levels [note from the editor: to go up to €3,000 billion from the current €2,000 billion]. And we want to do this in a way that is meaningful for the economy. That is why it is not a quantitative increase in liquidity (quantitative easing or QE), but is targeted and aimed at facilitating the flow of credit. In a way, I would describe it as a qualitative increase rather than as a quantitative one. However, we should not get into a debate over terminology. At the ECB, we do not believe in magic words, QE or otherwise. What we want to do is to devise a monetary policy that is effective in the current economic situation and that fits Europe’s economic framework. Thus, inevitably, the ECB’s monetary expansion is unlike that conducted in the United States or the United Kingdom. We are at a different juncture and our economy is structured differently. In fact, we cannot draw too many lessons from what other central banks have done, because our situation is so different. Q: Has an actual target been set for the expansion of the ECB’s balance sheet? A: No, we have not set a particular target, because we will do whatever is useful to facilitate the flow of credit to the economy. We have announced a programme to purchase asset-backed securities and covered bonds. Depending on its impact on growth and inflation, this programme can be expanded. The Governing Council will monitor developments, discuss them, and take decisions as appropriate. Q: You have been accused by some of instigating a bubble, particularly of public debt. A: It is true that there is currently an enormous amount of liquidity at the global level in general and in the euro area in particular. And there are very low risk premia across all asset classes, not just for public debt. This necessitates great vigilance on the part of investors and authorities in order to avoid encouraging excessive risk-taking. And it will also be very important to exercise macroeconomic vigilance, because there is going to be abundant 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 liquidity in the next few years. To achieve this, macro prudential instruments should be used to their full extend. Q: Spain is issuing bonds at historically low interest rates, but its debt is standing at around 100% of GDP and within ten years it will be faced with enormous payouts upon maturity. What is going to happen then? A: It is no mystery: debt sustainability depends on a sound fiscal policy, and Spain is on the way to achieving this. It is taking time, but Spain has already made good progress on reducing the deficit. This work is not yet done and should continue until equilibrium is reached. Debt sustainability requires a significant increase in nominal GDP growth. The ECB’s contribution is to bring inflation back to levels below and close to 2% for the euro area as a whole, as set out in our mandate. However, in the long term the most important thing is real growth and this can only be achieved by increasing productivity. So, the only way to ensure debt sustainability is to raise productivity, invest and increase the employment rate, and this implies structural reforms. Q: None of these factors are present. There is hardly any growth, investment or jobs. A: I am aware that the situation is still very difficult in Spain and that the Spanish people have suffered a lot in the process of reducing imbalances and implementing reforms. However, they can rest assured that Spain has turned the corner, and that the outlook is once again improving. This will encourage firms to invest and to start recruiting again, not only Spanish firms but also foreign ones. In a way, Spain can stand as an example not only for other countries that have been hit by the crisis, but for other large countries at Europe’s core, that have not been so active in reforming their economies. Spain is an example of how, through reforms, it is possible to redress imbalances and get out of the doldrums. Q: Which reforms are urgent? A: It depends on the country. The European Commission has already issued so-called “country specific recommendations”. The worrying thing, as the Commission acknowledges, is that these recommendations are too rarely followed. It would be preferable if countries took them seriously and felt collectively committed. In the case of Spain, my personal view is that much remains to be done to support the young people and help find jobs. They are the future. Q: Would you be in favour of the binding agreements proposed by Angela Merkel? A: Binding agreements are one way of achieving this. However, in my view, it is better to stay within the Community framework. It should be a multilateral discussion and not a bilateral one between the Commission and each Member State. There should be shared sovereignty as far as structural reforms are concerned, because there is a common interest. Q: The stress tests are nearing completion. Can we expect many failures and are there likely to be any surprises? A: We are checking the results, which will be available in the second half of October, so I cannot make any comments on them at present. Q: Will the tests be credible after what happened with Portugal’s Banco Espirito Santo (BES)? It collapsed despite the fact that the ECB and the rest of the Troika had been supervising Lisbon for the past three years. A: In the BES case, it appears that information was being kept from the supervisor, which was the Banco de Portugal and not the ECB. The ECB, the European Commission and the IMF were in Lisbon to analyse financial stability and macroeconomic outcomes. The ECB had neither the instruments nor the mandate to supervise banks, as this was the role of the national supervisor. I do accept, however, that the BES case has served as a reminder that there are risks beneath the surface in the European banking sector, and I am convinced that 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches the Single Supervisory Mechanism will be able to examine the financial health of the institutions in depth. Q: Could something similar to the BES case happen in other countries? A: This is always a possibility. Risks are inherent in banking activities. The only solution is a robust management framework within each bank and on a European level, coupled with instruments such as the Single Supervisory Mechanism or the Single Resolution Mechanism, which will be available in case of crisis. Q: Some analysts are comparing the situation in the euro area to that in Japan. A: I would imagine that they are referring to the situation in Japan in the 1990s, rather than to present-day Japan. At that time, Japan did not have anywhere near as expansive a policy as ours and it did not have the definition of price stability that we have to anchor inflation. Its approach to the financial sector was also different, as we have banking union, resolution rules, stress tests, etc. To put it plainly, European supervisors, in particular the ECB, are not going to allow European banks to turn into zombie banks lending to zombie businesses, as was said in the case of Japan in the 1990s. Q: I understand that you met with Syriza, an aspirant party for government in Greece. How do you view them as an alternative? A: I would prefer not to make any comments on the political situation in Greece. I do believe, however, that the appearance of protests in countries subject to financial assistance programmes [implemented by the Troika] is the reflection of the huge demands that have been placed on the population. Being in a democracy means that people have the right to voice their complaints. Yet it is also a warning to leaders that when an economy is undergoing reform, sharing responsibility and effort is key. It is key to both the economic efficiency and political sustainability of the reforms. Social protests are there to remind us that we cannot reform an economy by placing all the demands on workers and the most fragile parts of society. Q: Can the euro survive without debt mutualisation? A: The debate on the future of the euro should not be centred on instruments such as mutualisation. This is in my view the tail that wags the dog. The question to consider is to what extent we should share risk and sovereignty in order to make monetary union sustainable. Since the beginning of the crisis we have made a lot of progress in creating various instruments to establish effective solidarity within the euro area, as well as governance that establishes responsibility at a national level. The process is not yet completed. For the euro to be sustainable, we need a stronger framework, particularly in relation to structural reform, where we need a strong and shared decision-making mechanism. Fiscal union is part of this debate, but it can only be implemented when there is a sufficient degree of homogeneity between countries and when a mechanism for political responsibility becomes available. Fiscal union without democratic control is not possible and is incompatible with democracy. This subject will come up, but not until further down the line.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Raghuram Rajan: Make in India, largely for India Talk by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Bharat Ram Memorial Lecture, New Delhi, 2 December 2014. *      *      * The global economy is still weak, despite a strengthening recovery in the United States. The Euro area is veering close to recession, Japan has already experienced two quarters of negative growth after a tax hike, and many emerging markets are rethinking their export-led growth models as the industrial world stagnates. In the last couple of years, the IMF has repeatedly reduced its growth forecasts. After 6 years of a tepid post-crisis recovery, the IMF titled its most recent World Economic Outlook “Legacies, Clouds, Uncertainties”. The conventional diagnosis and remedy Why is the world finding it so hard to resume pre-Great Recession growth rates, let alone restore the levels of GDP that would have been attained if the Great Recession had not happened? The obvious answer is that the legacy of the financial boom that preceded the Great Recession is debt, and the overhang of debt, whether on governments, households, or banks, is holding back growth. In the colourful words of the IMF’s Managing Director, we are experiencing “the New Mediocre”. The implication is that growth is unacceptably low relative to potential, and more can be done to lift it, especially given that a number of economies are flirting with deflation. Hence the conventional policy advice urges yet more innovative monetary interventions with an ever expanding set of acronyms, even while governments are urged to spend on “obvious” needs such as infrastructure. While the need for structural reforms is acknowledged, they are typically deemed painful, and possibly growth-reducing in the short run. Hence the accent is on monetary and fiscal stimulus, and as much of it as possible given the deadening effects of debt overhang. The efficacy of such policy advice remains to be seen. But the Japanese checked each of these boxes over the last two decades, including interest rates held low for long, quantitative easing, and massive debt-financed spending on infrastructure. Few would argue that Japan has shed its seeming malaise. A different diagnosis A different narrative of the pre-crisis period is now emerging that may explain why the efforts at stimulating economies back to the pre-crisis growth paths have not been successful, even six years after the crisis.1 The term “secular stagnation” used by Larry Summers to describe the current persistent economic malaise, echoing Alvin Hansen’s speech in 1938 in the midst of the Great Depression, has caught on.2 But different economists focus on different aspects and causes of the stagnation. Summers emphasizes the inadequacy of aggregate demand, and the fact that the zero lower bound as well as the potential for financial instability prevents monetary policy from being more active. The reasons for weak aggregate demand include ageing populations that want to consume less and the increasing income share of the very rich, whose marginal propensity to consume is small.                                                 1 See, for example, “The Crises of Democratic Capitalism”, Wolfgang Streeck, New Left Review 71, Sept/Oct 2011 or “The True Lessons of the Recession: The West Can’t Borrow and Spend its Way to Recovery”, Raghuram Rajan, Foreign Affairs, Volume 91, no 3, May/June 2012. 2 Summers, L. (2014), “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysterisis and Zero Lower Bound”, speech delivered to the National Association for Business Economics, Economic Policy Conference, February 24, 2014. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Tyler Cowen and Robert Gordon on the other hand, emphasize a weak supply potential.3 They argue that the post-World War II years were an aberration because growth was helped in industrial countries by reconstruction, the spread of technologies such as electricity, telephones, and automobiles, rising educational attainment, higher labour participation rates as women entered the work force, a restoration of global trade, and increasing investments of capital. However, post-war total factor productivity growth – the part of growth stemming from new ideas and methods of production  –  fell from its 1920–50 high. More recently, not only has productivity growth fallen further, but growth has been held back by the headwinds of plateauing education levels and labour participation rates, as well as a shrinking labour force in some countries because of population ageing. It is obvious from these lists of factors that it is hard to disentangle the effects of weak aggregate demand from slow growth in potential supply. Population ageing contributes to both. Indeed, one may cause the other. For example, anticipating a slowdown in growth potential, households, worried about impending retirement in the face of promised social security entitlements that are unlikely to be delivered upon, may try and build savings. This will depress demand further. Conversely, anticipated weak demand may reduce incentives for corporations to invest, causing supply potential to grow more slowly. Whatever the reasons for slow underlying growth starting in the 1970s, the traditional adverse consequences such as the growing unemployment of the system’s outsiders such as immigrants and the youth was compounded by the growing realization that economies could also not deliver on social security promises without growth. These promises, as sociologist Wolfgang Streeck writes, were made to the wider public during the growth years of the 1960s when visions of a “Great Society” seemed attainable.4 Promises have been augmented since then by increases in pension and old age healthcare commitments to public sector workers. These have been made to avert budget-breaking wage increases, but they have created huge liabilities for the future, which is approaching fast. Growth therefore became an imperative, and with underlying growth slow from the 1970s on, governments began to spend more to stimulate the economy. With supply potential also stagnant, the spending translated into inflation, which spiralled upwards. Streeck argues that industrial country successes in curbing inflation in the 1980s meant something else had to take the place of the inflation tax in financing spending. And that was debt, first public debt, then as governments narrowed fiscal deficits, an encouragement to the private sector to take on debt. Growing leverage of all kinds, whether on banks, corporates, households, or governments, led to the financial crisis of 2008–11. Some of the private debt has morphed into government liabilities, but the overall level of debt in industrial countries as a fraction of GDP is still growing.5 Governments that are not forced by market pressures to undertake productivity-enhancing reforms prefer to delay them. As a result, overall debt is still growing because the policies of “reaching for growth” through monetary and fiscal stimulus have not abated. Further complicating all this is a growing sense amongst the middle class that they need quality higher education and training to not slip back into the ranks of the poor, but the poor quality early education they have received, as well as the prohibitive cost of quality higher education, puts better livelihoods out of reach. Populist middle class movements, as epitomized by the Tea Party in the United States or UKIP in the United Kingdom, reflect these worries. The possibility of a backlash against technology, global finance, and foreign                                                 3 Tyler Cowen (2013), The Great Stagnation, Ebook, Gordon, R. (2012), “Is US Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts Six Headwinds”, NBER Working Paper 18315. 4 Cited in footnote 1. 5 Luigi Buttiglione, Philip Lane, Lucrezia Reichlin and Vincent Reinhart, Deleveraging? What Deleveraging?, 2014, Geneva Reports on the World Economy. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  immigration and trade, which the middle class is led to believe are responsible for its plight, is very real. The mediocre economic outlook might change. Strong US growth could pull the world out its funk, while low oil prices could also give a substantial boost to aggregate demand. The industrial world may well muddle through for a while before it figures how to harness and monetize (as well as measure) new technologies. New well-paying middle class jobs that we cannot imagine today may emerge once again, as they always have. But overall, there is a palpable sense of gloom in the industrial world, a belief that growth is unlikely to be strong enough to satisfy for the foreseeable future. If secular stagnation persists, industrial countries will have to figure out how to restructure their promises, whether debt, social security, or low taxes, and how to distribute the burden. After filing for bankruptcy, the city of Detroit in the United States has already had to make tough choices, between servicing its pensioners or its debt, keeping its museums open or its police force intact. More such difficult decisions will have to be made. What about emerging markets? Slow industrial country growth has made more difficult a traditional development path for emerging markets – export-led growth. Indeed, in the last decade, even as China developed on the back of its exports to industrial countries, other emerging markets flourished as they exported to China. Emerging markets now have to rely once again on domestic demand, always a difficult task because of the temptation to overstimulate. That task has become more difficult because of the abundance of liquidity sloshing around the world as a result of ultra-accommodative monetary policies in industrial countries. Any signs of growth can attract foreign capital, and if not properly managed, these flows can precipitate a credit and asset price boom and exchange rate overvaluation. When industrial country monetary policies are eventually tightened, some of the capital is likely to depart emerging market shores. Emerging markets have to take extreme care to ensure they are not vulnerable at that point. What implications should an emerging economy like India, which has weathered the initial squalls of the “taper tantrums” of the summer of 2013, take away for its policies over the medium term? I would focus on four: 1) Make in India; 2) Make for India; 3) Ensure transparency and stability of the economy; and 4) Work towards a more open and fair global system. Lessons for India 1) Make in India The government has the commendable aim of making more in India. This means improving the efficiency of producing in India, whether of agricultural commodities, mining, manufacturing, or services. To achieve this goal, it has to implement its ambitious plans on building out infrastructure. This includes • Physically linking every corner of the country to domestic and international markets through roads, railways, ports and airports. The kind of economic activity that is generated when a pukka all-weather road is built into a village – the explosion of horticulture, poultry, and dairy farming, the opening of clothing and assorted goods shops, the increasing use of powered vehicles  –  is extraordinary, as is the kind of activity that emerges around national highways. • Ensuring the availability of inputs such as power, minerals, and water at competitive prices. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  • Linking everyone electronically and financially to the broader system through mobiles, broadband, and intermediaries such as business correspondents. • Encouraging the development of public institutions such as markets, warehouses, regulators, information aggregators and disseminators, etc. • Making possible affordable and safe homes and workplaces. A second necessity for increasing productivity in India is to improve human capital. This requires enhancing the quality and spread of health care, nutrition, and sanitation to start with so that people are healthy and able. People also need better and more appropriate education, skills that are valued in the labour markets, and jobs where firms have the incentive to invest more in their learning. The government is examining the cost of doing business in India with a view to bring it down. The woes of the small entrepreneur, as she confronts the myriad mysterious regulations that govern her, and the numerous inspectors who have the power of closing her down, are well known. The petty bureaucrat, empowered by these regulations, can become a tyrant. It is appropriate that the government intends to make him help business rather than hinder it. As regulators, we too have to continuously examine the costs and benefits of the regulations we impose. Finally, we need make access to finance easier. I have spoken about that in other contexts, and will not dwell on it here. Before I move on, let me add some caveats. There is a danger when we discuss “Make in India” of assuming it means a focus on manufacturing, an attempt to follow the export-led growth path that China followed. I don’t think such a specific focus is intended. First, as I have just argued, slow growing industrial countries will be much less likely to be able to absorb a substantial additional amount of imports in the foreseeable future. Other emerging markets certainly could absorb more, and a regional focus for exports will pay off. But the world as a whole is unlikely to be able to accommodate another export-led China. Second, industrial countries themselves have been improving capital-intensive flexible manufacturing, so much so that some manufacturing activity is being “re-shored”. Any emerging market wanting to export manufacturing goods will have to contend with this new phenomenon. Third, when India pushes into manufacturing exports, it will have China, which still has some surplus agricultural labour to draw on, to contend with. Export-led growth will not be as easy as it was for the Asian economies who took that path before us. I am not advocating export pessimism here – India has been extremely successful at carving out its own areas of comparative advantage, and will continue to do so. Instead, I am counselling against an export led strategy that involves subsidizing exporters with cheap inputs as well as an undervalued exchange rate, simply because it is unlikely to be as effective at this juncture. I am also cautioning against picking a particular sector such as manufacturing for encouragement, simply because it has worked well for China. India is different, and developing at a different time, and we should be agnostic about what will work. More broadly, such agnosticism means creating an environment where all sorts of enterprise can flourish, and then leaving entrepreneurs, of whom we have plenty, to choose what they want to do. Instead of subsidizing inputs to specific industries because they are deemed important or labour intensive, a strategy that has not really paid off for us over the years, let us figure out the public goods each sector needs, and strive to provide them. For instance, SMEs might benefit much more from an agency that can certify product quality, or a platform to help them sell receivables, or a state portal that will create marketing web sites for them, than from subsidized credit. The tourist industry will probably benefit more from visa on arrival and a strong transportation network than from the tax sops they usually demand. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  A second possible misunderstanding is to see “Make in India” as a strategy of import substitution through tariff barriers. This strategy has been tried and it has not worked because it ended up reducing domestic competition, making producers inefficient, and increasing costs to consumers. Instead, “Make in India” will typically mean more openness, as we create an environment that makes our firms able to compete with the rest of the world, and encourages foreign producers to come take advantage of our environment to create jobs in India. 2) Make for India If external demand growth is likely to be muted, we have to produce for the internal market. This means we have to work on creating the strongest sustainable unified market we can, which requires a reduction in the transactions costs of buying and selling throughout the country. Improvements in the physical transportation network I discussed earlier will help, but so will fewer, but more efficient and competitive intermediaries in the supply chain from producer to the consumer. A well designed GST bill, by reducing state border taxes, will have the important consequence of creating a truly national market for goods and services, which will be critical for our growth in years to come. Domestic demand has to be financed responsibly, as far as possible through domestic savings. Our banking system is undergoing some stress. Our banks have to learn from past mistakes in project evaluation and structuring as they finance the immense needs of the economy. They will also have to improve their efficiency as they compete with new players such as the recently licensed universal banks as well as the soon-to-be licensed payment banks and small finance banks. At the same time, we should not make their task harder by creating impediments in the process of turning around, or recovering, stressed assets. The RBI, the government, as well as the courts have considerable work to do here. We also have to work on spreading financial services to the excluded, for once they learn how to manage finances and save they can be relied on to borrow responsibly. New institutions and new products to seek out financial savings in every corner of the country will also help halt the erosion in household savings rates, as will a low and stable inflation rate. The income tax benefits for an individual to save have been largely fixed in nominal terms till the recent budget, which means the real value of the benefits have eroded. Some budgetary incentives for household savings could help ensure that the country’s investment is largely financed from domestic savings. 3) Ensure transparency and stability of the economy As I argued earlier in the speech, even developed countries like Portugal and Spain have been singularly unable to manage domestic demand. Countries tend to overstimulate, with large fiscal deficits, large current account deficits, high credit and asset price growth, only to see growth collapse as money gets tight. The few countries that have avoided such booms and busts typically have done so with sound policy frameworks. As a country that does not belong to any power blocks, we do not ever want to be in a position where we need multilateral support. It will be all the more important to get our policy frameworks right. Clearly, a sound fiscal framework around a clear fiscal consolidation path is critical. The Dr Bimal Jalan Committee’s report will provide a game plan for the former, while the government has clearly indicated its intent to stick to the fiscal consolidation path that has been laid out. Whether we need more institutions to ensure deficits stay within control and the quality of budgets is high, is something worth debating. A number of countries have independent budget offices/committees that opine on budgets. These offices are especially important in scoring budgetary estimates, including unfunded long term liabilities that the industrial countries have shown are so easy to contract in times of growth and so hard to actually deliver. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  On the monetary side, a central bank focused primarily on keeping inflation low and stable will ensure the best conditions for growth. In reacting to developments, however, the central bank has to recognize that emerging markets are not as resilient as industrial economies. So the path of disinflation cannot be as steep as in an industrial economy because an emerging market is more fragile, and people’s buffers and safety nets are thinner. A “Volker” like disinflation was never on the cards in India, but an Urjit Patel glide path fits us very well, ensuring moderate growth even while we disinflate. Going forward, we will discuss an appropriate timeline with the government in which the economy should move to the centre of the medium term inflation band of 2–6%. In addition to inflation, however, a central bank has to pay attention to financial stability. This is a secondary objective, but it may become central if the economy enters a low-inflation credit and asset price boom. Financial stability sometimes means regulators, including the central bank, have to go against popular sentiment. The role of regulators is not to boost the Sensex but to ensure that the underlying fundamentals of the economy and its financial system are sound enough for sustainable growth. Any positive consequences to the Sensex are welcome but are only a collateral benefit, not the objective. Finally, India will, for the foreseeable future, run a current account deficit, which means we will need net foreign financing. The best form of financing is long term equity, that is, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), which has the additional benefit of bringing in new technologies and methods. While we should not be railroaded into compromising India’s interest to attract FDI – for example, the requirements to patent a medicine in India are perfectly reasonable, no matter what the international drug companies say – we should ensure policies are transparent and redress quick. If we make it easier for young Indian companies to do business, we will also make it easier for foreign companies to invest, for after all both are outsiders to the system. This means a transparent and quick legal process to deal with contractual disputes, and a proper system of bankruptcy to deal with distress. Both are issues the government has taken on. Let me turn finally to the international framework. 4) Work towards a more open and fair global system As a country that does not belong to any power block, and that does not export vital natural resources but is dependent on substantial commodity imports, India needs an open, competitive and vibrant system of international trade and finance. Our energy security, for example, lies not in owning oil assets in remote fragile countries but in ensuring the global oil market works well and is not disrupted. We need strong independent multilateral institutions that can play the role of impartial arbiter in facilitating international economic transactions. Unfortunately, the international monetary system is still dominated by the frameworks put in place in the past by industrial countries, and its governance is still dominated by their citizens. To be fair, it is changing, albeit slowly. But there is a more immediate reason for faster change. With slow growth, as well as the need to finance large debt loads, the interest of industrial countries in an open global system cannot be taken for granted. For instance, regulations that have the appearance of shoring up safety and soundness of the industrial country financial system may have the collateral effect of discouraging investment in emerging market assets. We have to recognize that slow growth may direct industrial economy policymakers’ attention inwards, even while politics turns protectionist. The multilateral governance system, still dominated by industrial countries, may not provide a sufficient defence of openness. Emerging markets may therefore have the responsibility of keeping the global economy open. For this, not only do emerging markets have to work on quota and management reforms in the multilateral institutions, but they also have to work on injecting new agendas, new ideas, and new thinking into the global arena. No longer will it suffice for India to simply object to industrial country proposals, it will have to put some of its own on the table. And this 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  means that our research departments, universities, and think tanks have to develop ideas that they can feed to India’s representatives in international meetings. Conclusion Let me conclude. We are more dependent on the global economy than we think. That it is growing more slowly, and is more inward looking, than in the past means that we have to look to regional and domestic demand for our growth – to make in India primarily for India. Domestic-demand-led growth is notoriously difficult to manage, and typically leads to excess. This is why we need to strengthen domestic macroeconomic institutions, so that we can foster sustainable and stable growth. At the same time, we cannot let foreign markets shrink further, and we have to take up the fight for an open global system. Rather than being reactive, we have to be active in setting the agenda. That requires investment in our idea-producing institutions – research departments of official bodies, think tanks, as well as universities. In sum, the diminished expectations in the world at large should not be a reason for us to lower our sights. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jean-Pierre Danthine: Swiss banks from a financial stability perspective Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Vice Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the Media News Conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 1 December 2014. *      *      * In my remarks, I would like to look at the situation of the Swiss banks from a financial stability perspective, taking the big banks first and then moving on to a discussion of domestically focused banks. Strengthening the resilience of the big banks Since the last media news conference, the Swiss big banks have improved their capital situation once again. The Swiss National Bank recognises the considerable progress made in this area as regards both risk-weighted capital ratios and leverage ratios. It is also of the opinion that the strengthening of the big banks’ resilience must continue, for the following reasons. First, risks in the economic and financial environment remain high. In several of the adverse scenarios considered by the SNB, the estimated loss potential for the big banks continues to be substantial relative to their capitalisation. This is also the case when viewed in a historical perspective, as evidenced during the recent financial crisis. Second, while the big banks’ risk-weighted capital ratios are above the average for large globally active banks, the same still cannot be said for their leverage ratios. In this context, the SNB supports the recommendations by the group of experts headed by Professor Brunetti on the evaluation of the “too big to fail” regulatory framework. The report advocates a recalibration of capital requirements in order to ensure that Switzerland is in a leading position internationally in terms of the requirements for both risk-weighted capital ratios and leverage ratios. In particular, the report stresses that leverage ratio requirements for systemically important banks have been increased in several countries compared to the minimum proposed by the Basel Committee. In the SNB’s view, a possible recalibration of capital requirements must reflect the size and concentration of our banking sector. In fact, it is imperative that a lasting solution be found for the “too big to fail” issue in Switzerland. Increasing the credibility of model-based risk-weighted assets Beyond recalibrating capital requirements, increasing the credibility of the model-based risk-weighted assets (RWA) is essential. This is all the more important as RWA remain a key element of banking regulation. The Brunetti group of experts, too, considers this to be a prime objective and the issue has also been recognised at international level. The Basel Committee has therefore announced the release of a set of measures for consultation. These measures mainly provide for the revision of the standardised approaches for RWA calculation, the introduction of an RWA floor based on the standardised approaches, as well as greater transparency. The floor is aimed at ensuring that the requirements for banks using the model-based approach remain sufficiently prudent. In this regard, let us also recall that FINMA – together with the big banks and with the support of the SNB – has conducted a comparison of RWA calculated with the model-based approach and the standardised approach. The SNB suggests that banks consider the possibility of publishing the results of this analysis in appropriate form. In any case, the SNB remains convinced that banks which use the model-based approach for calculating their RWA must continue to improve their transparency with regard to their risks. Considerable 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  progress has been made already, especially in terms of disclosing changes in RWA broken down by cause. Publishing a parallel calculation of RWA based on the standardised approach would greatly contribute to building trust and market discipline. Enhanced transparency is likely to be a key component of the measures that the Basel Committee will put in consultation. Domestically focused commercial banks I would now like to turn to the situation of the domestically focused banks. Risks facing these banks are still primarily connected with the mortgage and real estate markets. These risks have largely remained unchanged at a high level over the past six months. In the last half year, the momentum in the mortgage market slowed, with annual growth in mortgage lending slightly less high than in the previous quarters. The mortgage volume continued to rise more steeply than GDP, but the difference between the two growth rates has become smaller. Furthermore, real estate prices continued to rise but, as in 2013, momentum remained below the levels observed until 2012. Developments still varied widely from one region to the other. Whereas real estate prices in some regions hardly increased or even decreased, other regions continued to register significant price rises. However, it is still too early for an all-clear. First, the imbalances that have built up since the beginning of the low-interest-rate phase remain at a high level. Second, mortgage interest rates have again dropped to historically low levels in the past few months. And third, there are no broad-based indications of a change in the banks’ risk appetite. Mortgage lending growth at the domestically focused banks has also decreased, but is still markedly higher than overall market growth. Moreover, the affordability risk (loan-to-income ratio) in mortgage lending has continued to rise, interest rate risk remains at a historically high level, and interest rate margins have fallen even further, from a level which was already low. In these exceptional circumstances, banks should ensure that their resilience is high enough to be able to bear the risks taken, even in the event of a marked real estate price correction combined with an interest rate shock. The countercyclical capital buffer plays a significant role in this context by ensuring that banks hold additional capital as a buffer in the current situation. Adding to that, many banks have a surplus of capital with respect to the regulatory requirements. Such surplus capital is especially important under the current circumstances. Banks should therefore maintain these surpluses in future, or should establish and increase them in line with their risk profile. As before, the SNB will regularly assess whether the countercyclical capital buffer needs to be adjusted due to mortgage and real estate market developments. If the momentum in these markets picks up again, additional measures to limit the affordability risk in mortgage lending should be taken into consideration. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Fritz Zurbrügg: Review of financial market developments, and various interest rate and foreign exchange benchmark reforms Introductory remarks by Mr Fritz Zurbrügg, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the Media News Conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 1 December 2014. *      *      * In my remarks, I will begin by talking about developments on financial markets since the middle of the year. Then I will speak about the various reform efforts in the area of interest rate and foreign exchange benchmarks. Developments on the financial markets After a lengthy period of calm, volatility has increased slightly on the financial markets since the middle of the year. In addition, investors’ appetite for risk has dipped at times, and the risk markets have suffered temporary setbacks. Thus we have observed two waves of selling on the stock markets over the past few months (cf. chart 1). At the end of July, the European stock markets, in particular, were affected, while those in the US and the emerging economies proved more resilient. The second, more serious wave of selling set in at the end of September, making a significant impact on the major non-European markets as well. The main trigger for both waves was unexpectedly weak economic data in the core economies of the euro area and Japan. To some extent, this negative effect was aggravated by geopolitical tensions. However, chart 1 also shows that these waves of selling were relatively short-lived. A number of share indices, including the S&P 500 in the US and the SPI in Switzerland, rapidly made good their losses and have in fact attained new highs in the meantime. Important share indices within the euro area, such as the Euro Stoxx 50, have also been able to recoup their losses, and their most recent levels roughly matched those of mid-year. Apart from the continued recovery of the economy in the US and the predominantly sound corporate profits on both sides of the Atlantic, the fact that central banks in the euro area, Japan and China have eased their monetary policies is likely to have played an important role in this regard. Looking at interest rates, yields on government bonds have continued to decline. This is partly a reflection of low inflation and the decline in inflation expectations in the major advanced economies. The fall in yields has been particularly marked in the euro area, where investors are expecting further monetary policy easing measures. Accordingly, yields on ten-year German government bonds have come down by more than 50 basis points since the end of June, while the yields on comparable US government bonds have declined by some 30 basis points. In the same period, yields on ten-year Swiss Confederation bonds have decreased by around 35 basis points, most recently hitting a historical low of about 0.3%. Foreign exchange markets have been significantly affected by the relative strength of economic developments in the US and the correspondingly higher interest rate expectations. Since the end of June, the trade-weighted US dollar has risen by nearly 10%. By contrast, the trade-weighted euro has lost over 3.5%, while the yen has lost almost 12% of its value. Chart 2 shows that, since the middle of the year, the strength of the US dollar has also made itself felt with respect to the Swiss franc. However, the chart also shows that the Swiss franc has become stronger against the euro over the past few months. It is likely that this is mainly due to two factors. On the one hand, the disappointing path of the euro area economy, and the further easing in monetary policy associated with this, have been responsible for a weakening in the euro. On the other, the pressure on the Swiss franc has reflected the strong demand for safe investments, particularly in periods of increased geopolitical tension. Since 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  mid-year, the trade-weighted Swiss franc exchange rate has barely changed overall. Thus, the Swiss franc is still high. Reform efforts in the area of interest rate and foreign exchange benchmarks This brings me to the progress that has been made in reforming interest rate and foreign exchange benchmarks. In recent years, revelations of manipulations have undermined the credibility of these benchmarks. At international level, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) is coordinating the reform efforts. At the same time, country-specific reforms are being implemented at national level. In Switzerland, responsibility for benchmarks lies, in principle, with the private sector and these benchmarks are not regulated. Nevertheless, the SNB is particularly interested that benchmarks for interest rates and exchange rates should be credible, since they are important for well-functioning financial markets and for the implementation of monetary policy. That is why the SNB has supported reform efforts in the area of benchmarks by taking part in various national and international working groups. I have reported here on these efforts on several occasions. The FSB has published two final reports since our last media news conference, so this provides me with a good opportunity to draw some initial conclusions. Benchmarks for interest rates As regards benchmark interest rates, the final report recommends pursuing two main approaches in the future. First, existing interest rate benchmarks should be further improved. Second, efforts should be made to develop alternative benchmark interest rates. Thus the two-pronged approach for the future envisages, alongside improved Libor interest rates which would still be based on unsecured money market transactions, the emergence of more benchmark interest rates related to repo transactions or other near risk-free transactions. The FSB’s final report states that significant progress has already been achieved with the Libor rates. However, not all of the requirements set by the securities regulators (IOSCO standards)1 have so far been met. In particular, it still remains unclear whether the markets upon which the interest rates are based are sufficiently liquid. A certain level of liquidity is needed to ensure robust benchmark rates, i.e. rates based on a sufficiently large number of transactions. The Libor administrator, ICE Benchmark Administration (IBA), reacted to the FSB report by announcing further improvements to ensure that the Libor rates would become better established through the use of actual transactions. Such actual transactions will be used either directly, for calculating the Libor rates, or indirectly, for underpinning the contributions. In this context, the inclusion of short-term loans to large customers or money market instruments, in addition to interbank market transactions, is being examined as a future possibility. In order to assess the FSB proposals, surveys are being conducted to collect data in the currency areas concerned. The SNB conducted such a survey at the beginning of summer for Switzerland, collecting data on bank transactions on the interbank market and with large customers, as well as on trade in money market instruments. More than 50 domestic and foreign banks took part in the survey. The results confirmed that the small number of actual transactions on the money market currently constitutes a problem for the creation of robust benchmark interest rates. Consequently, it seems improbable that a pure transactions-based approach could be implemented for the Swiss franc. This is also the case if other transaction types and additional instruments are taken into account. For this reason, the Swiss franc Libor will continue to be based mainly on contributions by participating banks.                                                 1 IOSCO is the International Organization of Securities Commissions. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  As I mentioned before, in addition to improvements in the existing Libor interest rates, the FSB also proposes that alternative benchmark interest rates be developed. In Switzerland, alternative interest rates for very short-term Swiss franc transactions already exist. An example of these on the secured money market is SARON,2 which is the basis for the interest rate curve on the Swiss franc repo market. On the unsecured market we have the TOIS3 fixing, which is related to transactions in the area of call money and is used for interest rate derivatives. However, reforms were also necessary for the TOIS fixing. Consequently, new standards have been in place since 1 October. These are in line with international requirements and have resulted in a number of enhancements, including improvements to supervisory structures and codes of conduct. For these benchmark rates, too, the underlying transaction volume is currently very low. Foreign exchange benchmarks I will now turn my attention to benchmarks on the foreign exchange market. On the international financial markets, currencies are traded around the clock. There are no final rates for any given day. Given this situation, benchmarks on the foreign exchange market provide numerous investors, such as investment funds or asset managers, with a basis which they can use for uniform valuation of their portfolios. One of the best-known benchmarks is the WM/Reuters fix, which is set daily at 4.00 pm, London time; it is calculated as the median of actual foreign exchange transactions conducted within the period of one minute. The FSB working group took on the task of investigating the way in which these benchmarks were fixed and recommending ways to improve them. The group’s work was independent of simultaneous investigations into foreign market manipulation by supervisory authorities in a number of different countries, which resulted in the imposition of fines in November. The final report presented at the end of September found that – unlike the situation for benchmark interest rates – liquidity in the foreign exchange market was high and therefore provided an adequate breadth of data for calculating benchmarks. However, the problem for benchmark fixing in this area stems from a different source, namely the fact that trading orders become heavily concentrated shortly ahead of the fixing time. This gives traders opportunities to manipulate the price of the fixing to their own advantage. In order to eliminate these opportunities, the working group is proposing that the fixing window be widened, thereby broadening the range of data sources. In addition, the group also recommends various codes of conduct guidelines for fixing orders. What is particularly important is to ensure that banks do not share information with each other about customer orders before the fixing. The SNB supports the recommendations contained in the report by the working group. It is now up to the private sector, first and foremost, to implement these recommendations. The reforms carried out so far, with regard to both interest rate benchmarks and foreign exchange benchmarks, are steps in the right direction. The SNB will carefully monitor implementation of the reform proposals for foreign exchange benchmarks and provide support, if necessary. In the case of interest rate benchmarks, the FSB’s work will continue with the further participation of the SNB.                                                 2 Swiss Average Rate Overnight. 3 Tomorrow/Next Overnight Indexed Swap. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Financial System Review Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press conference following the release of the Financial System Review, Ottawa, Ontario, 10 December 2014. *      *      * Good morning. Senior Deputy Governor Carolyn Wilkins and I are pleased to be here today to discuss the December issue of our biannual Financial System Review (FSR), which we published this morning. The purpose of the FSR is not to predict the most likely outcomes for the financial system. Instead, we use it to highlight key financial vulnerabilities and the catalysts that could turn those vulnerabilities into a risk to the financial system. The FSR is an essential complement to our Monetary Policy Report. Together, the two streams of analysis provide the basis for a fulsome discussion of monetary policy, within a risk-management framework. Although we view risks to the financial system separately from risks to growth and inflation, we think carefully about the interplay between them. In this FSR, we discuss three important financial system vulnerabilities: high household indebtedness; imbalances in the housing market; and increased investor risk taking. To some extent, all three are normal side effects of stimulative monetary policy. However, the post-crisis recovery has been frustratingly slow – we have called it serial disappointment – and bond yields and policy interest rates have been unusually low for a long time. In this context, these financial vulnerabilities have built up over time. Fortunately, Canada’s economy is showing the first signs of a broadening recovery. Non-energy exports have been responding to stronger U.S. growth and exchange rate depreciation, investment spending appears to be picking up, and we have seen pockets of new job creation. This natural rebuilding sequence is key to reducing financial vulnerabilities over time. In particular, our expectation of a soft landing for housing hinges on stronger growth, employment and incomes. The recent weakness in oil and other commodity prices raises important risks to this economic outlook, however. This shock is especially complex: it is likely to boost global growth but to moderate growth and inflation in Canada, even though the effects should be tempered by exchange rate depreciation and stronger non-energy exports. The potential consequences for the financial system will be monitored carefully in the months ahead. Meanwhile, the global financial system is stronger and more resilient, thanks to continued progress on implementing the G-20 regulatory framework and the efforts of policy-makers and market participants around the world, including Canada. In light of this continued progress, and taking into account the early signs of stronger exports, investment and employment in Canada, we judge that the probability of an adverse shock has eased since our June FSR. This mitigates our observation that some financial vulnerabilities appear to be edging higher, leaving our overall assessment of financial stability risk roughly the same as in June. That is why we continue to believe that the overall balance of risks remains within the zone for which the current stance of monetary policy is appropriate. Let me just add a few comments specific to the most important risk discussed in the FSR: the difficulty that highly indebted households would have servicing their debt if they were to face a sharp decline in their incomes or a sharp rise in interest rates. This situation raises the risk that a shock to the economy could trigger a correction in house prices. The probability of this risk materializing is low, but if it did occur, the effect on the economy would be severe. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  This risk would be greater if house prices were judged to be overvalued relative to fundamentals. Bank economists have done some new research on this risk, highlighted in a box in our FSR, and in a research paper released today on our website. Although there is considerable uncertainty around this question, various approaches – including our own – suggest that there is some risk that the housing market is overvalued, and our estimates fall in the 10 to 30 per cent range. We experienced housing corrections in the early 1980s and the early 1990s, after periods when prices became overvalued to a similar extent. But both of those episodes were preceded by a much faster run-up in prices amid rising inflation expectations. In both cases, interest rates rose as monetary policy leaned against inflation, and a recession ensued. None of those conditions is present today. The rise in house prices has been much more gradual and, in the context of a broadening recovery, the unwinding of household imbalances should be gradual as well. That is why we continue to expect a soft landing in the housing market, but it is conditional on continued strengthening in the economy. Let me reiterate the bottom line of the Financial System Review: After careful analysis of the latest economic, financial and regulatory developments at home and abroad, our assessment is that while vulnerabilities associated with household indebtedness and housing markets are edging higher, the overall risk to financial stability in Canada is roughly the same as it was at the time of our June FSR. With that, Carolyn and I are happy to take your questions. 
   Stephen S Poloz: Speculating on the future of finance Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Economic Club of New York, New York City, 11 December 2014. *      *      * Introduction Thank you for the invitation to speak here today. It is always a pleasure to be in New York, and it is a special treat for me to address this distinguished audience. I’d like to talk with you about the future of finance. Now, I know I don’t have to convince anyone in this room of the importance of financial intermediation. Just as you can’t have lights without power lines, you can’t have economic growth without financial intermediation. But as you also know well, our financial regulators have spent the last five years putting financial reforms in place in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis. There is absolutely no doubt that these reforms will affect the future of finance, but none of us really knows how. Financial intermediation is already evolving in response to the reforms, and I think it is worth speculating on how these trends might develop in the future. The only assumption I make is this one: no amount of regulation can snuff out the forces of competition – competition is a force of nature, and it is going to manifest itself in some way, for there is a lot of money at stake. Regulatory response to the crisis: too much or too little? At the G-20 Summit in Brisbane, leaders acknowledged that we have delivered on the core commitments made in response to the financial crisis. Yes, there are still some important issues to address, particularly with respect to consistent implementation of these reforms. But for the most part the core of the world’s financial system is far safer today. Depending on your perspective, these reforms are either overly harsh, or too lax. A systemically important bank sees the steep cost of reform, while the unemployed worker still feels the steep cost of the crisis. My perspective as a central banker is a macro one, and I can tell you that by the end of last year, the cumulative loss to global output owing to the crisis was roughly US$10 trillion, which is close to 15 per cent of global GDP. Over 60 million jobs were destroyed. We have rightly made a strong commitment to address the most serious fault lines exposed by the crisis, to reduce significantly the probability and severity of future ones. In short, we would like to ensure that this never happens again. No doubt, the sweeping scope and complexity of these reforms has some thinking that the new regulatory architecture is excessively tight, at least at first glance. Of course, optimizing the scope and intensity of regulation was never going to be easy. The new regulatory architecture is the outcome of a political process with many trade-offs and significant differences across financial systems. Accordingly, the principles behind the reforms matter more than the rules themselves – principles, complemented by a high level of supervisory vigilance. Fact is, the financial world is a dynamic place, where competition is inherent to it, regardless of market structure. Principles-based financial regulation sets a high bar under which competitive forces can still foster financial innovation, innovation that is more likely to be socially improving than simply evasive. BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  
   In Canada, active and vigilant supervision goes hand in hand with this principles-based approach to regulation. To help monitor potential emerging risks, we have a comprehensive radar system that includes surveillance, guidance and enforcement. Canadians have found that this complementary approach to regulation and supervision is conducive to responsible financial innovation. An important objective of these G-20 financial reforms is consistent implementation across jurisdictions, but in a manner that avoids unduly impeding financial innovation. I see such innovation in financial intermediation as essential to fostering regulatory balance between maintaining financial stability on the one hand and facilitating competitive market forces on the other hand. As people in the financial industry create new ways to do business – some call this regulatory arbitrage, which of course sounds like a bad thing – their innovations help re-set this balance, prompting regulation to adapt to positive progress in financial intermediation. There is a natural incentive behind financial innovation, since there is a lot of money at stake for those who innovate successfully. There is a lot at stake for the macroeconomy, too, because a return to sustainable economic growth around the world will require continued financial innovation. Regulation must allow these natural forces to manifest themselves, albeit in a safe way. Where the creative forces might take us Given this context, let’s speculate about the future of financial intermediation: How will the forces of competition manifest themselves in the years ahead? Let’s start with banks. Some may choose to shed business lines that have relatively low risk-adjusted returns. In particular, capital market activities could shrink as the risk weights associated with them increase. This has already started: since 2007 global banks have already sold off more than US$700 billion in assets and operations, of which foreign operations account for almost half. Furthermore, in response to the new resolution requirements, some large banks may simplify their organizational structures. I’m not suggesting that large universal banks will disappear. They will likely persist, at least because of the significant economies of scale associated with payments and foreign exchange. Large banks will also remain because there will be an ongoing need to serve global clients. For their part, smaller and less-complex banks will probably increase their focus on traditional banking. We can’t be definitive about these predictions, for we simply do not know how competitive forces will operate in this new environment. But it would be surprising if the net effect were not to reduce the availability of credit. If financial markets had imperfections before, some of those imperfections are likely to be even more evident under the new regulatory environment. This is straight out of your first economics textbook. It goes without saying that reduced availability of credit would be a headwind to economic growth. And, if there are funding gaps in our system at the best of times, and they turn out to be a little bigger under our new regulatory umbrella, those funding gaps will probably be found in all the usual places: lending for young businesses, small- and medium-sized companies, trade finance and infrastructure, to name a few. These areas of retreat by banks could look like good opportunities for other financial intermediaries. We can imagine several different channels where the forces of competition might emerge, all of which could occur simultaneously. 2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  
   First, there is market-based finance. As banks rein in their risk-taking, we can expect that market-based finance will play a larger role than it currently does. We can see this happening already. For starters, in some markets companies increasingly fund themselves by issuing bonds on the market. In the U.S., while bank dealers have significantly reduced their inventories of corporate bonds, non-bank lenders have increased their holdings of corporate bonds. Whether they are structured as asset managers, insurers, non-bank financial firms or retail investors, these groups are opportunistically filling the void that traditional bankers have created. Securitization is another market-based channel that could really expand in this new world. Although the very word securitization has been tainted by the crisis, I can imagine that a new class of high-quality, low-risk securitization products could differentiate itself from the mistakes of the past. Such innovations are to be welcomed, provided that they are created in a manner that does not pose new or growing risks to the financial system, such as liquidity shortfalls in times of stress. Importantly, market-based finance can even be a source of economic stability, if such intermediaries react differently to market turbulence than banks. In effect, countries with diversified financing sources may be better placed to weather shocks to the economy. However, market-based finance is unlikely to erase all of the imperfections in our future financial system. In particular, market-based finance is not very effective in reducing information asymmetries, so it probably will not fill the funding gap for young, small- or medium-sized businesses. No doubt, Mother Nature has a plan to fill those gaps in time, and one probable source is private lending and equity, a second channel where competitive forces are likely to emerge. There have been significant advances in technology that are sure to influence the future provisioning of private capital. One notable example is peer-to-peer (P2P) finance, which directly connects private lenders with borrowers via the Internet. An important element of this model is that there is no middleman, nor is there any liquidity or maturity transformation as in traditional banking or market-based finance. While P2P finance is still in its infancy, it is already transforming private capital provision and growing fast in pockets in the U.K., the U.S. and China. Although it originally focused on pooled funds from smaller investors, P2P finance is increasingly being dominated by big institutions and hedge funds with about two-thirds of the funds loaned coming from institutional investors. This is already changing the face of P2P finance in very important ways. P2P finance has an impressive cost advantage over traditional banking and since there is a lot of money at stake, as usual, competitive forces are certain to manifest themselves. With automated credit checks and “no skin in the game,” the operating expenses in P2P lending, for example, run about one-third that of traditional banks. With that advantage, P2P lending provides the opportunity for both savers and borrowers to get a “better” deal. However, there is no such thing as a free lunch. The cost of that better deal is the significant risk that the participants take on. Despite the risks, we can easily imagine a world in which P2P finance thrives. It has already begun to spread to a wide variety of new sectors, such as student loans, real estate, hedging, auto loans, equipment finance, medical loans, business-to-business lending, and so on. Over time, we could see P2P finance become more global, and could also see the development of a deep secondary market in securitized P2P loans. If I am right that there will be less credit available from traditional banks, it’s not a stretch to think that the young, the small and the medium, and the risky companies, will begin to tap into this P2P finance channel to meet their credit needs. BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  
   This evolution could be key to an eventual return to sustainable economic growth, as I am convinced that a return to natural growth – as opposed to policy-induced growth – will require a resumption of new firm creation, sustained by innovative financial intermediation. Will a surge in P2P finance mean new risks to the financial system? Perhaps. Will those risks be systemic in nature? We don’t have a clear answer yet, but with the increasing participation of institutional investors in this space and increasing market shares of P2P finance, there could be financial stability implications. And what if Mother Nature does not fix all the imperfections in our financial system through market-based or private finance? The third channel that we might expect to play an enhanced role in a credit-constrained world is public finance. Public financial intermediaries are active in such areas as lending to small and medium-sized enterprises and trade finance, and these demands could rise in the years ahead. But the bigger need for a public sector solution is more likely to be in the area of infrastructure investment. So-called “green infrastructure” is particularly susceptible to market failure, as it suffers from both the basic free-rider problem and societal mispricing – a double market failure, if you will. Public-private partnerships (or P3s) have proven to be an increasingly effective tool for funding these investments, but they have not been a panacea. The P3 space is not exempt from our call for more financial innovation. Innovative ways of risk-sharing in investment projects – for example, governments offering innovative guarantee structures where they take on a contingent fiscal risk as opposed to laying out large expenditures up front – are clearly worth experimenting with. Private sector intermediaries, pension funds, and sovereign wealth funds should be actively encouraged to develop and propose such innovations. Once again, there is a lot of money at stake. It should be clear by now that I am a big fan of market forces. The returns from successful financial innovation in market-based finance and P2P finance are likely to be very large, from the perspectives of both the innovator and the macroeconomist. Allowing those competitive forces to flourish, within principles-based regulation aimed at protecting the financial system, is essential for future economic growth. Tweaking public financial intermediation should take care of the rest of our market imperfections. But all of these market structures exist already, so speculating on their future is not that much of a stretch. That makes me wonder if we are missing something big. How blue-sky do we want to get? Does anybody besides me wonder what the banking system looks like in the background of Star Trek? Or, what about the corporatist model of finance, which lies in the background of Margaret Atwood’s novel, The Year of the Flood? Now that’s blue-sky thinking: people work for a massive corporation, live in the corporate compound, go to corporate restaurants and events, and bank with a financial intermediary wholly-owned by their own employer, which in turn invests the funds in growth for the corporation. I suppose that model is far-fetched, but I present it as an illustration that the sky really is the limit in this space. I have offered you a range of possibilities today, but there are many other possible futures for finance. Financial stability is a shared responsibility A bright future is one where the financial system is safe and efficient – and innovative. Financial regulation needs to be designed to allow competitive forces to work, and allow innovation to happen. 4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  
   I said earlier that it is very difficult to strike the perfect balance between regulation and innovation. Indeed, public authorities can’t strike a perfect balance alone. That balance is the product of regulation and the underlying forces of competition I have talked about. The simple fact is that financial intermediation is, for the most part, a scale business. Operating at scale creates the risk of market failure, or market imperfections, as we well know. Accordingly, operating at scale demands that the financial intermediary do so under a social license which, of course, goes hand in hand with regulation. In short, this is a contract. All contracts function best when the two parties live not just by the letter, but by the spirit underlying the agreement. I’ve asked you to imagine some possible financial futures; now, can you imagine one where regulated financial players uphold not just the letter, but the spirit of the new global regulatory framework? What I am suggesting is that the industry be at the vanguard of positive change, and voluntarily embrace the spirit of financial regulation. Use this positive response as a brand to rebuild trust in the street, especially Main Street. And, in the process, demonstrate the effectiveness of principles-based financial regulation that allows competition and innovation to facilitate economic growth. Conclusion Let me wrap up. Financial regulation is costly, but that cost pales compared with the fallout from the financial crisis. We are still paying for that. Global regulatory reform was absolutely essential. So let’s work together to make it better. Thankfully, the balance between regulation and innovation is dynamic, not static – competitive forces ensure this. We are at a critical juncture for the global economy. We have been through a destructive business cycle, and policies will need to remain stimulative until the legacy headwinds subside and the rebuilding phase truly gets underway. That rebuilding phase will require a substantial pickup in new firm creation and young firm survival, in particular, which will foster new job creation. Creative financial intermediation is a necessary ingredient for this rebuilding process. In Canada, we had a less difficult cycle than most other countries, in part because of the resilience of our financial system. Even so, we saw significant destruction in our export sector, the backbone of our economy. We have been waiting for a resumption of export growth, to be followed by a rekindling of animal spirits, investment in new capacity and new firm and new job creation, and it looks like that natural sequence may have finally begun. We have plenty of room to grow, however, so it will take another couple of years before our economy can enjoy steady, natural growth with inflation sustainably on target. It is this return to natural growth that we all want to see. But it simply will not happen without vigorous and innovative financial intermediation. We need to embrace our new regulatory architecture and get on with the job. BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Peter Praet: Current issues in monetary policy Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington DC, 9 December 2014. *      *      * I would like to thank Tobias Blattner for his contribution to this speech. Summary The ECB has responded forcefully to counter growing risks of a too prolonged period of low inflation. The current set of measures will enhance our monetary policy stance, incentivise bank lending, overcome remaining impairments in our transmission mechanism and underpin the firm anchoring of medium- to longer-term inflation expectations. Tentative evidence suggests that our credit easing package is delivering some tangible first benefits. But we need to remain vigilant as to whether the force of monetary stimulus already in the pipeline remains sufficient to reach our objective. If needed, one option for the ECB to ease the monetary policy stance further would be to extend its asset purchases towards other asset classes. Purchases of different asset classes will affect private sector financing conditions to varying degrees as they will activate different transmission channels and affect different spread components. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, Let me thank the organisers for inviting me here today. Konrad Adenauer – Germany’s first post-war Chancellor – once famously said, (and freely translated): “Why should I care about remarks I made in the past?” He said so knowing that the speed at which events unfold may – at times –outpace our comprehension of them at any given moment. And when I went back to the remarks I gave here in the spring of last year, my impression was that the pace of events over the past year or so was indeed dramatic. In May last year I discussed two things. I discussed the challenges monetary policy faces when banks engage in rapid leveraging and deleveraging. I noted that “the central bank may have to be vigilant that the pace of asset reduction by banks is commensurate with an evolution of income, activity, and employment that does not create downside risks to price stability”. And I discussed the long-term strategy of the ECB. Here I highlighted two main attributes of this strategy, namely that “it must be sufficiently flexible to adjust its policy conduct to the specific challenges at hand. And it must be sufficiently binding to anchor expectations and build central bank credibility with market participants and the general public”. When reading through my notes, I asked myself: did we indeed have a steady eye on the state of the banking sector? And have we applied the two principles of our strategy – that it is flexible and binding – in what turned out to be a very challenging year or so for monetary policy in the euro area? I think the answer to these questions is a qualified yes. A flexible policy response Let me start from the spring of this year. Our diagnosis at that time was that borrowing rates were becoming too unreactive to policy changes. We saw that our policy impulses – a combined cut of 50bps in our key policy rate 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  over the preceding year – were no longer being transmitted to private borrowing costs in the way they used to. As a result – and despite our very accommodative stance – bank lending rates remained at elevated levels in large parts of the euro area. This meant that weak credit dynamics were increasingly becoming a source of downside pressures regarding our medium-term inflation outlook. In other words, a dysfunctional bank lending channel was in full display: excessively restrictive borrowing conditions were suppressing demand in the countries where they were applied, and indirectly – through intra-euro area trade linkages – were contributing to economic weakness in the rest of the euro area. So, we had a very close eye on the banking sector as you can see. How did we respond to our diagnosis? In the face of these risks, we did precisely what any central bank would have done: we acted to restore transmission and bring down the average borrowing costs paid by households and firms to levels more consistent with the intended stance of our policy. This was the philosophy underlying our credit easing package that we adopted between June and October this year. The transmission mechanism we wanted to activate – the bank lending channel – was quite simple and, I would add, orthodox in its underlying logic. Our targeted long-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) provide significant term funding relief for banks: a very low fixed rate over a period of up to four years. They are designed to maximise the chances that banks pass the funding relief on to their borrowers. Banks will have to repay loans in advance if they fail to meet the agreed lending benchmark. And the more they lend beyond the benchmark, the more they are allowed to borrow. This positive incentive is amplified by the use of a multiplier. This shows clearly that we put incentives first, employing them to counteract the existing impairments in the bank lending channel. The ABS purchase programme (ABSPP), which we first announced in June and which became operational in November, will help further lubricate the transmission process. It can activate the same scarcity channel that was found to be a critical ingredient in the success of the Fed’s Large Scale Asset Purchase Programme. This channel works as follows: ABS purchases push down the market spreads paid on senior tranches, currently the main focus of our purchases. They do so by subtracting volumes from potential private investors in such tranches, and thus encourage banks to relieve the resulting scarcity by originating more ABS. Ultimately, they can only do this by creating more loans. The result is again an increase in loan supply. And as the supply of loans shifts to the right along a given demand for credit, lending rates adjust downward to create the necessary demand. In September we added an additional leg to our June package: purchases of euro area covered bonds (CBPP3), again with a view to making credit more abundant and less expensive. Covered bonds share some of the characteristics of the ABS: notably, they are loan-backed securities where the same scarcity channel can be put to work. Importantly, the CBPP3 has also strengthened the quantitative dimension of our policy. By increasing the pool of purchasable assets – and by communicating our intention that our combined measures will help bring the ECB’s balance sheet back to levels it had in early 2012 – we are providing guidance on the overall scale of our interventions; a scale considered necessary to deliver the intended support to inflation and the recovery of the euro area economy. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  And in scaling up the volume of our measures, we have also broadened the scope of transmission. The TLTROs and the ABSPP primarily work through what is called a direct price and pass-through effect. That is, both measures are designed to ensure an unimpeded transmission of our actions to the ultimate borrowing costs of the private sector. Purchases in the covered bond market will have a similar effect, but because of the size and liquidity of the market, other transmission channels may become more important in relative terms. In particular, our covered bond purchases will also activate two prime transmission channels of large-scale asset purchases: the portfolio rebalancing and signalling channels, which are more dependent on the size of the monetary stimulus. So, I think it is fair to say that our response so far has been flexible. The diagnosis that led to our credit easing package identified a dysfunctional bank lending channel as a prime threat to achieving our ultimate objective of price stability. Our measures were tailor-made to that objective and offer a powerful response to address the root cause of the impaired bank lending, and thus to facilitate new credit flows to the economy. Is it working? Tentative evidence suggests yes: our credit easing package is indeed delivering some tangible first benefits. Broad measures of nominal financial conditions have eased and spreads on senior ABS and covered bonds have fallen. Consistent with our expectations, price adjustments have been particularly pronounced in those segments where we intervened directly. The case of the ABS market stands out: spreads fell by an impressive 70bps since May although our purchases only started a few weeks ago. By way of comparison: the Fed’s QE-1 announcements, which involved combined purchases of nearly $2tn of MBS, Treasuries and GSEs, are estimated to have lowered 30-year MBS yields by some 100bps. At the same time, the broad-based nature of the easing across markets suggests that the signalling effect – operating through a flattening of the OIS curve – has also been a powerful element of our response. Lending rates have fallen too. Since May the composite indicator of the nominal cost of bank borrowing for euro area NFCs fell by 40bps to 2.6% in October. In Italy this indicator fell by nearly 60bps. In other words, the premium Italian firms pay for bank borrowing relative to the average euro area firm has fallen in recent months – a sign that the transmission of our policy is gaining traction. Lending volumes seem to be responding too. Evidence is growing that a turning point in loan dynamics might have been reached. As a result, the downward pressure on the output gap stemming from impaired credit supply is levelling off. At the same time, banks also report an increase in loan demand, which means that our measures come at the right time: banks would not borrow under TLTRO unless demand for loans strengthens. A binding policy response But flexibility aside, have we also adhered to the other element of our strategy I mentioned last year: have our measures been binding enough? Here we need to be more cautious in our assessment. The fact is that – despite our broad-based measures and the associated fall in private borrowing costs – inflation has not stopped trending down. In November inflation in the euro area fell back to a cyclical low of 0.3%. When we last met here in May 2013 it was still at 1.4%. The sharp fall in oil prices since the summer – down by 30% in euro terms since early June – explains a significant portion of this fall. But measures of underlying inflation – stripping out volatile items such as energy and food – have also continued trending down. Falling core inflation points to weakness in broad aggregate demand – consistent with the loss of economic momentum we observed in recent 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  months. And our latest staff projections foresee a material downgrade of the macroeconomic outlook. These developments have also affected inflation expectations. Short-term inflation expectations have almost moved in tandem with the fall in headline inflation. But more recently – basically since the summer – we have also observed a fall in medium- to long-term inflation expectations. In principle, these should not be too reactive to short-term commodity price gyrations. Does this mean our actions have not been binding enough? Not necessarily. First, notwithstanding their recent decline, most market- and survey-based measures of medium-term inflation expectations remain in close vicinity to our aim to keep inflation close to, but below 2%. Second, the fall in market-based measures was not limited to the euro area. Break-even rates and medium-term inflation swaps also fell in other jurisdictions, such as in the US. This of course does not mean that we can ignore these developments. Well-anchored inflation expectations are indispensable for medium-term price stability. They provide a nominal anchor for the economy. And even more so in the current environment: given the potency of the current oil price shock, the risk is that inflation may temporarily fall into negative territory in coming months. Normally, any central bank would prefer to look through a positive supply shock. After all, lower oil prices boost real incomes and may lead to higher output in the future. But we may not have that luxury at present. The reason is that shocks can change: in certain circumstances supply shocks can morph into demand shocks via second-round effects. In these conditions monetary policy needs to react to what initially appeared to be a supply shock, so as to prevent a destabilisation of inflation expectations. Remember: this is the binding element of our strategy. In light of this, the Governing Council last week reiterated that should the monetary stimulus fall short of our intention to move our balance sheet towards the dimension it had at the beginning of 2012, or should it become necessary to further address risks of a too prolonged a period of low inflation, it remains unanimous in its commitment to using additional unconventional instruments within its mandate. This would imply altering early next year the size, pace and composition of our measures. ECB staff and the relevant Eurosystem committees have therefore stepped up the technical preparations for further measures with a view to implementing them in a timely manner, if needed. Indeed, all of our monetary policy measures are geared towards underpinning the firm anchoring of medium to long-term inflation expectations, in line with our aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2%, and contribute to a return of inflation rates towards that level. Extending the policy response Extending our outright asset purchases towards other asset classes could be one option if we were to judge that the economy was in need of further stimulus. It is important though to constantly keep in mind our intention, our purpose in adopting further measures. Asset purchases are not an end in themselves. They are not a target of monetary policy. They are an instrument of policy. To see this, let us conduct a thought experiment: faced with the circumstances we have now, how would we have reacted in normal times – that is, with positive policy rates and no impairments in transmission? In my view we would have lowered rates further by now. This reaction would have been consistent with and guided by the wealth of evidence gathered over time on the transmission of changes in our key interest rates to borrowing rates and to economic activity and inflation. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  So, when we say our measures intend to bring our balance sheet back to levels seen in early 2012, what we are really saying is that – given the current composition of the unconventional monetary policies that we have put in place – this is the amount needed to bring inflation in the medium term back to levels closer to 2%. And in a bank-based economy such as the euro area, pinning down this amount rests crucially on the effectiveness of our measures in reducing the borrowing costs of households and firms. It follows from this that an important criterion for the choice of additional measures – if needed – should be their degree of influence over broad financing conditions in the private economy, scaled up to an amount of easing judged sufficient to achieve our price stability mandate. This might give rise to a trade-off: some assets might ex ante be more effective than others in reducing private borrowing costs, but might be in short supply. Others might be in abundant supply, but less effective a priori and plagued by institutional complications. Understanding the effectiveness – and hence the transmission – of purchases is therefore key to calibrating both the size and composition of our response in case we need to act further. Purchases of different asset classes will affect private sector financing conditions to varying degrees as they will activate different transmission channels and affect different spread components. For example, purchases of bonds issued by euro area non-financial corporations (NFCs) would probably have some direct pass-through effect to the financing costs of those firms which have the standing and ability to tap credit markets directly. And they could indirectly – through a sort of “trickling down” effect – make credit more abundant and less expensive for smaller firms by increasing the scope for banks to redirect credit provision from larger to smaller enterprises. Also, very low market-based funding costs might incentivise medium-sized firms to replace more expensive bank lending by issuing bonds. But compared to other asset classes, the market for NFC bonds is relatively thin and quite heterogeneous across the euro area. This could imply that potential portfolio rebalancing and signalling effects would be contained. Furthermore, the large issuers which are active in this market are in all likelihood on average not financially constrained, which may limit the propagation of easier funding conditions to their decisions to expand capacity. The transmission would work differently if we were to decide to buy bonds issued by euro area sovereigns. This would be the only market where size would generally not be an issue. Interventions in this market would therefore likely entail a stronger signal that the ECB – consistent with our forward guidance – is committed to maintain an accommodative stance for an extended period of time. This signal should not only compress the risk-free curve further, it should also spill-over to inflation expectations, thereby helping to lower the real expected rate of interest. We would also expect broad portfolio effects to materialise with sellers of government bonds willing to reduce their excess holdings of cash by bidding up the price – and hence lowering the yield – of alternative financial instruments other than those purchased by the central bank. For banks, broader portfolio effects might entail a shift out of government bonds – or other fixed-income instruments – and into loan creation. This essentially works through banks’ opportunity cost of lending. Our analysis shows that sovereign spreads in some Member States are still preventing lending rates from falling further. Remember that the existence of large spreads in the sovereign bond market was probably one of the main reasons why our 3-year LTROs had a limited effect in terms of stimulating credit supply by banks. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Although these spreads have narrowed sharply, there remain considerable differences in real – that is, inflation adjusted – yields across countries. Therefore, if purchases of government bonds were to reduce banks’ opportunity cost of lending by lowering the return of other alternative investments, this might create the incentives for banks to extend credit to the private sector, in particular if banks regain confidence and start to reappraise the macroeconomic outlook as a result of central bank action. In addition, our presence as a buyer in the ABS and covered bond markets eases potential balance sheet capacity and liquidity concerns that go along with an increase in credit supply. A precondition for these channels to unleash their full effects is a healthy banking system. The higher banks’ capital ratios, the lower their bad loan exposure and the more transparent their balance sheets, the larger are the chances that the quantitative impulses of the central bank will get transmitted to the wider economy. In this sense, the completion of the Comprehensive Assessment and the start of the SSM will provide important support to current and potential future efforts to revitalise sluggish lending in the euro area. In particular, increased clarity and transparency about banks’ balance sheets, together with a better capitalised banking sector, will create a more supportive lending environment. Of course, effectiveness is not the only criterion to assess the potential for new measures. In the euro area, the deliberation also needs to build on and factor in the institutional specificities of the euro area, including the boundaries set by the Treaty, notably with respect to the monetary financing prohibition and the no bail-out clause. That is, we cannot simply import the experience from other central banks. We have to carefully design measures that are tailored to the institutional set-up of the euro area. Unlike other central banks, we are not dealing with a single fiscal authority but with a multitude of national fiscal authorities. Conclusion Let me conclude. Since June the ECB has responded forcefully to counter growing risks of a too prolonged period of low inflation. Taken together, our measures will have a sizeable impact on our balance sheet, which is intended to move towards the dimensions it had at the beginning of 2012. In the coming months, our measures will further ease the monetary policy stance more broadly, support our forward guidance on the key ECB interest rates and reinforce the fact that there are significant and increasing differences in the monetary policy cycle between major advanced economies. But the latest euro area macroeconomic projections indicate lower inflation, accompanied by weaker real GDP growth and subdued monetary dynamics. In this context, early next year the Governing Council will reassess the monetary stimulus achieved, the expansion of the balance sheet and the outlook for price developments. We will also evaluate the broader impact of recent oil price developments on medium-term inflation trends in the euro area. Should it become necessary to further address risks of too prolonged a period of low inflation, the Governing Council remains unanimous in its commitment to using additional unconventional instruments within its mandate. This would imply altering early next year the size, pace and composition of our measures. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Erdem Başçi: Recent economic and financial developments in Turkey Speech by Mr Erdem Başçi, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the press conference for the presentation of the October 2014 Inflation Report, Ankara, 31 October 2014. *      *      * Original presentation is on the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey’s website: http://www.tcmb.gov.tr/ wps/wcm/connect/47fed704-6c8d-48a4-9fce-458bc4bad30b/ER_Ekim_2014_Konu% C5%9Fma_%C4%B0ngilice.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CACHEID=47fed704-6c8d-48a4-9fce-458bc4bad30b Distinguished Guests, Welcome to the briefing held to convey the main messages of the Inflation Report. I will now present an overview of the report, which will be published on our website soon.  The report typically summarizes the economic outlook underlying monetary policy decisions, shares our evaluations on macroeconomic developments and presents our medium-term inflation forecasts, which were revised in view of the developments in the last quarter, along with our monetary policy stance. In addition to the main text, the report includes six boxes entailing interesting and up-to-date analyses on various topics. For example, the report presents boxes that analyze how the determinants of bond flows into emerging economies change over time and the sensitivity of inflation to output gap and loans. Moreover, there are studies elaborating on current account fluctuations and current account deficit corrections, non-core liabilities, the correlation between capital flows and loan growth across a wide range of economies and the role of macroprudential measures in the elasticity of loans to capital flows. Titles of the boxes are shown on the slide. All of these analyses shed light on noteworthy issues in the Turkish economy. I strongly recommend that you read these boxes, which will soon be published on our website. Distinguished Guests, I would like to commence my speech by reviewing the global economic outlook given its undeniable influence on our policies. In the third quarter of the year, the uncertainty over advanced country monetary policies led to a partial volatility increase in global financial markets. While the US Federal Reserve (Fed) ended its quantitative easing program, uncertainties regarding the timing and size of a policy rate hike continued. In this period, the European Central Bank (ECB) cut its policy rates against the risks of economic slowdown and deflation and announced a kind of quantitative easing program of buying covered bonds and asset-backed securities. In the second and third quarters of 2014, indicators for global economic activity performed lower than expected, causing growth forecasts for this year to be revised down. Financial market volatility and falling global growth rates led to some fluctuation in capital flows to emerging economies (Chart 1). Following the weakening global growth outlook, commodity prices dropped markedly as well. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches    Regarding the developments in the Turkish economy, the recent global financial volatility appears to have affected Turkey in a way similar to other emerging economies. In the third quarter, Turkey’s risk premium indicators fluctuated on par with those of other emerging economies (Chart 2). Economic activity lost some momentum after the first quarter. The slowing EU growth and geopolitical tensions have restrained external demand. Despite waning external demand, exports continue to support the balanced growth.    The macroprudential measures and our tight monetary stance have had positive implications for the core inflation trend. A sizable amount of the significant first-half increase in core inflation indicators was reversed in the third quarter. Annual core goods inflation continues to slow down as the negative effects from exchange rate changes diminish. Moreover, falling oil prices restrict the inflationary pressures on energy items. However, elevated food prices cause inflation to hover significantly above the target. We expect significant disinflation for 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  the upcoming year. The continued decline in cumulative exchange rate effects, the return of food inflation to the average level of previous years and the fall in commodity prices, especially oil, will be the main factors contributing to disinflation. Moreover, we believe that the tight fiscal stance set out in the Medium Term Program (MTP) will support the decline in inflation. 1. Monetary policy and monetary conditions Distinguished Guests, The Central Bank implemented a front-loaded and strong monetary tightening in the first quarter of 2014 and then lowered policy rates gradually amid reduced domestic and external uncertainty in the second quarter. During the third quarter, we firstly cut the one-week repo auction rate from 8.75 to 8.25 percent, and the overnight borrowing rate from 8 to 7.5 percent in July. In August, to operate within a more symmetric interest rate corridor, we lowered the overnight lending rate from 12 to 11.25 percent, and the rate on borrowing facilities for primary dealers via repo transactions from 11.5 to 10.75 percent (Chart 3). In this period, we provided the CBRT funding primarily from one-week repo auctions (Chart 4). Thus, the average funding rate came close to the one-week repo rate. Yet, taking into account the geopolitical tensions and the financial market volatility, we have fortified our tight monetary stance with a tight liquidity policy since September. Accordingly, the BIST overnight repo rates, that neared the one-week repo auction rate in July and August, has lately followed a course close to the upper end of the interest rate corridor.    While we had measured rate cuts, we have maintained a tight monetary policy stance by keeping the yield curve nearly flat in this quarter as well. The spread between 5-year market rates and the BIST Interbank Overnight Repo rates has been at negative levels as of October (Chart 5). In addition, as we have tightened our liquidity policy recently, short-term rates have risen substantially. Thus, we are able to keep the yield curve on a nearly flat course. On the other hand, the spread between long and short-term rates continues to hover below its historical levels (Chart 6). We will closely monitor inflation expectations, pricing behaviors and other factors affecting inflation in the upcoming period and maintain our tight 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  monetary policy stance by keeping a flat yield curve until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook.    We aim to support the continuity of the balanced growth and capital inflows in Turkey during the global monetary policy normalization. To this end, we have changed the foreign exchange deposit rates that the banks pay when they borrow from the CBRT within their limits through the Foreign Exchange Deposit Market. As of 9 October 2014, the rates applied to banks' one-week maturity borrowings from the CBRT as a last resort facility have been reduced from 10 percent to 7.5 percent for USD and from 10 percent to 6.5 percent for EUR. Moreover, considering the increase in the size of the banks’ balance sheets and the CBRT’s international reserves, we announced that we will revise the banks’ USD 10.8 billion transaction limits in the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets at the press meeting on “Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy for 2015”. In addition, we stated that it is crucial to further strengthen the currently solid structure of the banking sector for financial stability purposes. In this context, we announced on 21 October 2014 that we will provide further support to core liabilities to spur balanced growth and domestic savings. As an incentive, we decided to remunerate the Turkish lira component of required reserves of financial institutions. Additionally, with this arrangement, we aim to reduce the sensitivity of the costs of holding Turkish lira required reserves against the CBRT’s policy rates and thus strengthen the automatic stabilization feature of the Reserve Option Mechanism. Distinguished Guests, As for the loans, we see that the macroprudential measures and our tight monetary stance have helped to keep the pace of loan growth at reasonable levels. The annual rate of total loan growth is 16 percent, below the 2007-2013 average of 23 percent, as of October 2014. In terms of loan trends, the annualized growth rate of consumer loans continues to hover at low levels while commercial loans remain relatively more robust (Charts 7 and 8). I would like to emphasize that this loan outlook will both restrain medium-term inflationary pressures and support the improvement of the current account balance. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5   2. Macroeconomic developments and assumptions Distinguished Guests, Now, I will talk about the macroeconomic outlook and our assumptions on which our forecasts are based. First, I will summarize the recent inflation developments, and then continue with the domestic and foreign demand outlook. Annual consumer inflation fell by 0.3 points quarter-on-quarter to 8.86 percent in the third quarter of 2014, while inflation excluding unprocessed food and tobacco at 8.37 percent was mostly consistent with our July Inflation Report forecasts (Charts 9 and 10). Due to adverse weather conditions and cumulative effects of exchange rate changes, food prices remained the subcategory making the greatest contribution to inflation. However, the main drivers of this third-quarter fall in inflation were energy and core goods. Annual inflation continued to decline across the core goods category thanks to decreased negative effects of exchange rate developments. Regarding underlying inflation trends, there has been a significant improvement in the core goods category. Meanwhile, the services category produced a relatively negative outlook.   In the third quarter, the core inflation trend recorded a decline 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  following the favorable impact of the macroprudential measures and our tight monetary stance (Chart 11). Accordingly, the marked first-half inflation increase in core indicators was reversed in the third quarter. Yet, I would like to note that underlying trend indicators are still above the target-consistent levels. In this period, international commodity prices, especially oil, fell in line with the weak global growth outlook and USD-denominated import prices dropped. In addition to this favorable outlook of import costs, aggregate demand conditions and the relatively slow pace of growth in consumer loans alleviate the pressures on inflation. In fact, excluding food products and associated services subcategories, we see that annual consumer inflation declined considerably in the third quarter (Chart 12).    In sum, the negative effects of cumulative exchange rate developments continued to wane in the third quarter, yet food prices remained on a relatively unfavorable track. The prolonged high level of consumer inflation and the ongoing deterioration in inflation expectations adversely affect pricing behaviors in certain categories, particularly services.  We expect the fall in commodity prices, which is driven by the weak global demand, to bring consumer inflation down, and the awaited moderate pace of domestic demand to restrain the upside risks. Thus, we believe that underlying inflation will move downward in the forthcoming period. Distinguished Guests, Now, I would like to give a brief account of developments in economic activity and the short-term outlook on which the inflation forecasts are based. According to the GDP data of the second quarter of 2014, economic activity was relatively weaker compared to the outlook we presented in the July Inflation Report. In the second quarter, we saw that industrial production remained virtually unchanged quarter-on-quarter, while national income posted a decline after eight quarters in seasonally adjusted terms (Chart 13). This decline was mostly attributed to the agricultural sector, which made a 0.3 point negative contribution to quarterly growth. Therefore, national income growth lagged behind industrial production growth (Chart 14).  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7    Industrial production, which grew by 1.1 percent in the July-August period of 2014 compared to the preceding quarter, contributed to growth in the third quarter. On the other hand, we may see some decline in the agricultural value added. Thus, there are signals that GDP growth may fall short of the industrial production growth in this period as well. Factors like the slowdown in the European economic growth and geopolitical developments led the external demand to decelerate, inducing a marked slowdown in the growth of exports excluding gold (Chart 15). As a result, although we expect the slowdown in external demand in the third quarter to be partially offset by the rebound in domestic demand, I would like to emphasize that the third-quarter growth accommodates downside risks stemming from the agricultural sector.    
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  A steady recovery in consumer and investor confidence is yet to appear, suggesting that downside risks to domestic demand still persist. We believe that the deceleration trend in external demand will curb the rise in exports for a while. However, we expect falling commodity prices to contribute positively to the current account balance by reducing import costs (Chart 16). Distinguished Guests, As you all know, food, energy and import prices also play a great role in inflation forecasts. Therefore, before moving on to forecasts, I will briefly talk about our assumptions regarding these variables. In the third quarter of the year, oil and import prices remained below the path we envisaged in the July Inflation Report (Chart 17). Accordingly, we revised our assumptions of average oil and import prices for 2014 and 2015 downwards. Given the current outlook, due to external prices, year-end inflation forecasts for 2014 and 2015 were revised downwards by 0.3 and 0.2 percentage points, respectively. Considering also the high course in food inflation in the third quarter, we revised our year-end inflation assumption for food prices upwards to 12.5 percent for 2014 and 9 percent for 2015. These revisions in food prices drove our year-end inflation forecasts for 2014 and 2015 higher by 0.8 and 0.3 percentage points, respectively.    Our medium-term projections are based on the assumption that tax adjustments and administered prices are consistent with inflation targets and automatic pricing mechanisms. Price increases in electricity and natural gas of 9 percent, which were released in early October, have slightly exceeded our assumptions in the July Inflation Report. Thus, our end-2014 inflation forecast was revised upwards by 0.2 percentage points. We based our assumptions about the medium-term fiscal policy stance on the MTP projections covering the 2015-2017 period. Accordingly, we assume that a tight fiscal stance will be implemented and the primary expenditures to GDP ratio will taper off. 3. Inflation and the monetary policy outlook Distinguished Guests, Now, I would like to present our inflation and output gap forecasts based on the outlook I have described so far. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  Our medium-term forecasts are based on the assumption that our tight monetary policy stance will be maintained by keeping a flat yield curve. A further assumption is that the annual loan growth rate will reach nearly 15 percent by the end of 2014 and stabilize around these reasonable levels on the back of the macroprudential measures. Accordingly, we expect inflation to be, with 70 percent probability, between 8.4 percent and 9.4 percent (with a mid-point of 8.9 percent) at end-2014 and between 4.6 percent and 7.6 percent (with a mid-point of 6.1 percent) at end-2015. We expect inflation to stabilize around 5 percent in the medium term (Chart 18).    We expect inflation to considerably exceed the 5-percent target by the year-end, and decrease significantly as of the start of 2015 and fall to 6.1 percent at end-2015. This noticeable decline we forecast in inflation is driven by the projections that cumulative exchange rate effects will continue to taper off, food inflation will recede to past year averages and commodity prices, chiefly oil, will stay at expected lower levels. Moreover, we believe that demand conditions and the announced tight fiscal policy stance will support the decline in inflation in this period. The fluctuating course in 2015 inflation forecasts that you see on the slide stems from the base effects (Chart 18). Distinguished Guests, In addition to these forecasts, alternative scenarios on the inflation outlook and the global economy are discussed in the Risks section of the Inflation Report. You can examine the Report for details. While concluding my remarks, I would like to thank all my colleagues who contributed to the Report, primarily those at the Research and Monetary Policy Department as well as the members of the Monetary Policy Committee, and thank every one of you for your participation. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Joachim Nagel: How the Banking Union has transformed banks’ IT requirements Keynote speech by Dr Joachim Nagel, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 20th Handelsblatt Annual Conference on Banking Technology, Frankfurt am Main, 3 December 2014. *      *      * 1. Opening remarks Professor Bott Ladies and gentlemen It gives me great pleasure to address this Handelsblatt Annual Conference today. “All Digital – All Mobile – All Compliant”, the motto of this year’s annual conference on banking technology, points to the major challenges faced by the IT departments of financial institutions. In my capacity as a member of the Bundesbank’s Executive Board, I am responsible for the Markets and Information Technology Departments. So I am familiar with some of the problems and difficulties associated with a bank’s IT infrastructure. On the one hand, the yardstick by which a bank’s chief information officer (CIO) is measured is the way in which he or she supports the institution’s core business areas by delivering high-quality IT services and products, which should ideally be standardised and streamlined. IT security is coming increasingly into play here. On the other hand, he or she is also expected to demonstrate a high level of agility and innovative ability in the face of stiffer competition, including from enterprises outside the traditional banking sector. Together with all other business units, then, it is important for banks’ IT to reap greater business benefits by implementing joint projects and employing innovative information technology. It is crucial that we recognise and harness the business relevance of trends in the field of information technology – trends such as mobility, as referred to in the conference’s motto. Big data, “datability”, social media and cloud computing undoubtedly all open up additional major opportunities for banks. Yet at the same time they pose new challenges, especially with respect to IT security. Today, I would like to shed some light on the third facet of this event’s motto – “All Compliant” – with regard to the European banking union. The German Corporate Governance Code defines “compliance” as adherence to legal provisions and corporate guidelines, which falls within the responsibility of senior management.1 Compliance therefore means adhering to and satisfying legal and regulatory requirements. The financial community is now confronted with many new and revised requirements and conditions, particularly as a result of regulation adopted in the course of the financial and sovereign debt crisis. Banks need to demonstrate their “regulatory compliance” with these, which also has a direct impact on their IT. 2. The Banking Union – a response to the financial market crisis The current financial and sovereign debt crisis has also exposed flaws in the architecture of banking supervision. I would therefore like to highlight four weak points that we have either eliminated or are working towards eliminating on the road to a European banking union.                                                  1  German Corporate Governance Code as approved by the Code’s Government Commission on 24 June 2014. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches 1. Consistent European banking supervision  Banking supervision at the national level was replaced on 4 November 2014 by direct, ECB-led supervision of the largest European banks.  Under the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), all prudential reporting data from significant banks are now collected by a central authority, with information assessed in a manner that allows cross-border comparisons to be drawn. 2. Harmonisation of banking supervision  The establishment of a uniform prudential framework has brought about greater harmonisation of banking oversight in member states, with regulatory arbitrage being prevented by shifting responsibility for banking supervision and resolution to the European level. 3. Liability cascade in the event of resolution  One lesson the crisis has taught us is that no bank should be “too big to fail”: if the worst comes to the worst, they must be able to fail. The Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) defines this usually self-evident liability cascade, according to which shareholders and creditors are first and second in line to absorb any losses. Taxpayers are the last link in this chain of liability. 4. Capital backing for government bonds  On the other hand, high levels of sovereign debt can also destabilise the domestic banking sector – I am referring specifically to the zero risk weighting of government bonds. In future, this vicious circle between sovereign and banking risks could be broken by implementing appropriate measures. After all, we have seen that government bonds are not risk-free. That is why the preferential regulatory treatment afforded to government bonds and other exposures to the public sector, in particular, needs to be brought to an end. The idea behind the banking union is a common financial regulatory framework, known as the Single Rulebook, and rests on two main pillars. The first pillar is central, joint responsibility for banking supervision under the aegis of the ECB. This has already been put in place in the shape of the SSM. The second pillar is the SRM, which is responsible for the recovery and resolution of insolvent banks in times of crisis. The SRM is a necessary complement to the SSM and, together, they represent two sides of the same coin: they aim to facilitate the orderly recovery or resolution of institutions in the event of insolvency. There was also talk of a third pillar in the form of a single deposit guarantee scheme. But this would entail joint, cross-border fiscal responsibility, which is a step that policymakers are not yet prepared to take. The recently revised EU Directive on deposit guarantee schemes did, however, bring about greater harmonisation in European deposit guarantee schemes. It is now more or less exactly one month since the SSM came into force. On 4 November, the ECB took on the far-reaching supervisory responsibilities assigned to it for credit institutions in the euro area. In the SSM, the ECB and the euro-area national competent authorities work together. The division of tasks between the European and national institutions is based on the distinction between significant and less significant institutions. Specifically, the following institutions are defined as significant:  banks with total assets of more than €30 billion or more than 20% of national GDP with total assets also in the latter case having to amounting to at least €5 billion;  banks receiving direct or indirect assistance from the EFSF or the ESM; 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  the three most significant credit institutions in an SSM member state. These are “either/or” criteria. This means that one criterion alone is sufficient to classify the institution as “significant”. For such significant institutions – at present, there are 120 of them with roughly 85% of aggregate total assets across all banks – the ECB is taking on complete supervision. For the 3,600 “less significant” institutions across Europe these tasks will be performed by the national supervisory authorities. So, about 1,700 German institutions will still be subject to ongoing supervision by the Bundesbank and potential measures by BaFin. Nevertheless, the ECB exercises oversight over the system as a whole. The ECB is to ensure consistent and high-quality supervisory practice in the SSM by setting standards and issuing instructions. The European Banking Authority (EBA) is responsible for the development of regulatory standards for European banks; compliance is a matter for the ECB and the national competent authorities. European supervision will make a major contribution to  the integration of the financial markets by means of uniform standards  the separation of bank and sovereign risks and  the stability of the financial market. From an IT perspective, the SSM will introduce new work processes as well as changes in the exchange of information and reporting channels. Via the national competent authorities (NCAs) – in Germany, through the Bundesbank – the ECB will be receiving the reporting data of all banks in the SSM area, irrespective of the significance of the given institution. For significant banks, the Bundesbank will become a supplier of data to the ECB. The data reported by the NCAs are analysed by the ECB and serve as a basis for regulatory decisions about significant institutions. For non-significant institutions, the national applications will continue to exist, but will be adapted in future to harmonised European specifications. Supervision of the significant banks will be undertaken by joint supervisory teams (JSTs). A JST is being established for each of these institutions. These teams will be headed by a coordinator who is a member of staff of the ECB. The teams themselves are largely made up of staff from the national competent authorities. In future, the supervisors will have access to the ECB banking supervisory applications via the SSM Information Management System (IMAS). IMAS will provide the infrastructure to ensure harmonised processes and consistency in the supervision of banking institutions. It is a key element for safeguarding the application of the common methodology and standards by all the JSTs. The system offers ECB decision-makers and banking supervisors efficient access to operational and analytical data via a stable and user-friendly interface. The first harmonised application in the European regulatory framework is designed for receiving and analysing institutions’ solvency and financial data from all the SSM countries based on the XBRL format2 in conformity with the EBA’s technical implementing standards. 3. New requirements for banking infrastructure The implementation of the new supervisory standards has become the greatest challenge for the financial industry since the Lehman insolvency according to a recent Forrester study. It                                                  2  XBRL (eXtensible Business Reporting Language) is a language based on XML used for the preparation of electronic documentation in the field of financial reporting. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches finds that, from a corporate viewpoint, compliance with regulatory requirements has the highest priority, with 60% in agreement. This is followed by improved customer services and operational efficiency, which have a lower ranking.3 The direct costs associated with this for the banking industry in Germany as a result of regulation in the period from 2010 to 2015 also represent a challenge, however. According to a study by KPMG, these are projected to total around €9 billion.4 Reports in the press recently made frequent mention of a “wave of regulation” inundating the banks’ IT. There was even talk of “excessive regulation” or a “regulatory tsunami”. With all sympathy for the great challenges that the banks are facing, we should not forget why these demands arose. They were due to sometimes glaring errors in developments and to a lack of meaningful possibilities of analysing the data that existed at the banks – both before the crisis and to this very day. What we have observed from inspections at the banks is that IT at most banks is suffering from data not being collected and maintained in accordance with uniform standards and that there are only limited automated facilities for analysing these data and thus utilising them for a forward-looking risk management. Risk silos exist. The outcome of this is that the management often finds itself in a situation where decisions have to be made with insufficient knowledge of the facts. This chiefly concerns banks with an international focus, which admittedly find it difficult to coordinate IT spread over a large number of locations. More than for others, however, it is absolutely essential for them to do so in order to hold their own in a volatile economic environment. The whole thing is not just a problem for German banks; according to a study by the Basel Committee, it concerns more or less all international banks. It goes without saying that no “data graveyards” should be created. I think that, together with the financial institutions, we will strike a healthy and, above all, viable balance in the future as well. Furthermore, many of the regulations have not been newly invented; they are already national banking supervision reality. In Germany, for example, the implementation of section 25 of the Banking Act (Kreditwesengesetz, KWG) and the Minimum Requirements for Risk Management (Mindestanforderungen an das Risikomanagement, MaRisk) means that many of the mentioned requirements are already common practice among supervisors. Warren Buffett is quoted as saying “Someone is sitting in the shade today because someone planted a tree a long time ago.” As I see it, the IT departments that have consistently and promptly implemented the requirements of earlier inspection practice are well equipped for the future demands of IT. The new “Principles for effective risk data aggregation and risk reporting” (BCBS 239) adopted by the Basel Committee at the beginning of 2013 will apply initially from 2016 to global systemically important banks (G-SIBs). A bank is deemed to be systemically important in global terms if its insolvency would severely impede the functioning of the global financial system or significant parts thereof, and would also have negative effects on the real economy. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) has classified 30 institutions worldwide as systemically important, including Deutsche Bank as the sole German institution. It is already envisaged that this will be extended to domestic systemically important banks. Risk information should be complete, correct, consistent and current and made available in a form appropriate to the addressees. This has always been a demand of the supervisory authorities. However, the Basel standards now set out, for the first time, globally coordinated, specific regulatory requirements for the architecture of risk and data management.                                                  3  Forrester: Preliminary Results of 2014 Global Financial Services Architecture Online Survey, August 2014. 4  KPMG: Impact of regulatory requirements, December 2013. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 The implementation of these provisions should make possible improved management information across all legal entities, an improved quality of strategic planning options and a complete assessment of the risk exposure at the highest consolidated level. Responsibility for this lies with senior management. The regulatory provisions will lead to a harmonisation of IT infrastructures, flexible and consistent processes in risk management and to enhanced analytical capabilities. The challenges in implementing these principles are highly ambitious and will require considerable input in terms of human resources and technology. This applies in particular to risk management, finance and information technology. In the medium and long term, however, this will also bring many opportunities. Even at an early stage, it should be possible to assess risks more quickly and more reliably; there will also be a crucial improvement in the quality of the basic elements of management. These changes are therefore also in the interests of the enterprises themselves. 4. Resulting challenges for institutions The requirements placed on institutions by the SSM have been a catalyst for major changes in the relevant business areas and IT departments, particularly with regard to reporting data. The expansion of the report contents has led to a marked increase in the volume of data to be submitted. For example, a tenfold rise in volume is expected for harmonised solvency and financial data. Another new aspect is that large institutions’ reports of large exposures exceeding €300 million could contain up to 200 MB of data per submission. And I must confess that the European harmonisation of credit reporting is still in its infancy and further requirements are on the cards. Given the sheer scale of affected data, “Big Data” with innovative analytical, visualisation and reporting tools as well as in-memory technology5 will gain greater importance in banks’ IT, if they haven’t done so already. Up until now, many data were already aggregated by institutions as part of the reporting process and the total figures were submitted to the supervisory authority. It is now increasingly the case that individual data are required, which are then aggregated by banking supervisors. The information and data to be reported by banks are now considerably more granular and serve as a basis for extended analyses in the field of banking supervision. Institutions need to get used to the idea that regulatory requirements will have to be implemented in a much shorter space of time. Time pressure and the associated planning uncertainty are likely to pose the main problems in this respect. Up until now, there has been a time lag of about one year between the publication of new requirements by the Bundesbank and the first-time submission of data in line with these new requirements. In the wake of the launch of the SSM, the EBA has now reduced this timeframe to 2–3 months. The same applies to completely new areas for which there was previously no systematic collection of data. The advantages of XBRL as the lingua franca for exchanging financial information is obvious. Data structures based on defined, uniform procedures allow information to be transmitted in a more efficient manner that is less prone to errors, and subsequently processed and evaluated. The complexity of taxonomies and reporting formats and the resulting increased volume of data are just some of the disadvantages compared with the previous, more simple formats. These directly impact on IT, placing greater demands on IT infrastructures, such as processor performance and storage requirements. Banks therefore need to upgrade their capabilities.                                                  5  In-memory databases permanently store the entire data pool in the main memory, thereby enabling much faster read-only access than traditional database systems. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches The previous interfaces between commercial banks and supervisory authorities have changed. Up to now, incoming reports were only subjected to syntactic checks, with technical verification taking place as a downstream process. At the Bundesbank, for example, Bundesbank staff reported any inconsistencies to the respective institutions. The correction could then be made by the institution in consultation with this member of staff. Gradually – the process started back on 1 April 2014 with COREP (common solvency ratio reporting) – the submission and correction process will be automated as far as possible, as the SSM continues to takes shape.6 The reported data will be machine-checked for technical correctness as well as subjected to initial specialist entry checks. At the end of the process, erroneous reports will be automatically rejected. Each individual submission will be subjected to several thousand automated checks. Institutions must expect error messages and be able to deal with not yet standardised contents and formats. Overarching examinations of economic, financial and large exposure data mean that institutions will need to cross-check figures down to the very last detail, even if they stem from different systems. The timeframe for corrections by institutions is being reduced. This means, inter alia, that banks’ internal correction processes need to be made more efficient and consistent, which might require more resources. I think that the challenges I have presented can be summarised in the following areas of action for banks’ IT financial architecture:  Data governance and data architecture need to be optimised in order to enhance the quality, accuracy and integrity of data.  Analytical and reporting processes need to facilitate faster decision-making and direct availability of the relevant information.  Processes and databases for the areas of finance, control and risk need to be harmonised.  Increased automation of the data exchange processes with the supervisory authorities is required.  Fast and flexible implementation of supervisory requirements by business units and IT necessitates a modular and flexible architecture and appropriate project management methods. Banks must ensure that their IT is equipped for this. Further developments and framework conditions are in the pipeline:  The SSM is gradually harmonising the banking supervision reporting system at the European level. Thus, new frameworks are continually being developed in a European context.  The ECB and EBA are setting out requirements in liaison with the national competent authorities. COREP and large exposure reporting have already had to report for the first time in line with European requirements.  The requirements concerning the scope and contents of reporting have increased significantly, while the response times for new requirements have been slashed. This trend looks set to continue in the future.  New standards such as BCBS 239 require the relevant institutions to have integrated and automated data processing in place.                                                  6  The Europe-wide standardised COREP provides a binding solvency reporting system. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  European harmonisation of credit reporting is presently being discussed (Analytical Credit Dataset – AnaCredit). It will be fundamentally different from the current reporting system. We are expecting regulations which lead to an increased number of metrics, and which additionally have a finer granularity. Furthermore, lower reporting thresholds and increased reporting frequencies are on the cards. In my opinion, there are two key messages: 1. Banks need to invest in their information technology. The implementation of supervisory requirements will tie up considerable resources and entail costs. 2. Regulatory projects reduce operational risk, permit a better and faster assessment of risks and possible courses of action. This can, in turn, diminish operating costs and offer a crucial competitive edge. 5. Conclusion Ladies and gentleman To achieve our common goal of making financial markets more stable, the various bank governance functions – in particular, risk management, reporting and finance – need to be much better integrated than they have been up to now. Overarching data and methodological governance, and the integration of processes and IT systems need to oust the existing silos and monolithic systems. Furthermore, institutions need to be capable of safeguarding flexible and timely reporting for different target groups. Thus the modernisation of IT systems is one of the big challenges faced by banks. Institutions want to keep their costs for fulfilling new – above all regulatory – requirements to a minimum. To do this, they will have to modernise their IT architecture. The Senior Supervisors Group7 emphasised the importance of strong IT governance, bringing together business units and IT, in its 2010 report8 This is also a key point for me: IT strategy needs to be embedded in the business strategy. The necessary transformations must not be an end in themselves from an IT perspective, but need to be strategically anchored and founded on business policy. Many regulatory requirements have been necessary precisely because banks’ systems are not integrated. Only a holistic cross-business approach can take IT financial architecture to the next strategic level. Ladies and gentleman Thank you very much for your attention.                                                  7  This body comprises representatives from the supervisory authorities of 10 countries, which are responsible for the world’s largest banks. 8  “Observations on Developments in Risk Appetite Frameworks and IT Infrastructure”, 23 December 2010.  The SSG’s analyses were carried out to support the Financial Stability Board in its task of addressing weaknesses in the financial system and promoting the stability of the international financial system. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Fahad Almubarak: Top achievements of the monetary sector during the past decade Speech by H E Dr Fahad Almubarak, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, at the National Day, Riyadh, 25 September 2014. *      *      * Our beloved country is celebrating its 84th national day, which is very dear occasion to all of us. The march of welfare and building continues under the prudent leadership of the Kingdom. SAMA’s employees are overwhelmed with happiness on this occasion in light of the achievements of the monetary policy by focusing on the interests of the country and citizens. SAMA’s balanced monetary policy has contributed to strengthening the stability of the national economy during stages of global stress and turbulence. As a result, the credit rating of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has been upgraded. Fitch upgraded the Kingdom’s sovereign credit rating to AA from AA- with a stable outlook. Over the past ten years, the banking sector witnessed a great development quantitatively and qualitatively. M3 rose by 270 percent to SAR 1,669.3 billion at the end of July 2014 against an increase of SAR 451.3 billion at the end of July 2004. Total bank deposits also went up by 284.5 percent to SAR 1,520.6 billion in the same period. Total commercial banks’ claims on the private and public sectors grew by 193.3 percent to SAR 1,314.4 billion at the end of July 2014 compared to SAR 447.8 billion at the end of July 2004. All these developments contributed to the growth of the Kingdom’s economy and enhanced the stability of its financial sector. Domestic banks’ capital adequacy ratio (Basel Standard) stood at 17.8 percent at the end of the second quarter of 2014, exceeding the prescribed rate of 8 percent. In addition, stress tests conducted periodically by SAMA on commercial banks showed good results. Banking services witnessed further expansion throughout the Kingdom. Commercial banks’ branches increased by 53.8 percent to 1,862 at the end of July 2014, compared to 1,211 at the end of July 2004. In recognition of the importance of using latest technological developments in the banking field, SAMA worked with domestic banks on the introduction of the latest secure banking technology. In this regard, the value of transactions carried out through SARIE system picked up to SAR 54.6 trillion in 2013 from SAR 8.1 trillion in 2004. Moreover, the total number of transactions executed through ATMs went up to 1,335.5 million in 2013 from 412.1 million in 2004. During the same period, the total number of transactions carried out through POS terminals increased to 294.1 million with a total value of SAR 144.3 billion from 52.1 million with a total value of SAR 23.9 billion. The number of bills paid through SADAD system increased to 160.8 million with a value of SAR 176.6 billion in 2013 from 43.5 million with a value of SAR 22.0 billion in 2007. Within the framework of its supervisory and oversight functions over the insurance sector, SAMA considered many files of insurance companies. By the end of 2013, SAMA licensed 35 insurance and reinsurance companies. Besides, SAMA approved 194 offices to provide insurance related services. SAMA issued a number of regulations and rules to regulate the activities of the financing sector in the Kingdom, improve its services, promote governance and transparency, protect the rights of its beneficiaries and create a competitive environment to contribute to provision of better financing services to meet the needs of the market and beneficiaries at competitive prices. Up to the end of July 2014, SAMA licensed 12 banks and 4 companies to conduct the activity of real estate finance and financial leasing, and 4 companies to carry out other 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  financing activities. SAMA also granted initial approvals on 11 applications for licensing pending the completion of the legal requirements of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. At the international level, the Kingdom holds a prominent position. It is an active member of the G20 since its establishment and of several international financial organizations. SAMA represents the Kingdom in a number of international forums and institutions, such as the Bank for International Settlements, the Financial Stability Board, Basel Committee, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, the Islamic Financial Services Board and the Gulf Monetary Council. Currently, SAMA is participating in more than 25 committees, working groups and sub-committees in international commissions and organizations. SAMA effectively contributes to the efforts exerted in international regulatory reforms, enabling SAMA to cope with the latest developments and international standards in supervision and control. On this occasion, I pray to Almighty Allah to preserve the security and stability of our country and may the Kingdom’s continue its development march under the wise leadership of the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, Crown Prince and Deputy Crown Prince. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Yuba Raj Khatiwada: SEACEN – enhancing collaboration with other global financial stakeholders Response address by Dr Yuba Raj Khatiwada, Governor of the Central Bank of Nepal and Chairman of the SEACEN Board of Governors, at the 50th SEACEN Governors’ Conference, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, 20 November 2014. *      *      * Mr. Patrick Pruaitch, CMG MP, Minister for Treasury, Papua New Guinea  Mr. Loi Bakani, Governor of Bank of Papua New Guinea Mr. Naoyuki Shinohara, Deputy Managing Director of International Monetary Fund  My fellow Governors and heads of delegates Delegates and distinguished speakers  Ladies and Gentlemen It is my great pleasure to be here and address the 50th SEACEN Governors’ Conference. As the chairperson of the BOG, let me extend warm regards to every one of you. I would also like to extend my sincere gratitude to Mr. Loi Bakani, Governor of Bank of Papua New Guinea for hosting this important SEACEN event. I take this opportunity to express my sincere appreciation to Mr. Bakani and his entire team as well as the SEACEN Centre for the warm hospitality extended to the delegates and also for the excellent arrangements made for this event. The colorful reception we had last evening will be highly memorable to all of us. Ladies and Gentlemen, While addressing this august gathering at the Opening Ceremony amid 20 member central bank Governors and quite a few associate members, I am reminded of the first SEACEN Governors’ Conference which was held in 1966 in Bangkok with the participation of seven heads/representatives of the central banks. Since then, and with each Governor’s Conference, the participation has grown from the small group to this present member of twenty, reflecting the organization’s vibrant and dynamic growth. Today, I am happy to welcome officially the Hong Kong Monetary Authority as the newest member of the SEACEN. Fellow Governors, Each Governor’s Conference is based on a topical theme which is discussed by participating heads/representatives and where important issues are raised, and these discussions have contributed and enriched the policy debate in this region. I am happy to observe that this trend is continuing with this bi-centennial Governors’ Conference on “Regional Initiatives in the Midst of Vulnerabilities”. Ladies and Gentlemen, The theme for this year’s SEACEN Governors’ Conference is indeed timely. The theme acknowledges that in the integrated global economy the strategies of central banks are affected by the external economy where formulation of domestic policies has to be made in an environment of greater cross-border financial linkages. In this context I understand that this conference will focus on three particular areas: (1) reconciling domestic and cross- border considerations in the use of macro-prudential and capital-flow-management tools; (2) steps to further the development of regional bond markets and their implication for monetary policy strategies; and (3) issues and challenges associated with increased integration of emerging market banking systems. In this regard SEACEN has an important role in enhancing cooperation and coordination of members for spurting regional initiatives for ameliorating perceived risks.   
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Fellow Governors  Ladies and Gentlemen, In the last several years, the dynamism of SEACEN is self evident. It has been successful in discharging its aim by adjusting its strategic goals in the changing environment as well as enhancing collaboration with other global financial stakeholders in general and IMF, BIS, Bank of England, Bundes Bank and CEMLA in particular. In the meantime, while I gather the fresh memory of 49th SEACEN Governor’s Conference and 33rd Board of Governors’ Meeting held in Kathmandu which was successful with fellow Governors’ encouraging participation, I would also like to express my sincere thanks to all BOG members for their kind and constructive support during my tenure as the SEACEN Chair. Finally, allow me to conclude by wishing everyone here a productive and rewarding Conference and a successful Meeting of the Board of Governors. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Charles I Plosser: A longer-term view of the US economy and monetary policy Speech by Mr Charles I Plosser, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, to the Charlotte Economics Club, Charlotte, North Carolina, 3 December 2014. *      *      * The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. Highlights • President Charles Plosser gives his views on the U.S. economy and discusses why it is important to take a longer-term view of economic data. • President Plosser shares some thoughts about the stance of monetary policy and the advantages of raising rates gradually and starting sooner rather than being forced to raise them abruptly later. • President Plosser also discusses how policy rules can offer useful guideposts for policymakers and the public in assessing and communicating the stance of monetary policy. Introduction Thank you for the invitation to be here today. The Charlotte Economics Club has welcomed many leading Federal Reserve voices to this podium over the years, including a number of my fellow Fed presidents. You have heard from President Jeff Lacker of the Richmond Fed, which has its Charlotte Branch over on East Trade Street, as well as Presidents Richard Fisher of Dallas and Dennis Lockhart of Atlanta. So I am pleased to have been included among your distinguished guests. On November 16, the Federal Reserve observed the 100th anniversary of the opening of all 12 Federal Reserve Banks around the country on the same day. These institutions along with the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., comprise our nation’s decentralized central bank. This decentralized structure is one of the System’s great strengths. Not only does it promote a diversity of views, but it also helps to build public trust and preserve independence. However, it requires that I begin by reminding you that the views I express today are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Your program chair, Professor Rob Roy McGregor, has spent a great deal of his academic career studying the workings of the FOMC – including the use of power by the Chair and the nature of consensus building and dissent within the Committee. Interestingly, some of this work has been coauthored with a former colleague of mine at the Philadelphia Fed, Todd Vermilyea, who now works at the Board of Governors. Today, I plan to talk about the importance of taking a longer-term view in setting monetary policy. We live in a 24-hour news cycle that focuses a lot of time and energy on analyzing the tea leaves from the daily onslaught of new economic data at our disposal. Yet, I believe it is a mistake for policymakers to focus too intently on the most recent numbers to justify a policy decision. Our data are always noisy and often subject to substantial revision, as we just witnessed with last week’s GDP revisions and as we see regularly with the monthly employment report. Instead, we must focus our attention on the underlying trends and the likely path of the economy over the intermediate to longer-term horizon. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  One reason why policymakers must think long term is that the effects of monetary policy actions on inflation and employment may not be felt for many quarters and maybe years in the future. Thus, the near term path of the economy is unlikely to be altered in any significant way by today’s policy choices. We must look further ahead in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy. Of course, there is a great deal of uncertainty about the future and that too has implications for how we should approach policy. I will begin with a brief overview of the economy as one policymaker sees it as we near the end of 2014. Economic conditions Over the past year, we have seen encouraging signs in the economy. The most recent estimate of annualized real GDP growth in the third quarter was 3.9 percent, which followed strong growth in the second quarter of 4.6 percent. Taking a longer view, growth from the third quarter of last year to this year was 2.4 percent. But this includes a negative 2.1 percent growth rate in the first quarter of 2014 that was a consequence of a severe winter and was largely transitory in nature. We are seeing continued strength in personal consumption, especially in durable goods, as well as business fixed investment, which marked the strongest two quarter growth in investment by businesses in nearly three years. GDP growth has averaged 2.3 percent over the 21 quarters of the recovery since mid-2009. That is a half point below the 5-year growth rates measured during most of the 2000s before the recession, which is, in part, why this recovery is often seen as being moderate or modest from an historical perspective. Nonetheless, we have seen a sustained improvement in the manufacturing sector. The November reading from the Philadelphia Fed’s Manufacturing Business Outlook Survey indicated very strong growth in manufacturing activity. Even more encouraging are the sustained increases we have witnessed in this sector. After a mediocre performance from mid-2011 to mid-2013, the index has now been positive for nearly 18 consecutive months, with the only aberration in February 2014 during the depths of our severe winter weather. Our index is often viewed as a useful indicator of national manufacturing activity, and indeed the national ISM manufacturing index has also shown solid performance over the past 18 months. The labor market has also strengthened over the year. Employers added jobs at an average rate of 229,000 per month in the first 10 months of the year, which is 18 percent higher than the rate in 2013, and it’s the highest we have seen at any point in the recovery. This acceleration in job growth has helped bring the unemployment rate down to 5.8 percent as of October, compared with 7.2 percent a year ago. Over the course of this recovery, the unemployment rate has fallen from a peak of 10 percent in October 2009 to 5.8 percent today. Other measures of unemployment have also declined. For example, the measure called U6, which includes marginally attached workers and those working part time for economic reasons, has fallen from its peak of 17.2 percent to 11.5 percent. Inflation, for the moment, remains well contained. The personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, price index, the measure of inflation preferred by the FOMC, registered a 1.4 percent increase over the 12 months through October. It is running somewhat below the FOMC’s stated longer-term target of 2 percent, but it remains above the level that should stoke concerns of sustained deflation. Falling energy prices are generally good news for consumers and a favorable development for the economy going forward. In the short term, the decline in the relative price of energy will show up in lower headline inflation, but as energy prices stabilize, headline inflation will increase. Policymakers tend to look through such volatile and transitory price changes to assess the underlying trend in inflation. The core PCE index, which excludes food and 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  energy, is a bit higher than the overall measure, increasing 1.6 percent over the 12 months through October. Other measures of inflation, including those that attempt to reduce the weight given to large outliers in any given month, all tend to suggest that inflation is running between 1.5 percent and 2 percent. Given the precision with which we can measure such things, I find this outcome satisfactory. Nevertheless, I anticipate that the FOMC will conduct policy over time in such a manner that inflation will gradually move toward the Fed’s 2 percent target. Private sector forecasters seem to share this view as the Philadelphia Fed’s most recent Survey of Professional Forecasters shows that long-term inflation expectations remain stable at 2 percent. Monetary policy In my discussion of the economy, I have emphasized the longer-run path of the recovery rather than the month-to-month fluctuations. Viewed in this context, it is clear that the economy has come a long way since the recovery began in June 2009. To me, that means we should no longer be conducting monetary policy as if we were still in the midst of a financial crisis or in the depths of a recession. The financial crisis was an extraordinary event, and much of the commentary on monetary policy has focused on the actions of central banks in response to the financial crisis. That is appropriate and understandable. Yet, there is another lesson to be learned from the past six years that I think is important to recognize. And that is how difficult it is for monetary policy to fine-tune real growth in the economy. Despite the FOMC’s stated desire and aggressive actions to accelerate the pace of the recovery, growth has proceeded at a moderate pace since the end of the crisis. Monetary policy has simply not proved to be the panacea that many had hoped. As I have argued on a number of occasions, I believe we have come to expect too much from monetary policy. We would be better served by greater humility and lowered expectations of the potential for monetary policy to manage real economic growth and employment. Ten years ago, I suspect most commentators would have told you that six years of a near-zero federal funds rate target and more than $3.5 trillion of long-term asset purchases by the Fed would likely produce an economic boom in the near term and would risk inflation in the longer term. Well, although we have experienced modest growth, we have not experienced a boom, and the jury remains out as to whether inflation will materialize as a consequence. Some argue that the absence of the boom is because the Fed didn’t do enough – more was needed to offset the constraint of the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. Of course, there is an alternative hypothesis: Monetary policy was not capable of offsetting or mitigating the sorts of real challenges the economy was facing. Distinguishing between these two hypotheses will undoubtedly be the subject of intense research in the coming decades. After all, economists are still studying the policy choices and their effects during the Great Depression eight decades ago. But let me turn our attention to how monetary policy should evolve going forward. I began my remarks by noting that monetary policy should focus on the intermediate to longer term and be less sensitive or reactive to short-run and transitory movements in the data. To that end, I see the economy continuing to improve with real growth averaging about 3 percent in 2015 before coming back down to its long-term trend growth rate of about 2.4 percent. Employment will continue to expand, and inflation will move closer to our 2 percent target. While people can disagree about the extent to which the labor market has healed, it is clear that the labor market is in much better shape than it was in 2009 when unemployment reached its peak of 10 percent. The economy has come a long way, and monetary policy should reflect such progress. This progress suggests that monetary policy should begin to normalize. Keeping the funds rate target near zero when inflation is close to our goal and the economy is near full employment is both unprecedented and risky in my view. Waiting too long to begin the 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  process of raising the policy rate risks facing the possibility that the rate may have to increase rapidly when the time comes and that could prove unnecessarily disruptive. And waiting could also risk a more rapid pickup in inflation. Of course, policymakers face many uncertainties, and so they must be prepared to adjust policy as the underlying trends in inflation and the real economy evolve. So, how should a central bank best inform the public about those uncertainties and the prospective path of policy? The appropriate way to communicate the future of policy is to describe in a general way a reaction function. That is to describe what key economic variables influence the setting of policy and to give a sense of how policy will change in response to changes in those variables. Over the past several years, I have criticized policy messages that suggest that calendar time is a relevant metric for determining a policy action. We must avoid such date-based forward guidance, whether it uses specific calendar dates or more vague references alluding to a “considerable period” of time. As policymakers, we do not know what the future holds, so forward guidance in this form cannot be very credible. Unfortunately, it is unlikely that policymakers will adopt a specific reaction function in the near term. Yet, there are numerous examples of such systematic approaches or reaction functions that can help us to gauge the stance of policy. Some of these reaction functions have been shown to be robust in a variety of circumstances and useful in describing past monetary policy behaviors. They can, I believe, provide useful guidelines for assessing the stance and the likely path of monetary policy. They can also be useful in communicating policy to the public. I frequently consider such reaction functions as I think about policy. These are typically Taylor-like rules named for the Stanford University economist John Taylor who first proposed them in the early 1990s. These policy rules typically call for the targeted funds rate to respond to deviations of inflation from some desired target and to deviations of output from some measure of potential – sometimes referred to as economic “slack” or the “gap.” Sometimes such gaps are translated into deviations from full employment. These policy rules can offer useful guideposts for policymakers and the public in assessing the stance of monetary policy, and communicating more about such guideposts would enhance transparency and help make policy more systematic. Thus, there is no need to mechanically follow any particular rule, and judgment will always be required. Yet, policymakers and the public should be very cautious when they call for policy rates to deviate in important or significant ways from these guideposts. Making such judgments should require careful analysis, and the justification for deviating from such guidelines should be clearly communicated to the markets and to the public. A monetary policy strategy such as I have just described could be communicated through a regular Monetary Policy Report, perhaps published quarterly. The report would offer an opportunity to reinforce the underlying policy framework of the Committee and how it relates to current and expected economic conditions. Publishing a Monetary Policy Report with an assessment of the likely near-term path of policy rates, in conjunction with its economic forecast, would also provide added discipline for policymakers to stick to a systematic, rule-like approach. Communication about that path, in turn, gives the public a much deeper understanding of the analytical approach that guides monetary policy, thus making policy more transparent and predictable. In the current environment, an assessment of a variety of these robust rules suggests that the funds rate target is no longer constrained by the zero lower bound. These rules indicate that liftoff of the funds rate target from zero should have already occurred or should occur in the very near future. It is important to point out that all of these rules recognize and take into account the fact that the inflation rate remains somewhat below the FOMC’s target of 2 percent. Nevertheless, they do not call for maintaining the funds rate target near zero. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  These rules are helpful because they not only suggest when liftoff should occur, but they offer guidance about the future path of rate changes, given the likely direction of the economy – that is, forecasts of inflation and employment “gaps.” Even more important is that if the forecasts of the future change, these guideposts can highlight how the entire policy path is likely to evolve. As such, they are capable of better aligning the public’s expectations of policy with those of the FOMC, making the conduct of monetary policy more accountable and more efficient. Conclusion In conclusion, the U.S. economy continues to recover at a moderate pace. Although we have not witnessed the strong bounce back from the depths of the recession that some anticipated, the recovery has been somewhat remarkable in the steadiness with which it has progressed. Labor markets continue to heal, and their stronger-than-expected recovery should serve to underpin continued economic expansion. Consumer balance sheets are much improved, and individuals have regained significant fractions of the wealth they lost during the crisis. That gives me additional confidence that the economy is now operating fairly normally and that policy should reflect that normalization. Policy can also be made more transparent and effective by specifying more completely the variables that guide policy and the general way that one can expect policymakers to react to those variables. To this end, I believe the FOMC should move forward to describe in a qualitative way its reaction function and then communicate our actions and decisions in terms of this reaction function. A detailed Monetary Policy Report could be a useful vehicle for such enhanced communication by discussing a range of robust policy rules. Placing policy choices in such a context will lead to a more systematic approach to policy and one that is more transparent and predictable. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Njuguna Ndung’u: Financial sector contributions towards vision 2030 goals Keynote address by Professor Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the AON Kenya Insurance Brokers seminar on “Financial sector contributions towards vision 2030 goals” Nairobi, 20 November 2014. *      *      * Mr. Joseph Onsando, Chief Executive Officer, AON Sub-Saharan Africa; Directors and Management of AON Kenya Insurance Brokers Limited here present; Distinguished Participants; Ladies and Gentlemen; It gives me great pleasure to be part of this important seminar themed “Financial Sector Contribution Towards Vision 2030 Goals”. Before I make my remarks, let me take this opportunity to thank AON Kenya Insurance Brokers Limited, for organising this important seminar to highlight the achievements of the financial sector under Kenya’s long term development blueprint, Vision 2030. This seminar provides an excellent platform to examine our successes, challenges and map the way forward to increase the financial sector’s contribution to Kenya’s economic development. As you are aware, the financial sector, the world over, plays a vital role in the socio-economic development process of a nation. In recent years, there has been increasing evidence showing that financial sector development is important not only for economic growth and development, but also for poverty reduction. Inclusive finance is good for sustainable inclusive growth. The financial sector intermediates between savers and borrowers by providing a wide range of financial services essential for productive economic activities. The financial sector also offers a wide range of products for risk mitigation, whose absence would impede entrepreneurship. The financial sector therefore allows for mobilization and allocation of financial resources for investment and wealth creation. The development of a well-diversified and accessible financial sector is imperative to meet the varied financial needs within the economy. Ladies and Gentlemen: The anchor Vision 2030 is to transform Kenya into an industrialized middle-income country that provides high quality of life to its citizenry. Vision 2030 defines the financial sector as vibrant and globally competitive that will promote high level of savings to finance Kenya’s investment needs. The key objectives for the financial sector in Vision 2030 are to enhance financial stability, efficient transformation and accessibility to all Kenyans. Ladies and Gentlemen: The long-term policy objectives of the financial sector in Vision 2030 include: i. Improved access and deepening of financial services and products for a much larger number of Kenyan households and small businesses; ii. Mobilising higher levels of savings to support higher investment rates; iii. Greater efficiency in the delivery of financial services to ensure that the cost of mobilising resources and allocating these resources becomes increasingly affordable and that the range and quality of services better caters to the needs of both savers and investors; iv. Enhanced stability in the system to ensure that all banks and other deposit-taking financial institutions can safely handle the public’s savings and ensure that the 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  chances of a financial crisis – with all the costs that this would imply – are kept to a minimum; and v. To make Kenya one of the ranked financial centres in “emerging markets” by 2030. Ladies and Gentlemen: In the first five years of Vision 2030, 2008 – 2013, the major reforms and initiatives undertaken in the financial sector to enhance financial stability, efficiency and access include:- • Licensing of deposit taking microfinance banks; • Introduction of agency banking to increase reach with least cost; • Automation of bond trading and lengthening the maturity of Treasury bonds to 30 years; • Development of a capital markets master plan to chart the development of Kenya’s securities markets for 10 years; • Introduction of credit information sharing and licensing of two credit reference bureaus; • Introduction of bancassurance products; • Enactment of the Proceeds of Crime and Anti-Money Laundering Act in 2009 and the establishment of the Anti-Money Laundering Board in June 2011; • The development of a regulatory framework for deposit taking savings and credit cooperatives (SACCOs); and • Strengthened oversight of the insurance sector following the adoption of risk based supervision by the Insurance Regulatory Authority (IRA). Ladies and Gentlemen: The financial sector has started to register significant achievements out of the outlined reforms and initiatives among others. Allow me to briefly mention some of these achievements. The contribution of the financial services sector to Kenya’s economic growth has been on an upward trend from 3.7% of GDP in 2009 to 9.2% of GDP in 2013. Over the same period, the sector grew faster than the economy. The financial sector grew by 9.3% in 2013 as compared to the economy which grew by 5.7%. This was an improvement from 4.9% growth by the sector in 2008 compared to the GDP growth of 0.2%. As a result, the financial services sector is one of the main drivers of Kenya’s economic growth. The national financial access surveys conducted in 2006, 2009 and 2013 revealed that the level of adult Kenyans accessing formal financial services has increased tremendously. This is from 27.4% in 2006 to 41.3% in 2009 and 66.7% in 2013. It is also worth noting that the level of Kenyans who access informal financial services has declined from 35.2% in 2006 to 26.8% in 2009 and to 7.8% in 2013. The increase in the level of financial access in Kenya is testimony to the success of the reforms and initiatives implemented by the players in the financial sector. Ladies and Gentlemen: In 2013, Geospatial Surveys to map financial access points were undertaken in Kenya, Nigeria, Uganda and Tanzania. The survey results indicate that Kenya is ahead of the other countries in terms of financial access. • 76.7% of the Kenyan population is now within 5 kilometres of a financial service touch point as compared to 47.3%, 42.7% and 35.1% in Nigeria, Uganda and Tanzania, respectively. • Kenya has 65,353 financial service touch points as compared to 21,206; 20,229 and 17,212 financial touch points in Uganda, Tanzania and Nigeria respectively. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  • Kenya has 161.9 financial access touch points serving 100,000 people as compared to 63.1, 48.9 and 11.4 financial access touch points serving 100,000 people in Uganda, Tanzania and Nigeria, respectively. Ladies and Gentlemen: The automation of bond trading and lengthening of maturity profiles has enabled the country to mobilise substantial resources for the desired infrastructure projects. Several infrastructure bonds, which have all recorded unprecedented oversubscription levels, have demonstrated the Kenya financial sector’s capacity to finance longer term public investment projects, but more importantly, has deepened the financial sector. Kenya also successfully issued a debut Sovereign Bond in 2014 to finance infrastructure projects, ease pressure on domestic interest rates and establish a benchmark for Kenyan issuers to tap into the international capital markets. The overwhelming oversubscription recorded in the Sovereign Bond demonstrates the confidence that foreign investors have on Kenya’s economy. The 10-year and 5-year tranches of the Sovereign Bond were issued at very competitive interest rates. Kenya’s aspiration of becoming an international financial centre is on course. Following Cabinet approval of a broad policy proposal for establishment of the Nairobi International Financial Centre in 2013, H.E. the President through an Executive Order set up the Nairobi International Financial Centre Authority (NIFCA). NIFCA will drive the process of establishing Nairobi International Financial Centre (NIFC). Consequently, an interim Secretariat for Nairobi International Financial Centre Authority (NIFCA) was established at the National Treasury. The Secretariat is currently engaging public and private sector players to inform the development of a comprehensive legal and regulatory framework for NIFC. This is one of the pillars making Kenya the Financial Hub of Eastern Africa. These successes notwithstanding, there remain challenges for us to address. First, 25% of adult Kenyans are still excluded from financial services. As a result, we need to re-energise our efforts to address any remaining barriers for the majority of Kenyans to access financial services. The main barriers are the cost of financial services and the use and quality of financial services. The use and quality challenges pinpoint the need for enhanced consumer protection, financial education and above all information symmetry across the divide. Ladies and Gentlemen: In order to address the existing challenges in the financial sector, the Vision 2030’s Medium Term Plan for 2013–2017 has outlined the following flagship projects: i. Establishment of the Nairobi International Financial Centre to raise funds for projects and tap into new investments coming to Africa. ii. Deepening of Capital Markets through a robust policy and regulatory framework to stimulate long-term savings to finance investments by the Government and private sector. iii. Promoting East African Community financial services integration to facilitate trade, enable cross-border operations and movement of capital. iv. Facilitating the expansion of electronic payments to significantly reduce transaction costs across the financial system, especially in the provision of retail financial services. v. Development of a national financial education and consumer protection strategy and framework to enhance usage and quality of financial services. Given that most of you are from the insurance sector, you appreciate its importance in raising long-term funds to support economic development. This is particularly important in the capital markets that provide suitable long-term investment vehicles for insurance products. Kenya’s insurance sector has played a pivotal role in development of the domestic bonds market. It is therefore important that we upscale the insurance penetration to mobilise additional long-term funds. The FinAccess Survey for 2013 indicated that just about 7% of adult Kenyans 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  access insurance products. There is hence a huge market in Kenya waiting to be discovered by insurance players. The challenge is to design suitable, affordable and accessible products to tap this nascent market. Ladies and Gentlemen: As the financial sector players, we have our work cut out to meet the needs of Kenyan households and businesses. We must put our best foot forward to understand the needs of our customers and offer suitably tailored products. Only then will Kenya meet its aspirations of being a middle income industrialized country that provides a high quality of life to its citizenry. I have championed financial inclusion in Kenya and beyond and I am sure that this seminar will provide some solutions and I therefore look forward to your proposals. With these few remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish you all fruitful deliberations in this worthwhile seminar. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Manuel Sánchez: The changing tide of financial markets Remarks by Mr Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the Latin America & Caribbean Government Funds Roundtable, Mexico City, 5 December 2014. *      *      * It is an honor to speak at the close of this government funds roundtable, which has brought so many important international investors together. This seminar has provided us with insightful ideas on the progress made and challenges confronted by the government fund community in protecting and expanding capital. I would like to organize my comments as follows, speaking first about the trade-offs investors may face as monetary policy normalization in advanced countries evolves. Second, I would like to examine the financial scenario from the point of view of authorities in emerging markets. Finally, I would like to touch briefly on the Mexican economy. As usual, my remarks are entirely my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. Investors amid U.S. monetary normalization It is hardly an exaggeration to say that today’s investment environment is unusually complex. Fund managers must factor in very low interest rates, many sovereign and corporate bond spreads at historically minimum levels relative to U.S. Treasuries, and possibly stretched stock market valuations. Generating continued profits in such a context is by nature difficult and potential upside in both fixed-income and equity markets could be limited. Muddying the waters, the U.S. Federal Reserve will likely begin to reduce stimulus in the near future. Indeed, as monetary policy normalization in the United States has drawn nearer, volatility in international financial markets has increased. Uncertainty on the pace of normalization still looms. Given recent forecasts and certain statements made by members of the Federal Open Market Committee, an eventual U.S. rate hike could come earlier than many market participants anticipate. Furthermore, exactly how markets will react to policy news as it arrives cannot be predicted. In the last few years, most central banks and institutional investors have diversified their portfolios to enhance expected returns or to improve risk-return profiles. Many of them have invested in unconventional currencies or in less liquid and lower-rated fixed-income assets, such as mortgage, corporate, or emerging market bonds, among other types of assets. Some sovereign wealth funds have pursued more aggressive strategies, engaging in real-sector asset purchases, such as infrastructure, commodities, real estate and equity. The overall results until now have been acceptable. But this could change as the global interest-rate scenario develops. In this context, difficult investment decisions will need to be made. How to adjust asset allocations to evolving monetary normalization is a key question. Should investors prefer a more risk-off, conservative stance, or hold tight and take a longer view, in which they have to tolerate greater volatility? How can they become more agile in the way they incorporate new information, modify their expectations, and make decisions? Related to these questions are the investment time horizon and the definition of an optimal portfolio. In general, asset managers attempt to use targeted optimization models based on historical data. But history is not necessarily a good predictor of the future. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  A complicating issue is that in periods of stress, asset correlation is greater. Indeed, recently, the assets that appeared likely to offer the benefits of diversification have performed in a way similar to that of other instruments.1 These challenges are present in all economies. Long positions in fixed-income assets anywhere in the world are bound to result in losses for investors as yields in advanced economies normalize. Alternative strategies in equity or other real-sector assets could also suffer as financing costs increase worldwide. Finally, currency risk is also likely to rise in many countries. Emerging economies may face particular difficulty given high weights for their assets in international portfolios. Currently, there is much discussion on whether it makes sense to participate or not in these countries from a risk-return perspective. In general, there are fears that eventual monetary normalization in the United States will affect all emerging economies as an asset class, but some nations are more prepared for the scenario than others, as always.2 The situation of emerging economies may become even more complicated in the face of possibly slower recovery in the Eurozone and lower growth in China, which might drag commodity prices down even further. This would be particularly daunting for many commodity-exporting countries. The challenges for financial authorities in emerging markets What should monetary and financial authorities in emerging markets do to prepare their economies for a rapidly complicating environment, given likely near-term gradual monetary normalization in advanced nations? They have at least two complementary policy avenues. One is to pre-emptively make their economies more resilient to shocks by strengthening macroeconomic and financial fundamentals. Possible measures include improving the fiscal position, controlling inflation, and performing the delicate balancing act of bolstering financial regulatory and supervisory frameworks without limiting market development and innovation. Open, liquid, and transparent financial markets are beneficial in this aim. Structural reforms and healthy prospects for economic growth are also important. A second strategy, which goes hand-in-hand with the first, is to monitor and manage risks in the aim of preserving financial stability. By financial stability, I mean the absence of interruptions and alterations that could impair the financial system’s intermediation capacity.3 Risks to watch encompass significant overheating of the overall economy or crucial sectors, substantial misalignment of asset prices from long-term trends such as in the property market, excessive risk-taking and increasing corporate or household leverage, and extraordinary credit expansion, especially through nontraditional vehicles, including shadow banking. Timely corrective action at the detection of any systemic problem is essential. Corrective action opens the debate as to what instruments to use to tackle specific complications. In addition to traditional measures such as fiscal, monetary, and bank                                                 1 See, for instance, Scholes, M.S. (2000), “Crisis and Risk Management.” The American Economic Review, 90(2); and Miyajima, K., et al. (2012), “Emerging market local currency bonds: diversification and stability.” BIS Working Papers No 391. 2 See, for example, Arslanalp, S. and T. Tsuda (2014), “Tracking Global Demand for Emerging Market Sovereign Debt.” IMF Working Paper WP/14/39. 3 For a discussion of the concept of financial stability, see Tucker, P. (2011), “Macroprudential policy: building financial stability institutions.” Speech given at the 20th Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference, April. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  regulatory actions, market interference in the wake of the big financial crisis has been invoked under the rubric of macroprudential policies. Some countries have opted for active FX intervention or direct management of capital flows. Although these measures may have resulted in short-term benefits, especially in emergency situations, their costs in terms of market distortions and disincentives for sustainable long-term flows may be high. Emerging economies suffering from high inflation, excessive fiscal disequilibria, and large current account deficits were hit by severe volatility at the end of last year and beginning of this year, underscoring the importance of the task of preparing for financial turmoil. In short, authorities should take advantage of the potential of both fortifying fundamentals and managing risks in order to waterproof against financial storms. The Mexican economy Mexico’s economy has weathered volatility relatively well during the last two years. For example, currency depreciation has been lower than that observed in many other emerging economies. Orderly market conditions have prevailed, with bid-ask spreads remaining tight and operating volumes high. This strength likely reflects a set of sound economic policies, including moderate and relatively stable public debt ratios, low inflation and a well-capitalized and liquid banking system. Furthermore, Mexico’s flexible exchange rate regime has served as a buffer against turbulence, become a mechanism of self-discipline for authorities and market participants, and resulted in less pass-through to inflation. The Mexican peso sees more trade than many advanced-nation currencies, and it is the most traded among those of emerging economies.4 Additionally, the local debt market has become attractive to foreign holders, and this is beginning to be the case for foreign issuers as well. Foreign holdings of local‐currency government bonds, as a percentage of total domestic public debt outstanding, have run at around 37 percent. This share has remained relatively stable in the wake of brusque market reactions to talk of eventual tapering of Federal Reserve asset purchases last year and so far continues to do so. A high concentration of these holdings in long tranches of the yield curve provides some basis for believing that many investors see their positions as a long-term bet. In other words, perhaps they are here to stay. However, as we are in unchartered waters, we cannot rule out the possibility of significant downward adjustments in these holdings, amid changing market sentiment or shrinking carry-trade opportunities as U.S. monetary normalization proceeds, among other possible causes. After a year and a half of weakness, Mexico’s economy started to rebound during 2014, notwithstanding some lower growth in the third quarter reflecting, in part, temporary factors. The main impulse has come from consolidation of U.S. economic activity and associated higher demand for Mexican exports. Domestic spending has also gained some steam, mainly through private investment and, to a lesser extent, from consumption. Consumer confidence has been at somewhat low levels but appears on the mend according to evidence from November data. The growth outlook is one of gradual improvement. A close economic relationship with the United States is a positive factor for Mexico. Before the U.S. recovery took off, it was a                                                 4 See Bank for International Settlements (2013), Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity in 2013, April. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  disadvantage vis-à-vis many commodity-exporting countries, which enjoyed the benefits of high and ascending commodity prices. The tables, however, now appear to have turned.5 Monetary policy in the last two years became more accommodative in the context of lower economic growth. Rate cuts from March 2013 to June 2014 totaled 150 basis points, and the policy interest rate is currently at 3 percent. Since July 2014, annual inflation has surpassed the upper limit of the variability interval around the permanent 3 percent target, due mainly to transitory factors. Pressures from the effect over the year of tax hikes, and from the noncore component of the National Consumer Price Index, especially livestock prices, have made themselves felt. Inflation is expected to be lower in 2015, on a path of convergence to the permanent target. This development would be extremely timely as it would contribute to increasing the economy’s resilience to a possibly more difficult international financial environment. But convergence implies not only achieving but also maintaining the target level. Upside inflation risks should be carefully monitored. One may come from substantial hikes in minimum wages. Others are a prolonged weaker currency due in part to financial market stress, and renewed pressures from noncore inflation. Analysts’ inflation expectations for all periods, although stable, remain above the Bank of Mexico’s permanent target. Concluding remarks Approaching monetary normalization in advanced countries will make life more complicated for fund managers, especially in light of very low global interest rates, historical minimums for bond spreads, and record highs in many stock markets. Beset by heightened uncertainty, emerging markets will see added challenges. Portfolio weights are already heavy with their assets, a stumbling Eurozone recovery could derail some of them, and lower growth in China could further dent demand for commodities, on which many emerging economies depend as exporters. Financial authorities need to work hard to underpin macroeconomic fundamentals by focusing on how to strengthen fiscal and monetary policies, as well as regulatory and supervisory frameworks in the financial system. They should also remain fully alert to financial risks and keep stability at the fore of their concerns. After some fragility, Mexico’s economy appears to be on an upturn, pulled by a stronger recovery in the United States, as well as more momentum from domestic demand. The expected approach of inflation to the permanent target is a welcome development, particularly given the need to shield the economy against what could be rocky times ahead in the global marketplace. Especially in light of this possibility, any warning sign in the financial markets that would indicate serious future systemic instability must be heeded in a timely and decisive manner.                                                 5 Analysts estimate that GDP for Mexico will grow 2.2 percent in 2014, 3.5 percent in 2015 and 4.0 percent in 2016. See Banco de México (2014), Encuesta sobre las Expectativas de los Especialistas en Economía del Sector Privado: Noviembre de 2014, December. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Daniel Mminele: Normalising monetary policy in an uncertain world – the outlook for monetary policy in South Africa Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Bank of America Merrill Lynch Fixed Income conference, Johannesburg, 28 November 2014. *      *      * Introduction Good morning ladies and gentlemen. Thank you to Bank of America Merrill Lynch for inviting me to address you on the issue of monetary policy normalisation in an uncertain world. This must be the single-most important issue that central banks around the world have been grappling with for quite a while now. We are now in the sixth year post the global financial crisis (GFC). Six years seems rather instructive, because this is approximately the amount of time of that Reinhart and Rogoff originally suggested it would take to recover from the financial crisis.1 There is now a fairly strong consensus view among economists across the world that the US has paid its dues and set itself up for a period of economic growth and subsequent monetary policy normalisation. In the case of the US, normalisation is generally taken to mean that the Federal Reserve (Fed) will stabilise the size of their balance sheet, raise the Federal Funds rate and allow the yield on US treasury bonds to move more freely. As a consequence of the US’s favourable interest rate and growth differentials vis-a-vis the rest of the world, the US dollar is likely to continue to strengthen as capital flows back to higher yielding opportunities in the States.  Although normalisation and the consequent moves to higher policy and bond rates are probably one of the most expected and anticipated consensus trades that the collective market has ever anticipated, two things remain uncertain – namely timing and the degree of adjustment, both in the US and elsewhere. In a normalising yield environment in the US, most investors expect emerging market (EM) currencies to come under pressure – particularly of those EMs running large (twin) deficits and vulnerable to capital flow reversals. South Africa is unfortunately part of this latter group of countries. If this is not challenging enough, we are also faced with stagflation – i.e. low growth and high inflation. On the one hand US policy normalization suggests that we need to tighten policy, but on the other hand raising rates carries the risk of weakening our own already weak recovery. Consequently, the combination of an uncomfortably high current account and fiscal deficits requires a pragmatic and balanced policy response that will contribute to a more sustainable growth path for our economy. In an effort to do justice to the topic I was asked to address today, I will try and assess how we got into this unpleasant juncture, and what policy can do about it. But let me first say a few words about monetary policy in major advanced economies and its effect on South Africa, given just how important a swing factor this is for our policy considerations.                                                 1  Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff examined the evolution of real per capita GDP around 100 systemic banking crises. They found that on average, it takes about eight years to reach the pre-crisis level of income; the median is about 6½ years. See American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2014; Recovery from Financial Crises: Evidence from 100 Episodes* http://www.nber.org/papers/w19823. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Diverging policies global monetary policies We know that the onset of the global financial crisis saw a synchronised response by central banks across the world. There was a coordinated effort to loosen monetary policy to cushion the world economy against what would probably have been a devastating collapse. These accommodative policies have indeed succeeded in helping to protect against a protracted global recession, and have also underpinned a global economic recovery. However, the pace and extent of recovery has been uneven, which has resulted in diverging policies across the major developed economies. After a disappointing start to the year, the US economic performance has been better than expected in recent quarters. The weather-related contraction of the first quarter was followed by a strong rebound in growth in the second quarter, with the strong momentum maintained into the third quarter. The economy is estimated to have grown at a better-than expected 3,9 per cent in the third quarter, with leading indicators such as the PMI pointing to strong growth in the final quarter of the year. The job market has also improved considerably, with the unemployment rate declining to 5,8 per cent in September, the lowest level since June 2008. In line with this stronger than expected performance of the economy, the Fed concluded its quantitative easing programme in October and this has raised expectations of a policy rate hike in mid-2015. The pace and timing of normalisation of policy rates, as repeatedly stated by the Fed, will largely depend on the economic and inflationary developments and the Fed’s interpretation thereof. With a lot of slack still remaining in the US labour market, one would expect the Fed to be cautious to not impede the recovery by moving too soon and too aggressively. Inflationary pressures are also expected to remain largely contained by a strong dollar and lower energy costs. The Fed will therefore face a less difficult trade-off between above-target inflation and consolidating growth. As such, the base case appears to one of a gradual normalisation of the Fed’s policy rate. The UK recovery also appears to be on track, with the economy growing 2,8 per cent in the third quarter and the unemployment rate falling faster than expected, reaching 6 per cent at the end of the third quarter. Although the Bank of England has maintained its asset purchases at £375 billion and interest rates at 0.5 per cent, sentiments are slowly shifting with some policymakers starting to vote for a policy rate hike. However, with the decline in the inflation rate to below the 2 per cent target, faltering growth in Europe, and soured trading and financial relations with Russia, a delay in policy normalisation appears likely. In contrast to the positive developments in the US and the UK, growth in the euro area and Japan has stalled, with policymakers in these countries indicating their willingness to take strong remedial action to mitigate against a protracted recession and extremely low inflation. The outlook for the euro area has deteriorated over the year, with growth forecasts by the European Commission having been revised downwards in November, from 1,2 and 1,7 percent to 0,8 and 1,1 per cent for 2014 and 2015 respectively. More worrying has been the shift of the weakness from the periphery to the core, notably France and Germany. The euro zone is also battling with extremely low inflation, with CPI growing by a meagre 0,4 per cent in October, uncomfortably close to deflation and far below the ECB’s target of close-to-but-below 2 per cent. The ECB has responded to these challenges by cutting its policy rate further in September and introducing a new stimulus plan2 involving the purchase of investment-grade asset backed securities issued by the non-financial private sector as well as covered bonds of the financial sector. And we have had strong indications from policy makers again during this week that should these measures prove to be insufficient, the                                                 2  The ECB expects that the purchases of asset-back securities and covered bonds under the new programme, together with the targeted longer-term refinancing operations (announced in June 2014), would increase the size of its balance sheet by roughly 1 trillion euros to 3 trillion euros, a level last seen in early 2012. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Governing council will consider in the first quarter of 2015 whether to embark on a sovereign bond purchase programme. Japan’s economic performance has also disappointed, with the hike in the value-added tax (VAT) partly to blame. Pre-emptive buying ahead of the VAT increase in the first quarter of the year resulted in a positive performance, but this was followed by contractions in the second and third quarters, pushing the Japanese economy back into recession. Furthermore, although inflation is above the 2 percent target, this is largely due to the VAT increase and inflation is expected to fall in the early months of 2015. In response to recessionary conditions and still muted inflation, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) responded by raising its monetary expansion programme in October by an additional ¥10–20 trillion to ¥80 trillion (an equivalent of just under US$700 billion) per year. Clearly, we are seeing a divergence of policy in the major advanced economies. This suggests that central banks need to weigh the spill-over effects of tightening policy in the US against accommodative policies in Europe and Japan in determining their own monetary policy trajectories. Our sense is that the impact of US tightening will dominate, but that it would be tempered somewhat by ECB and BOJ stimulus plans. However, it is clear that global financial conditions have become less hospitable for countries with large external financing requirements. This process has already delivered a bumpy ride for South Africa, as it has for some other countries. Impact of normalisation on South Africa Like most emerging markets, South Africa benefited from the massive liquidity injection into the global financial market following the Great Recession. Inflows of capital meant that the current account deficit was comfortably financed, while it also resulted in significant appreciation of the rand. This in turn helped to contain inflation, allowing room for accommodative monetary policy over a fairly extended period. However, these trends started to reverse in May 2013 in anticipation of US monetary policy normalisation, following indications to that effect from the Fed. This saw a widespread depreciation of emerging market currencies, which intensified with the actual implementation of the US Federal Reserve’s asset purchase tapering programme starting from January 2014. The rand depreciated quite sharply in line with emerging market currencies, with the weakness exacerbated by a widening current account deficit. The rand weakness contributed to rising inflationary pressures, with inflation breaching the 6 per cent target in April and reaching 6,6 per cent in May and June before retreating to 5,9 per cent in September and October. The moderation in food and petrol prices contributed to lower inflation outcomes in recent months. In particular, the abrupt and significant decline in international oil prices to below US$80 per barrel in November has had a positive impact on the medium term inflation outlook. The Bank’s latest inflation forecast reflects an improved outlook, with headline inflation now expected to average 6,1 per cent and 5,3 per cent in 2014 and 2015 respectively, compared with the previous forecast of 6,2 per cent and 5,7 percent. However, there is a lot of uncertainty around the sustainability of the decline in oil prices, while the exchange rate also continues to pose upside risks to the inflation outlook, as it still remains vulnerable to changing perceptions about global monetary policy normalisation, and the large current account deficit. As we have indicated previously, wage settlements that are de-linked from inflation and underlying productivity trends also pose an upside risk to the inflation outlook. Furthermore, the Bank remains concerned about the elevated level of core inflation which remains close to the upper target level. Domestic growth outlook also remains weak. The economy contracted by 1,6 per cent in the first quarter and grew by a marginal 0,5 per cent in the second, with much of this weakness due to prolonged strikes in the mining and manufacturing sectors amid already weak global conditions. Growth improved to 1,4 per cent in the third quarter, however this was off a low base. The Bank revised its growth outlook for 2014 downwards to 1,4 per cent, as 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  announced after our most recent MPC meeting last week, compared with 1,5 per cent previously. The 2015 and 2016 projections were also downgraded from 2,8 per cent and 3,1 per cent respectively to 2,5 per cent and 2,9 per cent. Domestic growth prospects remain constrained by short-term and long-term structural supply factors such as strike activity, rising input costs and electricity shortages, as well as slowing consumer demand. Falling commodity prices and weak economic conditions in the country’s major trading partners also add to this subdued outlook. The combination of uncomfortably high current account and fiscal deficits (in the face of global monetary policy normalisation), high inflationary pressures, and weak domestic growth pose a challenge for both monetary and fiscal policy. These have required a balanced policy response in an effort to ensure a sustainable growth path for our economy. So how is South Africa doing? Let me quote you a paragraph from last week’s Economist magazine: “It was great while it lasted. In a golden period from 2003 to 2010 …. economies grew at an annual average rate of close to 5%, wages rose and unemployment fell, … people were lifted out of poverty and the middle class swelled…. But now the growth spurt is over. What some worried would be a ‘new normal’ of expansion of 3% a year is turning out to be far worse. The …economy will on average grow by only around 1.3% this year.”3 No, in this case the Economist is not referring to South Africa – the quote is actually for the Latin American region. But it is very much also our own story. Indeed, the ongoing emerging market slowdown serves to remind us of the protracted nature of previous crisis episodes, including the 1997–1998 Asian crisis and the 2008–09 world financial crisis. However, there are limits to similarities among EMs, which may lead to differentiation when assessing countries. For example, South Africa’s export performance relative to a number of peers remains poor – irrespective of whether they are commodity exporters (Australia), or have also experienced significant exchange rate depreciation (India, Turkey), or both (Brazil and Chile). The fact that South Africa has grown its exports less than its peers, implies that the domestic economy is suffering from something more than weak global demand and declining commodity prices.  South Africa’s weak performance is also visible in the country’s declining share of world exports, which declined from around 0.7% of world merchandise exports to 0.55% over the last 10 years. Perplexingly, SA’s portion of global exports has remained roughly stable since 2011, at about the level last attained at the height of the Great Recession, despite pronounced currency depreciation over that entire period. With global growth – particularly in the EU, our largest trading partner – under severe pressure, we increasingly relied on the domestic non-tradeables sector to prop up domestic growth as it would have been difficult to ramp up exports. Unfortunately not all growth is equal. The quality of growth matters at least as much as the quantity of growth, and there are reasons to believe SA’s non-tradeable growth in the post-crisis years has been of inferior quality. It has been driven by consumption, not investment, which has been financed by debt, meaning it reduces future consumption and investment                                                 3  The Economist, “The great deceleration: The region’s economies have slowed far more abruptly than anyone expected” 22 November 2014. See http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21633940-regions-economies-have-slowed-far-more-abruptly-anyone-expected-great-deceleration. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 capacity. Furthermore, the growth has been based on large quantities of imported inputs, resulting in an unsustainable current account deficit. Credit growth to the private sector appears sustainable and consistent with macroeconomic fundamentals. Since the first quarter of 2011, credit extended to households increased by 22.3 per cent (or 4.9 percent when deflated with headline CPI), slightly less than the 6% increase in GDP over the same period. Household credit has weakened quite significantly in recent months, with growth slowing to an annual rate of 3,7 percent in September compared to 7,5 percent in the same month last year. However, the moderate overall increase in credit could be masking several unwelcome developments. For instance, “good credit” extended for mortgages increased by much less than other categories, notably instalment sale credit (mostly used for vehicle financing) and unsecured credit. With credit extended to households shifting from relatively low interest (and lower margin) mortgages to more profitable (higher margin) categories, it is not surprising that the real value added in the financial sector also increased by a cumulative 9.5 percent since 2011q1 – on par with the real growth recorded in the retail sector. In fact the retail and finance sectors together contributed almost 60 percent of GDP growth since 2011q1 – significantly larger than their 37 percent share in GDP.  The growing size of the non-tradeables sector may also explain a weakening economy-wide response to a weaker real exchange rate. Potential growth has slowed Another reason why South Africa has so far experienced a relatively weak recovery from the 2008–09 recession, relates to faltering potential growth. According to the OECD, “estimating potential growth rates is always an imprecise exercise, and all the more so for a country (such as SA) with such a high rate of inactivity and where the responsiveness of wage and price inflation to changes in unemployment is low. In addition, in recent years the task has been further complicated by uncertainty over the extent to which electricity supply limitations have constrained potential output growth in South Africa”.4 Replicating work by Borio, Disyatat, and Juselius (2013, 2014) at the Bank of International Settlements (BIS), which incorporates financial cycle characteristics into the estimation, some estimates suggest that South Africa’s potential growth rate declined from 4 per cent in 2007 to around 2½ per cent in 2013, compared to earlier estimates which suggested that current potential growth rates was around 3 to 3½ percent5. This development is not unique to South Africa as several studies show that potential growth may have been over-estimated in many emerging market economies. Monetary policy response The operating environment for South Africa’s monetary policy has become increasingly complex, with growth and inflation dynamics being influenced by a range of global and domestic factors, which call for delicate trade-offs in terms of policy settings. Recent developments suggest that the period of relatively low volatility has come to an end. Market participants and policy makers now have to grapple with the possibility or risk that the lift-off of rates in US may occur sooner than they anticipate, while in Japan and the Eurozone more easing seems to be on the way, while risks assigned to geo-political risks, which the 4  OECD (2013), OECD Economic Surveys: South Africa 2013, OECD Publishing. See http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/economics/oecd-economic-surveys-south-africa-2013_eco_surveys-zaf-2013-en. 5  Anvari, V., R. Steinbach, and N. Ehlers (2014). A semi-structural approach to estimate South Africa’s potential output. South African Reserve Bank Working Paper WP/14/08. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  market seems relatively relaxed about, may intensify. All these factors are likely to increase volatility. Recent experience has shown us how sensitive our domestic market are to the international backdrop. Against the background of South Africa’s elevated current account deficit, which is expected to only correct slowly, the risk of abrupt swings in capital flows cannot be under-estimated. This environment calls for continued vigilance from policy makers, and preparedness to respond to the fast-changing economic and financial markets environment, and readiness to act to changes one’s monetary policy stance when deemed appropriate. It also calls for ongoing dialogue, exchange of information and appropriately calibrated communication in order to strengthen policy credibility. As you are aware, we embarked on a gradual, data-dependent, policy normalisation process at the beginning of this year, which will continue, but will also take account of the unfolding situation as it affects the inflation trajectory and growth dynamics. More recent developments on the inflation front have been encouraging and resulted in an improved headline inflation forecast, which gave the MPC some flexibility in the short-term, while it expressed concern about sticky core inflation, and reiterating that the need to over time realign our real interest rates better with our emerging market peers remains. As indicated in our MPC statement last week, the timing of future interest rate increases will be dependent on a range of factors, including the evolution of inflation expectations, the timing and speed of normalisation of monetary policy in the US and the state of the domestic economy. As we have said before, while monetary policy should and in South Africa will play its role within the confines of its mandate, a concerted effort is needed by other key role players in agreeing and effectively implementing the necessary structural reforms that will deliver higher trend growth. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik: Rules and regulation update Speech by Ms Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik, Vice-Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, at the Erste Group Bank workshop “Rules and regulation update”, Skopje, 1 December 2014. *      *      * Dear Governor Bogov, Dear Guest Speakers from Erste Group Bank, Dear representatives from financial regulatory agencies, Dear colleagues, Please, let me thank you Governor Bogov for supporting the idea of organizing such an event that summarizes financial regulatory reform after six years of the global financial crisis and also I would like to give my appreciation to the guest lecturers from Erste Group Bank for their quick response to help us to better understand it. This workshop is distinctive, in my opinion, as it will point at numerous regulatory changes aimed at supporting the vision of a financial system that would be both globally integrated and adequately regulated over the medium-to-long-term. Why we are here today? Probably, some of you have already asked this question. Why? The subject and the presentations of today’s workshop are of great importance, having in mind that, we, the Central Bank with its unique foreign reserves management function, and other institutional investors (banks, pension funds, insurance companies) that are supervised by the regulators participating in this workshop, all of us, are investors on the European and global financial markets. In that regard, understanding of the regulations that are changing the financial markets landscape is of greatest significance for each market participant. The second question raised today is: What were the reasons for undertaking steps for financial sector reform? The recent financial crisis served as a reminder that the impaired financial system can have a significant impact on the functioning of the overall economy. Moreover, the 2007–08 financial crises was, to a great extent, a result of the failure of public authorities in the United States and Europe to adequately monitor and address systemic risk. By comparison, Asia and other parts of the world where memories of systemic financial crises were still fresh, had adopted more prudent policies and practices, and were less impacted by the subprime-triggered financial shockwaves. In order to make global finance more stable, the 2009 G20 summits in London and Pittsburg listed commitments on financial regulatory reform, pushing the financial regulation to the forefront of the global economic cooperation agenda at the level of political principles, which had until then, been mainly focused on trade and macroeconomic policy. The items on regulation can themselves be divided into two subgroups. On the one hand, the G20 decided to tighten or strengthen the regulatory framework applying to entities or activities that had already been regulated before the crisis. Examples include: • A more demanding framework for the capital, leverage, and liquidity of banks, prepared by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and known as the Basel III Accord since its initial exposition in 2010; 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  • Special regulatory treatment of systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs), such as additional capital (or in the Basel jargon, “loss absorbency”) requirements; and • Additional disclosure obligations for banks. On the other hand, entities or activities that until 2008 were mostly outside of the scope of regulators were made subject to a comprehensive regulatory framework: • Over-The-Counter (OTC) Derivatives, • Executive compensation, • Credit rating agencies, • Hedge funds, “shadow banking” (i.e. entities and activities that are not regulated as banks, but present bank-like systemic risk profiles) and, more recently, • Financial benchmarks (following the detecting of fraud in the setting of LIBOR, the London Interbank Offered Rate, and other similar reference rates). All those initiatives that were envisaged by the G20 are translated into regulatory changes in US and Europe. In the US, Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (or known as Dodd-Frank Act) implements changes that, among other things, affect the oversight and supervision of financial institutions. The Dodd-Frank Act creates the Financial Stability Oversight Council to oversee financial institutions. Additionally, it provides for a new resolution procedure for large financial companies, a creation of a new agency responsible for implementing and enforcing compliance with consumer financial laws, introduces more rigorous regulatory capital requirements, affects significant changes in the regulation of OTC derivatives, includes reform of the regulation of credit rating agencies, implements changes to corporate governance and executive compensation practices, incorporates the Volcker Rule, requires registration of advisers to certain private funds, and affects significant changes in the securitization market. In the EU, Markets in Financial Instruments Directive MiFID is an important step in the biggest overhaul of financial markets regulation in the EU for a decade. However, the new regulatory framework consists of Directive (MiFID 2) and Regulation on markets in financial instruments (MiFIR). It is an integral part of the EU’s strategy to address the effects of the financial crisis, but at the same time aims to bring greater transparency to markets and to strengthen investor protection. These changes are a key for restoring the trust in the EU financial markets. In reaction to the global financial crisis, the EU has also introduced the European Market Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR) that initiates a reporting obligation for OTC derivatives, a clearing obligation for eligible OTC derivatives, measures to reduce counterparty credit risk and operational risk for bilaterally cleared OTC derivatives, common rules for central counterparties (CCPs) and trade repositories (TRs), and rules on the establishment of interoperability between CCPs. MiFID 2 and EMIR are causing many changes in the financial market infrastructure, but changes are also happening as a result of other regulations such as the Central Securities Depositories Regulation and Target 2 Securities project. Some of them will change market practices as well, not only financial infrastructure. To conclude, excessive risk taking and leveraging have been one of the main causes of the financial crisis. As we are all aware, various policy initiatives are on the policy agenda to enable effective financial services reform. A sound, stable and resilient financial sector capable of providing funding to the real economy is of major importance for growth in the medium and long term. Both the financial reform agenda (internationally coordinated by G20) and the unique project of creating a Banking Union with Single Supervisory and Resolution Mechanisms (SSM, SRM) and a single rulebook will change the set-up of financial markets. The implementation of the financial sector reforms will also necessitate a vast amount of secondary legislation that may have a sizeable impact on the funding of the real economy. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  I hope that you will enjoy the workshop and that we will all learn much from the very impressive array of speakers. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Martin Flodén: Measures to mitigate the risks from high and increasing household debt Speech by Mr Martin Flodén, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at BNP Paribas, Stockholm, 20 November 2014. *      *      * The high level of household debt has been the subject of much discussion in connection with the monetary policy decisions in recent years. The discussions have partly related to the extent that these debts entail risks and partly to the measures that would be most effective in counteracting these risks. Today, I would like to briefly present my view of these issues, and I will link my thoughts to the discussion at last week’s meeting of the Financial Stability Council. In order to understand the risks, it is necessary to broaden the perspective somewhat and to examine the entire housing and mortgage markets in Sweden. Such an examination reveals that the Swedish markets are special in several respects, both in comparison with the previous situation in Sweden and with the situation in other countries. The household debt ratio, that is debts in relation to disposable incomes, has almost doubled over the last 20 years. The tax system encourages indebtedness by offering tax deductions for interest payments, and the households amortise at a slow rate. At the same time, housing prices, especially for tenant-owned apartments, have increased rapidly. The fact that housing construction has been low despite the rising prices indicates that the supply side of the housing market is not working well. The strict regulation of the rental market also means, for instance, that households may feel forced to buy a home even at stages of their lives when ownership and a mortgage may entail taking a major risk. Although a mortgage is a long-term undertaking for both the borrower and the lender, the households mainly choose variable-rate mortgages; only around one percent choose fixed rates at maturities longer than five years. In addition, the banks largely fund their lending using mortgage bonds with maturities that are significantly shorter than the maturities of the loans.1 I see the specific aspects I have just listed as risk factors, even though arguments can easily be found for each aspect to explain why this particular one does not actually constitute a risk. For example, one can point out that the high level of household debt is offset by the high level of household saving and households having assets that are substantially larger than their debts, or that the low level of construction over several decades limits the scope for a fall in housing prices.2                                                 1  In many countries, mortgages are amortised over periods of 20 to 40 years. This was also the case in Sweden a few decades ago, but it subsequently became increasingly common with interest-only loans. Over the past few years, a larger proportion of new mortgage borrowers have chosen to amortise their loans, but still at a slow rate. The proposal on stricter amortisation regulations presented by Finansinspektionen (the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority) last week corresponds to an amortisation rate of 78 years during the first decades of a mortgage. Swedish housing investments have averaged approximately 3 per cent of GDP over the last ten years compared to almost 6 per cent in the euro area (European Commission 2014a). According to the European Commission (2014b) Sweden has the most strictly regulated rental market in the EU and moreover, because of low property taxes and generous interest-rate deductibility, the strongest tax incentives for owner-occupied housing. In recent years, over 70 per cent of new mortgage borrowers have chosen variable interest rates and only a few per cent have fixed their interest rates for more than five years. In many other countries, it is usual to fix interest rates for between 10 and 30 years. Much of this is described in more detail in Riksbank (2014a). 2  An important explanation of the high level of saving is collective pension saving, see Nilsson et al. (2014). 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Large debts and variable interest rates make the households vulnerable However, despite these and other mitigating arguments, I think it is clear that there are risks associated with the Swedish housing and mortgage markets. That the households have bloated balance sheets, with both large debts and large assets, makes them vulnerable to shocks. This is partly because debts and assets are unevenly distributed between households, unequally liquid and have different risk profiles, and are thus not affected by shocks in the same way. Vulnerability is then not necessarily a question of the households becoming insolvent, but rather of them reacting to shocks in a way that leads to a fall in consumption, and thus to a fall in growth and employment.3 The high debts in combination with mainly variable mortgage rates imply of course that the households are sensitive to changes in interest rates.4 To some extent this can be seen as an advantage as it means that monetary policy then has a greater direct impact on the economy. However, it may also be problematic for several reasons. The Riksbank’s repo rate is and should preferably be a blunt instrument that affects the entire economy, that is the households, the companies and the financial markets. It is not desirable for monetary policy to have a disproportionally large impact on a limited part of the economy, in this case on the indebted households. One should not expect that monetary policy will always be designed so that it is well balanced for just this particular part of the economy. This is exemplified by the monetary policy of recent years in which the repo rate has been set lower than justified by developments on the mortgage market. In the future, we may well end up in the opposite situation with the repo rate being set higher than justified by this particular part of the economy. Longer fixed-rate periods desirable It is difficult to determine how large a proportion of variable interest rates is desirable in an economy, but I suspect that we have gone too far in that direction in Sweden. And by this I mean from the point of view of systemic risk. For an individual household there may be good reasons for choosing a variable interest rate, but for the economy as a whole it would probably be good if we could limit the proportion of variable rates. This can be achieved in different ways. In some countries, regulations have been used to either limit how large a proportion of the mortgage may have a variable interest rate or how much a variable interest rate may increase during the maturity of a mortgage. In other countries, long fixed-rate periods have become the norm without the need for regulations. The fact that this has not happened in Sweden indicates that the financial markets are not working well enough for some reason. This may, for example, be due to the lack of a market for mortgage bonds at really long maturities, or of regulations concerning how mortgages with long fixed-rate periods can be paid off prematurely. Limit the build-up of debt despite the need to stimulate the economy I would also like to say something about the interplay between current monetary policy and measures to mitigate the risk factors I have mentioned. Is it really justified to introduce measures that may dampen household consumption or activity on the housing market when the Riksbank is at the same time trying to stimulate the economy in order to increase                                                 3  Several studies based on household data from the financial crisis of recent years show that highly-indebted households reduced their consumption more than households with low debts (see for example Dynan 2012, Mian et al. 2013, and Andersen et al. 2014). Studies that compare developments in different countries also indicate that high or growing indebtedness in the household sector entails higher risks to the real economy, even if the households also have substantial assets (see for example IMF 2012, Jorda et al. 2013, and Flodén 2014). 4  See Riksbank (2014b). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  inflation? This question is particularly relevant given that the repo rate is at zero and cannot be cut much more. I think that the question, at least in principle, should nevertheless be answered in the affirmative. It must be possible to meet financial risks with targeted measures even if this makes it more difficult for monetary policy to attain the inflation target. At the same time, it is of course desirable that the measures targeted at household indebtedness and the housing market do not in themselves lead to an economic downturn or unnecessarily obstruct monetary policy. The primary aims of policy in this area must be to ensure that the build-up of household debt slows down, that the households gradually become more resilient to shocks of various kinds and that the housing and mortgage markets become more effective. This is thus a question of a long-term adjustment process that must take place in suitably-large steps. The amortisation proposal – a step in the right direction I see last week’s amortisation proposal as one such suitably-large step in the right direction. As only new mortgages will be covered, increased amortisation will be phased in over a long period of time. In combination with many new mortgage borrowers already amortising, and because the proposal entails only a moderate increase in amortisation rates, this means that the macroeconomic consequences will probably be small during the first few years. According to the Riksbank’s estimate, the amortisation proposal will have reduced the household debt ratio by 0.6 percentage points after five years compared with a base scenario. This means that the proposal will increase amortisation payments by less than 0.1 per cent of GDP per year during the period.5 The amortisation proposal thus appears to be well balanced at the moment, but work on the long-term adjustment process must continue. There are many factors to take into account when considering further measures. One such factor is how a new measure conforms to the current state of the economy and interplays with monetary policy. The suitably-large steps should preferably be taken in the right order. From this point of view I note that two proposed measures, longer fixed-rate periods and reduced tax deductions for interest payments, have opposite effects on how the repo rate affects household finances. Longer fixed-rate periods would weaken the impact of the repo rate while reduced deductions would strengthen its impact. If one worries that the households are myopic in their planning and that they will find it difficult to manage a return to normal interest-rate levels, it is probably appropriate to try to enforce longer fixed-rate periods now that interest rates are still low. If, on the other hand, one worries that the households have too easy access to inexpensive credit and in the near term wishes to see a greater gap between household and corporate interest rates, it is probably more appropriate to reduce the tax deductions. How to take the suitably-large steps in the right order is thus not self-evident, but my assessment is that it is now appropriate to strive for both longer fixed-rate periods and a phasing-out of the right to make tax deductions for the largest interest payments. However, most welcome from my monetary-policy perspective would be measures that lead to a more effective housing market, and in particular to increased housing construction. Such measures can stimulate the economy in the short term at the same time as they are structurally justified.                                                 5  See Riksbank (2014c). This calculation then builds on household disposable income being approximately 50 per cent of GDP. The additional amortisation payments as a percentage of GDP will then be (50% × 0.6%)/5 = 0.06%. The effects on household consumption may be smaller or greater, depending in part on how the households adjust their behaviour and on how this affects housing prices. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  References Andersen, Asger Lau, Charlotte Duus and Thais Laerkholm Jensen (2014), Household Debt and Consumption during the Financial Crisis: Evidence from Danish Micro Data, Working Paper No. 89, Danmarks Nationalbank. Dynan, Karen (2012), Is Household Debt Overhang Holding Back Consumption?, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. European Commission (2014a), Macroeconomic Imbalances: Sweden 2014, Occasional Papers 186. European Commission (2014b), Institutional Features and Regulation of Housing and Mortgage Markets, chapter 2 in Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, 13(2). IMF (2012), “Dealing with Household Debt”, Chapter 3 in World Economic Outlook. Jorda, Oscar, Moritz Schularick and Alan Taylor (2013), When Credit Bites Back, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 45(2). Mian, Atif, Kamelesh Rao and Amir Sufi (2013), Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump, Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(4). Nilsson, Christian, Jonas Söderberg and Anders Vredin (2014), The significance of collective pension saving for the Swedish financial system, Economic Commentary no. 3, the Riksbank. The Riksbank (2014a), From A to Z: the Swedish mortgage market and its role in the financial system, Riksbank Studies, April. The Riksbank (2014b), Households’ sensitivity to interest rates, article in Monetary Policy Report, October. The Riksbank (2014c), Appendices to the memo Amortisation requirements – a step towards a more sustainable debt situation, 11 November. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Njuguna Ndung’u: Public debt, fiscal policy and forward looking monetary policy Keynote address by Professor Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 2nd Annual Research Seminar of the Kenya School of Monetary Studies Research Centre, Kenya School of Monetary Studies, Nairobi, 18 November 2014. *      *      * Invited Guests; Chairman of the Central Bank of Kenya Board of Directors; Members of the Monetary Policy Committee; Researchers; Distinguished Guests; Ladies and Gentlemen: Good Morning. It gives me great pleasure to be here this morning at the official opening of the Research Seminar on “Public Debt, Fiscal Policy and Forward Looking Monetary Policy ” organized by the Research Centre at KSMS. As you are aware this is the second time we are gathered here to discuss the research findings of our researchers. A look at the papers in today’s program shows that they are as a result of collaborative effort of researchers in the Bank and other esteemed institutions. Collaborative and comprehensive research is key to good policy advice work. Ladies and Gentlemen, the title of this research seminar touches on a very important and current topic. Looking globally, a number of countries are going through a time of hardship. Public debt is a real economy problem when not sustainable. When public debt is unsustainable, it creates a debt overhang problem with the effect that the private sector believes the government will raise taxes in future to pay the public debt. The effect is on private investment since the private sector acquires a waiting option and finally, these effects slow down growth. Thus, the most important challenge to debt sustainability and this will restore growth trajectory to dislodge the market from this waiting option. To achieve this objective many difficult and far-reaching decisions have to be taken. Against this backdrop, forums such as this one are essential for sharing ideas. After all, scientific research is a central pillar of good decision-making. Therefore, I would like to thank the Kenya School of Monetary Studies for organising this event. Why public debt, fiscal policy and forward looking monetary policy? My starting point is to draw our attention to the principal objective of macroeconomic policy, which is to achieve sustainable economic growth in a context of macro stability. To achieve this, monetary and fiscal policies have to play their roles and their success is largely dependent on how they anchor public expectations.  Ladies and gentlemen, there are interesting studies on fiscal policy and economy growing with debt; and monetary policy and fiscal dominance. They come to interesting conclusions, but the most important is policy coordination.  Why is policy coordination important? • Monetary policy is about short-run decisions on the direction of prices, and affects nominal variables; while fiscal policy affects real variables. • It makes it easier for policy makers to achieve their stated policy objectives in a coherent and efficient manner. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  • Ensures commitment to mutually agreed upon objectives, thus helping to eliminate the problem of time inconsistency in the design of policy. • It enhances the credibility, anchors public expectations, ensures sustainability of fiscal and monetary policies, thus promoting macroeconomic stability. Ladies and gentlemen, to ensure success of policy coordination we need either of the following: • A continuous interaction between the fiscal and monetary authorities to decide jointly on aspects relating to policy design and implementation, or; • A set of rules and procedures that minimize the need for frequent interaction. But we know all these, why was the EU zone not successful? As noted by Sargent and Wallace in their famous article “Some unpleasant monetarist arithmetic”, “tighter money today leads to higher inflation not only eventually but starting today”. The paradox for tight monetary policy and heavy debt expansion will lead to economic stagnation, Eddie Buffie has demonstrated this for a number of countries in this region. Moreover, ladies and gentlemen, the lack of credibility of the overall policy framework caused by the long-term inconsistency of such mix in signals diminishes the effectiveness of monetary policy. Our experience with fighting inflation in Kenya suggests that inflation may be occasioned by demand side as well as supply side factors. Monetary policy uses interest rate as an instrument to fight inflation and anchor inflationary expectations. Fiscal policy on the other hand raising debt domestically and using a mix of debt instruments drives the domestic interest rate structure. How policy makers coordinate and consolidate their efforts not only affects expectations concerning future policies and outcomes but can also affect the outcome of economic activity. Ladies and gentlemen, several papers that link fiscal policy, monetary policy and inflation have been lined up for presentation today. As you listen to the presentations and the discussions, it is important that we filter the conclusions first to reach to the frontier of this subject matter and provide renewed thinking in the policy arena. The recommendations of these papers should fit in the policy dialogue and policy making process to support growth and employment as envisaged in Vision 2030 in Kenya. As I conclude, I would like to thank all the participants present. I hope the issues addressed in today’s contributions will provide the basis for a rewarding discussion.  Once again – you are all very welcome! It is my pleasure to declare this workshop officially open. Thank you.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jens Weidmann: Strengthening forces for growth – reforms geared towards boosting prosperity Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the economic summit of the Süddeutsche Zeitung, Berlin, 28 November 2014. *      *      * 1. Introduction Dear Mr Kister, Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you for inviting me to this event. It gives me great pleasure to be here with you today. I wonder if any of you have heard of Will Rogers. The man I refer to was a very well-known figure in the USA back in the twenties and thirties. Beginning his career as a lassoo artist, he went on to become one of the first big names in Hollywood. He was also a renowned documentary maker and newspaper columnist. In short: He was a true all-rounder. What is more, he was a humourist whose aphorisms are still popular as quotations today because many of them remain topical. For example, he once commented that mankind’s three greatest inventions were first fire, second the wheel and third central banks. He made this assertion in 1920, in other words seven years after the Federal Reserve was established. However, its message is surprisingly relevant to today’s world where many people appear to believe that central banks hold the key to resolving all our economic woes. Nowadays, central banks are viewed as the font of all wisdom in the fight against financial and sovereign debt crises and economic deficits in general. Indeed, some observers deem them to be the only capable actors gracing the stage. People’s expectations of monetary policy, especially of European monetary policy, are correspondingly high. But let me make one thing clear: central banks are not magicians. And they have no wand to make all our wishes come true. In particular, it is fanciful to believe that monetary policy tools can sustainably lift the growth potential of an economy or permanently create new jobs. These goals can only be achieved through structural reforms as growth and employment are generated by innovative enterprises that offer competitive products combined with a well-trained and highly motivated workforce. In my opinion, Japan is a good illustration of this fact, although it is undoubtedly still too early to make a final assessment of that country’s economic policy strategy, known as Abenomics. This approach, characterised by an expansionary monetary policy coupled with a short-term stimulative fiscal policy and growth-inducing structural reforms, was designed inter alia to shift the Japanese economy onto a higher growth path on a lasting basis. However, the preliminary effects of Japan’s expansionary monetary policy and its stimulative fiscal policy are in danger of dissipating as the economic upturn was partly attributable to clear anticipatory effects prior to a VAT hike. What is more important, however, is that the announced structural reforms, notably measures to liberalise the services market and to expand labour force participation, have not actually been implemented yet. Monetary policy cannot solve structural problems. Such problems can only be remedied by political means, through growth-friendly reforms. And that is why I would like to talk to you today about what we can actually do to raise the growth potential of our economy. Please note that the observations I am about to make are not exhaustive. For example, I will not broach the subject of energy policy which is particularly relevant for German enterprises in terms of how it affects competitiveness. Nor will I be commenting on the consequences of demographic change, which I already addressed in my speech yesterday. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Returning to Will Rogers’ aphorism, today I intend not so much to focus on central banks per se as on the forces of fire and the wheel. For both of these inventions have galvanised productivity. Without fire we would have no energy and without the wheel there would be no mobility. It was the American Nobel prize-winning economist, Robert Solow who first showed how inventions, or technological progress as we would probably say today, and economic growth are connected, to which end he used his own model. The acclaimed Solow Growth Model may be over 50 years old but it has lost none of its effectiveness in giving crucial insights into how growth, investment and technological progress interact. 2.  Investment and growth One of the key insights provided by the Solow Model is that in the early stages of an economy’s development, growth is driven by the accumulation of capital, whereas at a more progressed stage of its development, the chief determinant of growth is the rate of technological progress. But there is another more decisive factor at play: in the long run, it makes little sense to invest in a mature economy unless it is technologically advanced or has an abundant supply of labour at its disposal. For these two factors are key to inducing higher income expectations on the part of enterprises. Which brings us to the crux of the debate about growth-friendly economic policy in Germany and the euro area. This debate has often prompted calls for increased investment as the best way to foster growth, the argument being that such investment would raise the productive capital stock, thus stoking long-term growth potential. At the same time, it would also push up the demand for machinery and equipment and in so doing stimulate the economy, both at home and abroad. Thanks to the globalised economy, greater investment in Germany, for example, would also benefit the rest of the euro area. Without doubt, the import content of private investment is at least higher than the rather modest content constituted by government expenditure, another reason why I am against calls for a government stimulus package in Germany aimed at boosting the economy in the euro area. That said, if we take a closer look at the Solow Model we see that, more often than not, quite the reverse is true. In a market economy, demand for investment cannot simply be conjured up by decree with a view to boosting growth potential. Conversely, it is also true that increased growth and therefore higher income expectations enhance enterprises’ willingness to invest. Hence, expectations pertaining to growth and income are of pivotal importance. In the case of Germany, however, demographic change has tended to exert a dampening influence, its shrinking labour force being a paramount factor hindering economic growth. For example, enterprises are finding it increasingly difficult to recruit the specialists they require. This has prompted many German enterprises to invest abroad, as reflected in Germany’s high current account surpluses. Regarding the low level of investment in Germany, many commentators point to public investment, the scale of which can be directly influenced by the state. But here, too, the nexus identified by the Solow Model applies. Rates of investment lying above the growth potential of a developed economy are unlikely to increase prosperity, a fact that applies not just to public investment but also private investment. Since public net investment has been negative for some time now, there would nevertheless actually seem to be room for improvement in this area as well. No less important than the question of how much should be spent on public investment is the question of how this 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  money should be spent. Because, as every private investor is aware, not every investment is ultimately worth the money, and the same holds true for the public sector. In any case, public investment only represents a relatively small share of total investment. And as I already indicated: such investment cannot be steered arbitrarily but should instead reflect demographic trends and productivity gains. This brings me to the all-important question: how can an economy’s productivity be maximised? Here, I would like to cite another economist who delivered some major input regarding growth theory: I refer to Joseph Schumpeter, who described the growth process as one of “creative destruction” under which an entrepreneur develops a new product or a cheaper method of production which then enables him to steal the market from his competitors. As a result, less productive businesses disappear from the market. Overall, this serves to boost economic output. Viewed from this perspective, the competitive forces unleashed by innovative enterprises are the engine of growth – and there is ample evidence to support this assessment. For example, as a rule, the prosperity-boosting effects of the European Union have not arisen from higher trading volumes, as one might perhaps assume. Rather, studies1 show that the upturn in growth is mainly due to the fact that the expanded single market has intensified competition. And this increase in competition has in turn led to more innovative and therefore more productive enterprises. 3. Common market for services This insight leads us directly on to several possible ways of increasing growth potential in Germany and Europe. The single market has proven extremely successful at simplifying trade in goods. As a result, competition here is intense. Enterprises’ market power does not enable them to charge large mark-ups on top of their costs; levels are similar to those in the USA, for example. Creating a transatlantic market – the TTIP is a keyword here – could thus provide even more stimulus in this regard. The USA is the EU’s largest export market and its third most important import partner for trade in goods. As far as trade in services is concerned, the two regions share even closer connections. And it is precisely in the area of services that the EU still has some catching up to do in terms of intensifying competition. Mark-ups on the cost of services are on average higher than in the USA. One could say that the European Commission’s Services Directive has not lived up to expectations. Creating a single market for services thus promises considerable economic benefits. The original intention behind the Services Directive was to anchor in law the “home country principle”, which already applies to trade in goods within the EU. This principle states that a service provider shall no longer be hindered by regulations in the importing country if it complies with national regulations in its home country. However, this principle did not make it into the final version of the directive. Yet implementing the home country principle for services, too, would have great potential – after all, services account for over two-thirds of value added in Europe. Another way to leverage growth potential were if the single market were to fully enter the digital age. Fragmentation is still part and parcel of the digital economy, in particular for legal aspects such as protecting privacy and personal data, content and copyright, the liability of                                                 1 H Badinger (2005), “Growth Effects of Economic Integration: Evidence from the EU Member States”, Review of World Economics 141, pp 50–78. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  online intermediaries, electronic payments and electronic contracts. The EU does not yet consist of one digital single market but 28 individual digital markets. Studies2 show that creating a harmonised and well regulated digital single market has the same potential as implementing the single market in its original form, which is to say an upturn in growth of as much as 4%. In Germany alone, as many as 420,000 new jobs could be created between 2015 and 2020. 4. Barriers to market entry However, in the services sector barriers are not just at the European level. In Germany, they also exist for business start-ups in the form of red tape – things like mandatory administrative formalities, approval periods and fees incurred. In the World Bank’s Doing Business table, Germany ranks 114th in the “ease of starting a business” category. In other words, there is plenty of room for improvement. Even though an enterprise’s direct costs may appear to be manageable at first glance, the economic cost of difficulties entering the market and, as a result, weaker competition should not be underestimated. Studies3 indicate that the relatively small differences between costs of entering the market in the USA and in the EU could still account for 10% to 20% of the EU’s productivity shortfall. The costs of removing red tape are comparatively low and could strengthen growth. 5. Venture capital markets New, innovative enterprises are key to an economy’s productivity and highly competitive position. It is thus all the more important for these enterprises to have sufficient funding. A comparison between the USA and Europe shows that there is still some way to go here. New, innovative enterprises are often too small and banks frequently struggle to assess them, so they regularly raise capital in the form of equity. Venture capital has an essential role to play in this connection. The business model of a venture capital fund is based on gaining expertise in a particular business area and then investing in several start-ups in this area. Although a high percentage of these start-ups fail, profits are high if they succeed. For this business model to work, though, the market has to be large enough to enable venture capitalists to adequately diversify their investment. Furthermore, measures must be in place to ensure that lenders’ rights are sufficiently protected. This is the only way to ensure that they can reap the benefits of a successful investment. There is room for improvement on the venture capital market in Europe on both accounts. On the one hand, it is highly fragmented which reduces opportunities for diversification. On the other hand, there are varying levels of protection for lenders’ rights. The United Kingdom, which has by far the largest venture capital market in the EU, also has the highest level of protection. By contrast, Germany offers minority investors only a medium level of protection. However, decisions regarding protection for different groups of investors always have to be weighed up carefully. Overall, the venture capital market in the USA is five times as big as that in the EU. This could also be why innovative enterprises in the USA, measured in terms of the number of patents granted, have much easier access to capital.                                                 2 Copenhagen Economics (2010), The Economic Impact of a European Digital Single Market, Final Report. 3 Markus Poschke, “The Regulation of Entry and Aggregate Productivity”, Economic Journal, Royal Economic Society, Vol 120(549), pp 1175–1200, December 2010. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  And with regard to the willingness to raise capital, the fact that business tax laws in Germany provide for different tax treatment of debt and equity – as highlighted again in the German Council of Economic Experts’ latest report – is not very helpful either. 6. Capital market union However, it is not just in terms of growth that greater integration of European capital markets is promising. It can also help to make monetary union as a whole more resilient. Another comparison with the USA shows that equity holdings there are dispersed much more widely throughout the entire country. If a negative shock hits an industry or a specific region, then this loss is spread widely beyond that region. The same applies to positive developments, which are reflected in higher dividends. Equity investors participate directly in economic risk and in gains and losses. Creditors, on the other hand, are not exposed to losses – except in the case of insolvency. In the USA, the integrated markets for capital cushion around 40% of total cyclical fluctuations between the US federal states. If a regional economic downturn were to occur, the enterprises’ loss in earnings in one state would then be distributed between shareholders in other states, just as these would also benefit from increased profits in a boom. Only 25% of cyclical fluctuations are smoothed via the credit markets, where losses are shared only in the event of an insolvency. Fiscal mechanisms cushion just 20% of economic shocks.4 Studies for the German federal states come to similar conclusions. Deeper integration of European capital markets could thus make a key contribution to improving the absorption of macroeconomic shocks and the impact of heterogeneous economic developments in the euro area. The more the capital markets exercise this buffer function, the less fiscal policy will be responsible for stabilising the economy, which has a knock-on impact on government debt. After all, experience has shown that in an upturn it is often not possible to repay debt that was incurred in a downturn to stabilise the economy. In turn, there is less pressure on monetary policymakers to support expansionary fiscal policy by easing monetary policy. Monetary policy can thus become more stable. 7.  Closing remarks Ladies and gentlemen, while monetary policy is able to have a short-term impact on demand in terms of safeguarding monetary stability and thus to support the economy, it cannot solve the central challenge facing the euro area, namely weak growth prospects. There will only be a sustained rise in growth and wealth in our monetary union if we cut existing red tape and promote competition. To conclude, I would like to again quote Will Rogers. “There is no better place in the world to find out the shortcomings of each other than in a conference.” If I have understood correctly, I believe that it is now up to you to do just that in the next few minutes, Mr Kister. I look forward to our discussion!                                                 4  M Hoffmann and B Sorensen, Don’t expect too much from EZ fiscal union – and complete the unfinished integration of European capital markets! VoxEU, 9 November 2012. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Lars Rohde: The international and domestic factors impacting Denmark’s economy Speech by Mr Lars Rohde, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the annual meeting of the Danish Bankers Association, Copenhagen, 1 December 2014. *      *      * Thank you for inviting me to speak today. I would like to start by describing international developments. After that, I will comment on the Danish economy and the capitalisation of firms and of the agricultural sector. And finally, I will talk about the issue of Danish membership of the Banking Union. The world economy continues to grow at a modest pace, while the euro area is still waiting for the upswing. This situation is attributable to, inter alia, the conflicts in Ukraine and the Middle East, which have reduced consumer and business confidence, possibly by more than could be expected. The slowdown since the summer has led to downward adjustment of growth forecasts for Germany and other countries. On the other hand, the USA and, to some extent, the UK are seeing robust growth in economic activity. Euro area consumer prices are being curbed by falling energy prices. At a more fundamental level, wage growth is low. Inflation is currently well below the European Central Bank’s target of just under 2 per cent. Combined with weak growth, this in early September led the ECB to announce two new purchase programmes for securities issued by the private sector. However, only a very small share of production is limited by shortage of credit. The overriding issue is lack of demand and, to a somewhat lesser extent, lack of access to labour. So we should not have too high expectations that more credit will in itself lead to a surge in investment and employment. At the end of October, the Federal Reserve decided to discontinue its purchases of government and mortgage-backed bonds. It has been important to avoid turmoil in this connection. And indeed, the decision was expected in the markets and reflects the continued improvement of the US economy. It also underlines the divergence between the US and euro area economies. In all the major economies, monetary policy is supporting growth by reducing market interest rates and risk premia to very low levels. On the flip side, a prolonged period of low interest rates and low volatility could result in underestimation of risks and excessive risk exposure among credit institutions and their customers. A sudden reversal of the international hunt for yield could cause prices to plummet, and the trend may be intensified by sales spirals and queues at the exit, which may have a knock-on effect across asset classes. A shortage of liquidity in the market could further accelerate the process. There are currently no indications that major systemic risks have built up in the Danish financial system. All the same, there is reason to be on guard. Credit institutions should ensure that they are able to withstand both direct losses due to price adjustments for financial assets and the derived effects of the potential market turmoil triggered by such adjustment – e.g. because market access becomes more difficult. Turning to the real economy, the Danish economy has grown since the end of 2012 if we adjust for falling output of North Sea oil and gas these years. Growth has been driven mainly by domestic demand. Developments in the labour market have been positive over the last year. Employment has risen sharply, and unemployment has fallen. According to Danmarks Nationalbank’s estimate, the current unemployment gap is only around 10,000, so if the recovery continues, 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  it will soon close. The potential for increasing the labour force is greater, but this is also more difficult. Inflation is also low in Denmark due to factors such as falling oil prices. In the coming months, price inflation will remain low, but looking ahead we can expect inflation to pick up as the effect of falling energy prices fades away. Interest rates in Denmark have continued to fall, to historical lows, and the low level of interest rates is set to continue for some time yet. In spite of this, investment activity is low and corporate savings high. This is the case not only in Denmark but in most advanced economies and no-one can really say when this circle of restrained private consumption and low investment appetite will be broken. It is not purely bad that corporate savings are high. Other things being equal, a firm is more robust to economic shocks the higher its equity is relative to its total assets. That reduces the risk that the firm will fail. It also reduces the probability that the firm’s bankers will suffer losses on their lending to the firm. Hence, a high solvency ratio has a positive impact on financial stability. A high solvency ratio also gives the individual firm greater flexibility when choosing between alternative sources of funding and greater certainty of obtaining the desired funding. An analysis by Danmarks Nationalbank shows that since the financial crisis erupted, loan capital in the Danish banking system has to a large extent flowed to the soundest, most profitable and productive firms. This is healthy in a banking system and should induce firms with small buffers to consider whether it might be a good idea to increase their capitalisation. This applies not only to limited liability companies, but also to sole proprietors – including farms, for example. In the pre-crisis years, the Danish agricultural sector experienced a land price bubble that inflated prices per hectare to unrealistic levels. The high land prices were to a large extent used to pledge land as collateral for raising further debt. Since 2008, the average price per hectare has almost halved. This has left many farmers with high debts and a low equity base. This makes them more vulnerable to fluctuations in the prices of agricultural produce, which have shown considerable volatility over time. The shaky foundations of Danish agriculture were partly masked by favourable conditions for the sector in the period 2010–13, with good prices and rising terms of trade. At the same time, farms could be financed at historically low rates of interest. Nevertheless, return on equity was unsatisfactory for many farms. This points to fundamental structural problems within the agricultural sector. The prices of grain, pigs and milk have fallen since the spring, partly on account of Russia’s boycott of western agricultural produce. However, prices have not fallen more sharply than we have seen on many previous occasions, and the current price level is relatively normal in a long-term perspective. Production and sale of highly volatile goods such as agricultural produce require well-consolidated production units that are resilient to such repeated price fluctuations. The current situation has highlighted the weak capital base of many farms. Capitalisation must be strengthened. Now I will turn my attention to the Banking Union. On Tuesday, 4 November 2014, the EU’s Single Supervisory Mechanism entered into force. Responsibility for major supervisory tasks in the participating member states was transferred to the ECB. This marks an important step in the implementation of the Banking Union. Seen from the outside – from Denmark – it is difficult to spot any change. But we must not be mistaken. 4 November 2014 was a red-letter day in Europe. The member states participating in the Banking Union have set the future course for supervision and crisis management of their banks. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  They have chosen to have one strong authority to supervise all their banks in future. And they have chosen to transfer responsibility for crisis management to a Single Resolution Board from January 2016. This Resolution Board will guarantee credible and consistent application of the bail- in rules in relation to distressed banks. The claims of unsecured creditors will be converted into equity or written down. Tax payers will no longer have to help clear up the mess left by irresponsible banks. In the debate on the Banking Union it is now and then argued that – if we participate – Danish banks risk having to pay for problems experienced by banks in other member states. In my view, that point of departure is wrong. After all, when it comes to distressed banks, the key element of the Bank Union is bail-in, not bail-out. The Banking Union creates the basis for a gradual strengthening of the single market for financial goods in the coming years. Common rules and uniform implementation will lead to less bureaucracy and will be a good thing for competitive banks, which will have better opportunities to compete across national borders. This can be expected to lead to increased price and product competition, to the benefit of households and firms in the participating member states. The Danish Bankers Association has published a report with deliberations on Danish participation in the Banking Union. I agree with large parts of your analysis. For example, I agree when it comes to competition and financial stability aspects. As I have just said, the Banking Union can be expected to create potential for more competition. And it will strengthen financial stability to have a single authority that is expected to be better at preventing, predicting and managing financial crises. Those are sound observations. Therefore I am a little surprised to see that the overall conclusion of the Danish Bankers Association is that Denmark should wait and see before deciding whether to join the Banking Union. The Danish Bankers Association lists a number of outstanding issues to be clarified before we make up our minds. For example, the report mentions uncertainty about how the Banking Union will handle distressed banks. And it mentions uncertainty as to how the market will assess the Union. As I see it, this wait-and-see conclusion leaves one central question unanswered: What, exactly, is it we should wait for? Both the handling of distressed banks and market players’ assessments of the Banking Union will be dynamic processes. It may have been sensible to wait for the results of the asset quality review and stress test concluded by the ECB in October. But what are we waiting for now? What will it take before we have enough information to make a decision? Wait and see – without clearly indicating what we are waiting for – is de facto a “no”. A “wait and see” decision is precisely – a decision. If we are not participating, we are de facto outside the cooperation which the participating member states have now begun. I find that unwise. In all fairness, I should say that it would not be a disaster if we waited or if we chose to opt out. There is a life outside the Banking Union. But non-participation will have some implications and bring some challenges that we will have to take into account in the coming years, should that be the path we choose. The implications may seem small today, but in the longer run they could be considerable. Going forward, Denmark cannot expect to be compared with the members of the Banking Union when international players try to assess the risks in the Danish banking sector. Instead, relevant benchmarks will be Sweden and Switzerland. As in Denmark, the assets of the largest banks in these countries amount to approximately 1.5 times GDP. In these countries, which will not be joining the Banking Union, the authorities already impose stricter 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  requirements on the largest banks than we do. People will invariably begin to ask whether the Danish requirements are sufficiently high. And so will Danmarks Nationalbank. In addition, it will become relatively more costly for international investors to invest in Danish credit institutions. Inside the Banking Union, investors will have to study one single rulebook and the ECB’s implementation of this rulebook before assessing which of the many banks within the Union to invest in. We will be a small country outside the Banking Union. Investors will have to understand our unique national setup – and where it deviates from the Banking Union – before assessing which Danish banks they might want to invest in. That will require a lot in terms of communication from banks and authorities. But no matter how good our communication is, international investors will need to be compensated for the extra resources spent understanding our particularities. When we discuss the Banking Union, one issue always crops up in Denmark – and not without reasons. That is the Danish mortgage credit system. And, indeed, the mortgage credit system is one of the uncertainties that make the Danish Bankers Association say “wait and see”. Again, I do not quite follow your argument. In recent years, Denmark has applied considerable political muscle to ensure that our mortgage credit system has a place in the new single European regulation. We have negotiated with 27 member states, all with their separate national interests to safeguard. And the negotiations went well. This does not mean that current regulation is the end of the road. Rather, a game changer has been introduced. Decisions will be taken by the members of the Banking Union. They will, as a matter of course, negotiate and reach a conclusion among themselves – and will then stand together as one large group that cooperates closely when it comes to banking. The outsiders, on the other hand, will be a small, diverse group. In that situation we may ask ourselves how we can best protect the Danish mortgage credit system. By participating in future negotiations within the group of cooperating member states? Or by opting out together with a few other member states that have no particular interest in supporting our mortgage credit model? As you know, it is not for the Danish Bankers Association or Danmarks Nationalbank to decide whether Denmark should participate in the Banking Union. It is a political issue. The politicians determine when the time is right to make a decision – and they make the decision. But those of us who play a role in the sector have an obligation to be frank and honest about our views and opinions. Danmarks Nationalbank firmly believes that both credit institutions in Denmark and the Danes in general have an interest in participating in the Banking Union. Together with the Danish mortgage credit sector we should knock on the front door of the Union. The Banking Union aims to provide security for citizens. No element of the Union makes it more expensive to be a homeowner or bank customer. On the contrary – increased competition could make it less expensive. The Banking Union will have a huge impact on Denmark – whether or not we choose to participate. Therefore we need a broader debate so that the pros and cons become crystal clear. In this connection I can already reveal that Danmarks Nationalbank’s assessment will be elaborated on in our upcoming Monetary Review. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for our good cooperation in relation to the establishment of the Straksclearing express clearing system. It has been a large project for all of us. But now we have upgraded the Danish payments infrastructure so that it is possible to transfer money instantly between accounts in different banks. Today I think we can all see the advantages of having implemented this project that brings Denmark right up to date in the field of payments. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Microfinance improves lives and bank profits Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central bank of the Philippines), at the 12th Citi Microentrepreneurship Awarding Ceremony, Kuala Lumpur, 3 December 2014. *      *      * It is always a pleasure to celebrate yet another milestone year in the presence of the best among the best of our microentrepreneurs and the institutions and individuals who have remained faithful advocates and cheerleaders of the Philippine microfinance sector. I refer, among others, to the Citi Philippines headed by Country Officer Mr. Batara Sianturi; the Microfinance Council of the Philippines headed by Chairperson Ms. Maria Anna Ignacio; the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas; and the members of our CMA National Selection Board – we have with us today Secretary Imelda Nicolas, Chairperson, Commission on Filipinos Overseas; former Monetary Board Member Antonino Alindogan, Jr; Ms. Marixi Rufino-Prieto, Chairman of Philippine Daily Inquirer; Mr. Jose Maria Concepcion III, President and CEO of RFM Corp; Dr. Darwin Yu, Dean of the School of Management of Ateneo de Manila University. We also thank the people who patronize the goods and services of our microentrepeneurs and the members of the media who report the inspiring success stories of our CMA awardees. Indeed, we continue to see how microfinance empowers, transforms and uplifts individuals, families… even communities. In particular, the stories of our CMA finalists and awardees attest how humble beginnings can grow to progressive businesses with higher incomes because they gained access to finance, to microcredit. Equally important, we have seen how microfinance has improved bank operations and profitability. In the last four years for instance, the return on equity of rural banks with microfinance operations was higher by an average of 3 percentage points compared to that of the rural banking sector. In addition, from 2010 to 2012, the non-performing loans (NPL) ratio of rural banks engaged in microfinance was lower by an average of 0.33 percentage points from the industry-wide average. As of June 2014, microentrepreneurs have outstanding loans amounting to 9.3 billion pesos. It is clear: microfinance has become a viable proposition for banks. In fact, we can say that microfinance as a medium for financial inclusion, has strengthened the institutional stability of banks by generating reliable business opportunities. This is because the microfinance industry has evolved from a narrow focus on microcredit to a more holistic, sustainable and “value-adding” provision of financial services to our target market. For example, 69 of the 183 banks with microcredit operations now hold 1.7 million microdeposit accounts. In early 2012, there were only 22 such banks. In addition, 86 of these banks have decided to offer microinsurance to their clients. Furthermore, 26 of these banks now provide e-banking services, including mobile money – a more cost-efficient transactional platform for both banks and clients. Ladies and gentlemen. The availability, accessibility and affordability of these financial products have drawn more microentrepreneurs to do business with banks. From this, we have learned that developing appropriate products and delivery channels enable financial institutions to serve markets that were previously marginalized. This is a solid foundation to build on for our broader financial inclusion program. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  It appears therefore that in the case of the Philippine microfinance sector, we have achieved convergence in the delivery of positive financial results and social performance management. Congratulations everyone! The Bangko Sentral is pleased to contribute to the success of microfinance in our country. We deliberately crafted our regulations to fully support the safe and sound development of microfinance. We believe that financial inclusion, through microfinance, complements our financial stability objectives. Thus, our regulatory environment is conducive to expand financial access while preserving financial stability and integrity, deepening financial education, and ensuring consumer protection. Congratulations BSP! Credit should also be given to our microfinance institutions including banks and NGOs who took advantage of this enabling regulatory environment to magnify their outreach. They are the ones directly catalyzing change on the ground – in small businesses, in poor households. Finally, I am pleased to share the good news that the survey on financial inclusion conducted by Europe-based Economist Intelligence Unit gave the Philippines high scores on account of strong leadership, highly capable regulators, optimal credit regulation and effective dispute resolution. Overall, the Philippines is ranked as the top country in Asia, and third in the world, with the most conducive environment for financial inclusion. The EIU notes that countries like the Philippines, with a long tradition of microfinance, have better institutional and financial infrastructures, which can be leveraged to provide a wider range of services, and cater to more clients at the “bottom of the pyramid”. Ladies and gentlemen. This happened because we have dedicated and creative microentrepreneurs like our CMA finalists and winners, responsive microfinance institutions, a consultative regular, and people who patronize the goods and services from our microentrepreneurs. Moving forward, let us continue to find ways to maximize the opportunities and benefits we can derive from microfinance. I look forward to seeing our CMA winners take advantage of the mentoring program organized by Citi, guidance from the Microfinance Council and even better products from microfinance institutions. At the same time, you can count on the Bangko Sentral to keep working with industry players and advocates to nurture the development and maturity of the microfinance sector. We look forward to innovations that can target financially-excluded segments of our population, with affordable and accessible financial services. At the same time, we will ensure that our regulations will keep providers and products safe, sound, and responsive to diverse needs of our microfinance clients. Once again, congratulations to all our winners and all those involved in this this 12th CMA! Mabuhay ang ating microfinance sector! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Piilipinas! Maraming salamat, at magandang hapon sa inyong lahat! 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Yannis Stournaras: Global financial and economic crisis – challenges and prospects Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 2014 Multinational Finance Society Winter Conference “Global Financial and Economic Crisis: Challenges and Prospects”, co-organized by the Centre of Planning and Economic Research and the Multinational Finance Society, Athens, 14 December 2014. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a pleasure to address such a distinguished audience, on a topic that unfortunately is not yet history. Governments and Central Banks certainly managed to safeguard financial stability in turbulent times. However, certain repercussions of the crisis have not yet been fully dealt with and some vulnerabilities may reappear. In this sense, looking back with a critical view may help us understand the factors that put at risk the global economic recovery. The global financial and economic crisis that was triggered by a distortion in the U.S. sub-prime mortgage market, highlighted serious weaknesses in the financial regulatory frameworks of the globalized and broadly interrelated national markets. As a result, the validity of the theory of self-correcting market mechanisms has been strongly contested. Global financial crisis • The roots of the global financial crisis can be traced back to both macroeconomic and microeconomic factors. On the macro level, global imbalances for over a decade before the crisis resulted in ample liquidity in world financial markets and in low interest rates, facilitating high levels of leverage, excessive dependence on unsustainable short-term financing and weak risk management. • At the same time, on the micro level, financial innovation and the investors’ “search for yield” led to the creation of complex financial instruments with an obscure credit risk distribution. The originate-to-distribute model, according to which loans are traded between investors, became widespread practice. This led, in effect, to a loosening of lending criteria and facilitated the creation of the aforementioned complex credit instruments. • Over time, excessive credit risk and liquidity accumulated in the so-called “investment vehicles.” The placement of credit institutions in such vehicles was not recorded on their balance sheets, and as a result, the associated risks slipped through the cracks of internal control mechanisms. Moreover, the opacity and the uncertain dispersion of risks of these instruments were further exacerbated by the rapid growth of the derivatives market, in particular of derivatives traded outside regulated markets (“over the counter”). • As revealed in retrospect, in many cases, banks and investors had failed to realistically assess the nature and extent of risks. The high degree of correlation between credit risk, market risk and refinancing risk had also failed to be properly assessed. As a result, the risks associated with certain credit instruments were not properly reflected in their price. When this was made evident in the US market for sub-prime mortgages in 2007, it led to a market-wide reassessment of financial risks and the collapse in the market values of credit instruments. This, in turn, affected negatively the net worth and profitability of banks which held such assets in their portfolios. The once believed “too big to fail” institutions rapidly became illiquid and insolvent. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  • In order to rebalance their portfolios, affected banks performed widespread liquidations of their assets and attempted to raise capital in an attempt to strengthen their capital base. Through the subsequent fall in asset prices and via banks’ balance sheet cross-exposures, the crisis quickly spread to the financial system globally. The euro-area was similarly affected. • Uncertainty about banks’ exposure to “toxic assets”, especially in Europe, led to mutual distrust between banks. As a result, the interbank market has been severely impaired causing liquidity problems, which required the necessary intervention by monetary policy authorities. • The crisis in the financial markets, aggravated by the pro-cyclicality of banks, where in times of economic downturn they tighten risk criteria and decrease lending, thus amplifying the contraction of the economy, quickly spread in the real economy, and economic conditions deteriorated globally. Euro-area crisis • The international financial crisis brought about the crisis in the euro area. However, here also, the roots of the crisis can be traced to the creation of serious imbalances. • According to the theory of monetary integration, as it had developed by the time of the inception of the euro in 1999, it was thought that nominal convergence along with a single monetary policy would gradually promote real convergence. Banks had no special role in transmitting financial market shocks to the real economy or in producing spillover effects across union members. • However, monetary union has to go hand-in-hand with financial integration. Indeed, financial integration did proceed apace with increasing capital flows among the member-states of the euro area, leading to increased interdependence between financial institutions and markets. • Such interdependence is necessary for the smooth operation of the single monetary policy, because it facilitates the transmission of monetary policy throughout the euro area. • The prevailing view was that persistent capital flows from the north to the south, which financed the current account deficits of the south during the early years of EMU, were an equilibrating force – capital moved from countries where the rate of return on investment was low to those where it was high. • The elimination of exchange rate risk was interpreted by markets and institutions as an elimination of all risks. Credit risk was essentially ignored. • With the outbreak of the global financial crisis in 2008 and the re-pricing of risk, the ample capital inflows to the EU periphery were suddenly reversed. • This sudden reversal led to a negative feedback loop between banks and public finances, exacerbating the effects of financial instability on the real economy. • In some countries, such as Spain, the sudden reversal led to a collapse in demand, a collapse in asset prices and bank distress. The bank distress then fed back into a fiscal and, ultimately, sovereign crisis. A similar narrative can be told for Ireland. In other member-states, such as Greece, the sudden reversal initially affected the refinancing of debt and subsequently inflicted damage on the banking system following the haircut of Greek government debt. • As a result, the crisis revealed important weaknesses in the EU architecture and inadequacies in the implementation of the structures that had been put in place. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  • First, the existing framework of economic governance was not sufficient to prevent the creation of imbalances. The Stability and Growth Pact was not properly enforced and there was no mechanism in place for monitoring external imbalances. • Second, the increased interdependence between financial institutions and markets, which was the result of the monetary union and the ensuing financial integration, was not accompanied by a more unified regulatory framework. • Third the link between financial stability and the financial cycle had been largely ignored. The architects of monetary union chose to keep financial sector supervision and regulation largely at the level of the nation state, with insufficient coordination of macro and micro-prudential supervision. Policy responses to the crisis • In this unprecedented global crisis, Governments, Central Banks and international organizations reacted with coordinated actions. These actions included first, direct monetary and fiscal interventions, aiming at enhancing liquidity to maintain system stability and support the economy; second, a broader mobilization to reshape the global financial architecture and mitigate the magnitude and duration of future financial crises. • Following the eruption of the crisis, it was understood that any kind of supervision should be exercised taking into account not only the behaviour of individual credit institutions but also the interconnections and interdependencies between financial institutions, markets and economies. The increasing degree of integration of economies and financial markets required more coordinated action between supervisory and regulatory authorities worldwide, as well as continuous, timely and accurate exchange of information between supervisory authorities. It was made clear that the new architecture of financial supervision required the strengthening of micro-prudential and macro-prudential supervision. Regulatory and supervisory efforts focused on financial stability and on trying to limit the build-up of systemic risk. Monetary policy response • More specifically, as a first response to the global financial crisis, central banks were quick to put in place measures that ensured adequate liquidity in the financial system by facilitating access to central bank financing. • Moreover, central banks largely adjusted their respective monetary policy stance to reflect the diminished risks for price stability. The size of interest rate reductions implemented by central banks pushed policy rates at historically low levels. • The ECB initially reduced its interest rates by 50 basis points in a coordinated move with five other major central banks [Bank of Canada, Bank of England, the Federal Reserve, Sveriges Riksbank and the Swiss National Bank] in October 2008. This was followed by successive reductions in the interest rates, resulting in a cut in the main refinancing rate by 325 basis points within seven months, between October 2008 and May 2009. • In addition, the ECB adopted temporary non-standard measures in order to reduce obstacles in monetary policy transmission and to address liquidity shortfalls in the interbank market. • First, the ECB switched to fixed-rate tender procedures with full allotment for all refinancing operations, ensuring unlimited access to central bank liquidity at the main refinancing rate. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  • Second, the ECB introduced longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs), initially at 6-month maturities, then at one year and finally, at three year maturities, aiming at reducing uncertainty and encouraging banks to continue to provide credit to the economy. • Third, during the global turmoil the ECB temporarily provided liquidity in US dollars through currency arrangements with the Federal Reserve in order to provide banks with adequate funding in US dollars. • Fourth, the ECB extended the eligibility of collateral that could be used for central bank financing, facilitating banks’ refinancing liquidity shortages caused by halts in interbank lending. • Fifth, the ECB introduced in May 2010 the Securities Markets Programme. By intervening in the secondary markets of public and private debt securities, the ECB could ensure depth and liquidity in dysfunctional market segments and restore the proper functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. • Finally, in September 2012, the ECB announced the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) initiative, essentially the intention to purchase, if necessary, securities of euro area member-states in economic adjustment programmes from the secondary market. Although not activated, the announcement of the initiative has contributed significantly to the improvement in financial market conditions, the decline in sovereign bond spreads and the gradual reversal of financial fragmentation. Changes in the EU architecture • With the outbreak of the euro area crisis, it was made clear that both imbalances in the real economy and in the financial sector are sources of financial instability. • A more comprehensive policy framework was therefore necessary. • In this context, improvements in the policy framework aimed at completing the EMU architecture with more coordination of economic policies, sufficient backstops to address liquidity shortfalls and, last but not least, common supervision of the financial sector. • The Stability and Growth Pact was strengthened through a series of EU regulations in 2011 and 2013. The new legislation clearly defined debt reduction rules, sanctions in case of non-compliance and a new surveillance procedure monitoring the emergence of macroeconomic imbalances. In addition, fiscal coordination and surveillance was further strengthened through the ex-ante co-ordination of fiscal and structural policies of member states of the euro area. • Moreover, the “Fiscal Compact”, agreed by the euro area and some EU member states, in March 2012 further strengthened fiscal governance. The treaty, which entered into force at the beginning of 2013, requires structural deficits limited to 0.5% of GDP and the introduction of fiscal rules in each country’s national legislation. • Furthermore, the euro area, as well as some EU member states agreed in March 2011 on the “Euro Plus Pact”, a commitment to undertake additional reforms, on top of the EU-wide “Europe 2020” obligations, to promote competitiveness, employment and productivity. • In the meanwhile, the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) provided financial assistance to sovereigns which faced temporary liquidity shortfalls caused by the impairments in the sovereign bonds markets. The EFSF was succeeded in 2012 by a permanent backstop mechanism, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  • Finally, let me turn a bit more at length, to, perhaps the most ambitious EU initiative, the Banking Union, which was finalized during the Greek Presidency of the Council of the European Union in the first half of the current year. • The Banking Union was initially agreed at the European Council of June 2012 in an effort to deepen Economic and Monetary Union. • Five years after the outbreak of the euro area crisis, it is important to understand why the interconnection between banks, the real economy and sovereigns were so strong in the euro area and why a banking union is necessary. • First, the size of the banking sector in the EU, measured either in absolute terms or as the share of banks’ assets in GDP, is about five times larger than in the US. These data underline the importance of banks as financial intermediaries in the EU. Firms in the euro area are much more reliant on bank credit compared to the US, where capital markets play a much more important role in the financing of investment. • Second, although large banks in the euro area and the US are of roughly similar size, large banks’ balance sheets in the euro area represent a much larger share of any individual country’s GDP in the euro area. This implies that bank failures in the euro area can easily call into question state solvency. • Third, euro area banks typically hold large volumes of national government bonds in their portfolios, making them more vulnerable to sovereign crises. And the capital flows from the core to the periphery that characterized the early years of monetary union also led to the concentration of peripheral sovereign risk in the core. • One of the consequences of the crisis and the negative feedback loops between banks and sovereigns was the so-called “Balkanization” of the euro area banking system, i.e. the retreat of banks behind national borders. As a result, financial conditions diverged between euro area member states. The fragmentation of financial markets deepens the gap between core and periphery, hinders the smooth transmission of the common monetary policy and is harmful to real economic convergence. • The foregoing analysis clearly highlights the need for a centralized, European responsibility for financial market and banking supervision; the establishment of the European Banking Union was perceived as a logical next step in the advancement of the Economic and Monetary Union. The three pillars of the Banking Union • The Banking Union is built on three pillars: The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) and a harmonised system of Deposit Guarantee Schemes. • The Single Supervisory Mechanism gives the European Central Bank (ECB) responsibility for supervision over banks in the euro area and the EU countries which participate in the banking union. This will ensure the application of a common supervisory model for all banks. • As of November 2014, the ECB assumed the direct supervision of 120 significant banking groups which represent 82% (based on the assets) of the euro area banking sector. For all other 3,500 banks the ECB will also set and monitor the supervisory standards and work closely with the national competent authorities on the supervision of these banks, ensuring a level playing field in the supervisory requirements to be met by banks. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  • The ECB ensures a truly European supervision mechanism that is not prone to the protection of national interests, will weaken the link between banks and national public finances and will take into account all risks to financial stability. • A necessary complement to the single supervision mechanism is the resolution framework to deal with non-viable banks. • The Single Resolution Mechanism constitutes the second pillar of the Banking Union. Orderly and prompt resolution of non-viable banks is essential in order to avoid costly rescues by sovereigns that may impact on their fiscal position. • The SRM Regulation creates a Single Resolution Board, responsible for the resolution of banks in the euro area and in the participating Member States in order to ensure swift and effective resolution decisions, especially in the case of large and complex cross-border banking groups. • From the 1st of January 2016 onwards, any resolution of a euro area bank will be decided within the context of the SRM. • Resolution also needs a credible back-stop. This back-stop is provided by the Single Resolution Fund. The Fund will be financed via ex-ante and ex-post contributions by the banking sector, which will be gradually mutualised. The SRM will thereby reduce the link between domestic banks and their sovereigns and it will contribute to a level playing field for banks. The use of the SRF funds is conditional on the application of the bail-in tool, thus ensuring that shareholders and creditors are the first to carry the costs of a failing bank. • A prerequisite of the Single Resolution Mechanism is the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), which provides for a complete framework for the crisis management of banks in the EU and lays out specific measures for bank recovery and resolution. • The third pillar of the Banking Union is the EU harmonized framework for the European deposit guarantee schemes, which includes certain provisions to ensure the establishment of sufficiently robust national deposit insurance systems in each Member State, and an appropriate degree of depositor protection in the European Union. Where we stand now • Since the outbreak of the euro area crisis, policy makers have managed to correct considerably the internal and external imbalances of the past. Significant structural reforms and fiscal consolidation efforts have taken place at a national level. As a result, since 2010, the euro area fiscal deficit has improved from 6.1 per cent of GDP to 2.9 per cent of GDP in 2013. • Substantial fiscal adjustment has taken place particularly in member-states with economic adjustment programmes. In Greece, the fiscal deficit was reduced by 13 percentage points of GDP between 2009 and 2013, the largest fiscal consolidation recorded in history in such a short period. The primary budget deficit [10.2 as a per cent of GDP in 2009] turned into a surplus exceeding 1 per cent of GDP in 2013. The cyclically-corrected adjustment of the primary balance was close to 20 per cent of GDP at the same period. The rest of the programme countries have also undertaken substantial adjustment efforts. What makes these achievements especially impressive is that they have taken place in a contracting economy. • Member-states in economic adjustment programmes have also made substantial progress towards eliminating their external imbalances and improving their competitiveness. Between 2008 and 2013, the current account balances as a 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  percentage of GDP of Ireland, Portugal and Greece improved by between 10 and 16 percentage points. Relative unit labour costs have also fallen significantly, since 2008 (in Greece by over 20%). • As a result, current account deficits in these countries have turned into surpluses in recent years. • Substantial structural reforms in the product and labour markets and in public administration have also been implemented by member-states in economic adjustment programmes, facilitating the gradual adjustment of euro area economies. Challenges and risks • Despite the considerable progress made since the global financial crisis, the economic recovery has been fairly slow. Global GDP growth is expected to be relatively low in 2014 for the third consecutive year. Meanwhile, the recovery in the EU has been sluggish and fragile, with low GDP growth and persistently high levels of unemployment, as noted by EU leaders in October. • Political and geopolitical risks will continue to negatively affect the recovery going forward. • However, the efforts made to improve the institutional framework and to promote productivity in the euro area have also created favourable conditions for a sustainable recovery. • The ECB’s accommodative monetary policy stance and the non-standard measures it adopted have helped to preserve financial stability, which is a necessary condition for growth. • The Comprehensive Assessment of banks’ balance sheets – which comprised the Asset Quality Review (AQR) and the stress test components – exposed the areas in the banks and the financial system that need improvement, helped banks to strengthen their balance sheets, enhanced transparency and built public confidence in the banking sector. • Growth will also benefit from the consequences of the Banking Union for the reversal of the fragmentation of EU financial markets, which was observed after the crisis. This reversal is necessary to create the conditions for further integration. Through common supervision, trust among cross-border banks will increase, enabling them to operate more efficiently across borders, to the benefit of consumers and firms. • Moreover, banking union may reinforce the consolidation dynamics in the EU banking system, leading to a restructuring of the European banking sector, while enhanced cross-border competition through integration in the retail banking sector will lead to better prices and services for the consumers. • However, key challenges remain. A key characteristic of the euro area economic recovery is the continuing decline in loans to the private sector. The recovery is so far “creditless” at both the euro area as a whole and, in many cases, in individual countries. • Because the euro area economy is bank-based, bank lending is especially important for companies and, in particular, for SMEs, which produce the bulk of goods and services and account for a large share of employment. • Consequently, the on-going credit contraction raises the question: Can the recovery be sustained in the presence of negative loan growth? 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  • Throughout the crisis, the Eurosystem has adopted both standard and non-standard monetary policy measures with the objective of increasing confidence and further restoring the smooth operation of the monetary transmission mechanism. The latest such non-standard measures, the targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs), the purchase of asset-backed securities (ABSPP) and covered bonds (CBPP3) and the intention to bring the ECB balance sheet at the level observed at the beginning of 2012, aim at bringing inflation at levels consistent with price stability and support lending to the real economy. For a number of distressed economies potential lack of collateral could limit the usefulness of such measures. The ECB and the respective national Central Banks are paying special attention to this important issue. • Overall, there is still work to be done. This is where the Banking Union again comes in. The banking union represents a crucial step towards restoring confidence in the banking sector. • Restoring confidence in the banking sector will, in turn, greatly contribute to financial and economic stability in the future. Lower volatility in the real economy will have a positive impact on economic growth. This is in line with evidence of the growth theory literature which documents a negative correlation between growth and economic volatility. • One lesson of the global financial crisis is that disruptions of financial intermediation play an important role in business cycle fluctuations. Credit constraints amplify economic fluctuations and banking crises contribute to the deepening of economic recessions. This is particularly true in bank-based economies, where capital markets are less developed. • Eliminating the fragmentation of financial markets will loosen tight credit standards in the member states of the periphery, allowing banks to finance investment. Financing corporate investment is currently of outmost importance for economic growth both in the euro area as a whole and in the periphery countries, which have suffered particularly from deep and prolonged recessions. Remarkably, private investment in the euro area has declined from 20% of GDP in 2008 to 16% of GDP in 2013. The decline was much more pronounced in periphery countries such as Greece, Spain and Portugal, where private investment declined by between 6 and 9 percentage points of GDP. • In the longer term, economic growth will benefit from deeper financial integration and development. Financial market integration will boost long-term economic growth by broadening the pool of available funds and supporting an efficient credit allocation process. This will contribute to a better allocation of physical resources in the economy, boosting in the long term total factor productivity and potential output. Ladies and Gentlemen, Today we witness a containment of systemic stress, despite intermittent financial market turbulence. And this is the result of the aforementioned coordinated actions. However, this should not make us complacent. The search for yield in a very low interest rate environment, the growing use of leverage in the non-bank financial sector, the persistent pressures on bank profitability in a weak and uneven macroeconomic recovery, the re-emergence of sovereign debt sustainability concerns amid low nominal growth, the wavering policy determination for reforms, and the signs that some investors may underestimate the potential for losses and volatility going forward, are issues of major concern. The probability of a systemic threat is currently low but increased vigilance is required. In this environment, macro-prudential policies need to ensure that financial intermediaries can withstand a potential reversal of risk premia, while at the same time further initiatives are 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  needed to monitor and assess vulnerabilities in the shadow banking sector. I believe that the lessons we have learned so far will prove valuable in addressing those potential risks and in safeguarding financial stability. Finally, and with reference to the Eurozone, we should not forget one of its most pronounced characteristics: that it is almost fully integrated in the monetary side, less so in the financial side despite recent progress, and much less so in the fiscal and economic sides. Until this asymmetry is eliminated its overall economic performance will tend to remain below potential. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Thomas Jordan: Swiss National Bank’s monetary policy decision and assessment of the Swiss economic situation Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the Media News Conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 1 December 2014. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen Welcome to the Swiss National Bank’s six-monthly news conference. I will begin by explaining the Governing Board’s monetary policy decision and outlining our assessment of the economic situation. I will then hand over to my colleagues, Jean-Pierre Danthine and Fritz Zurbrügg, who will comment on current developments in financial stability and the financial markets. Thereafter, we will be happy to take your questions. Monetary policy decision I will begin with our monetary policy decision. The Swiss National Bank (SNB) has decided to maintain the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro. The target range for the three-month Libor remains at 0.0–0.25%. Deflation risks have increased once again in recent months, and the Swiss franc is still high. We will therefore continue to enforce the minimum exchange rate with the utmost determination. If necessary, we are prepared to buy foreign currency in unlimited quantities for this purpose. With interest rates at zero, the minimum exchange rate is the key instrument to avoid an undesirable tightening of monetary conditions. This is especially important at the moment, as upward pressure on the Swiss franc has intensified once again. Furthermore, we will not hesitate to take further measures, should they prove necessary. Our new conditional inflation forecast has been revised downwards once again. Above all, the appreciably lower oil price will push inflation into negative territory during the next four quarters. Moreover, the economic outlook for the euro area has deteriorated once more. Together with persistently low inflation across the globe, this is dampening the medium and long-term inflation outlook for Switzerland. For the current year, we have revised our forecast downwards by 0.1 percentage points to 0.0%. For 2015, we are now even anticipating a negative inflation rate of –0.1%, with inflation turning positive only in 2016, at 0.3%. This constitutes a downward adjustment of 0.3 percentage points for 2015, and 0.2 percentage points for 2016. These forecasts assume that the three-month Libor will remain at zero over the entire forecast horizon, and that the Swiss franc will weaken. The revision of the inflation forecast is a clear sign that deflation risks have increased once more. Global economic outlook The SNB’s inflation forecast is embedded in a global economic scenario. Let me now discuss our assessment of the global economy. Global economic developments continue to be mixed. The US, UK and China all saw robust growth in the third quarter. In the euro area and Japan, by contrast, it was weaker than expected. In addition, inflation in the advanced economies was below central bank targets – in some cases by a considerable margin. In the euro area, it is only just in positive territory. The decline in commodity prices, above all crude oil, will curb inflation further over the short term. We continue to assume that global economic growth will gradually firm over the course of next year. The considerable fall in oil prices should be a contributory factor. However, the 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  prospects for individual countries vary widely. For the US, we are expecting that growth will remain robust over the next few quarters, leading to better utilisation of economic capacity. For the euro area, by contrast, we have revised the growth forecast downwards once more, and the outlook for this region remains very subdued. The picture for the emerging economies is mixed. China will continue to be a driver of the global economy, although it is likely to see a gradual weakening of growth. For India, growth prospects are picking up again. The outlook for Brazil and Russia, by contrast, remains muted. Overall, the global economic outlook is still very uncertain and dominated by downside risks – the most important of which are the continuing difficult conditions in the euro area and a possible escalation in geopolitical tensions. Swiss economic outlook I will now look at economic developments in Switzerland. Following a weak second quarter, real GDP growth was unexpectedly favourable in the third. On the demand side, the increase was supported predominantly by goods exports, with manufacturing the main beneficiary of the strong export demand. However, private and public consumption also picked up, after having registered only lacklustre growth in the first half of the year. Momentum in equipment investment, by contrast, remained weak. In part, growth was also boosted by special factors, including an unusually large increase in value added in the healthcare industry. Despite the positive developments of the third quarter, utilisation of economic capacity remains unsatisfactory. We are assuming that growth will be markedly lower in the fourth quarter. In particular, export demand and value added in manufacturing are likely to contribute significantly less to growth than in the previous quarter. As a result of the comprehensive revision of the national accounts, the reported figures for previous quarters are higher, and therefore GDP growth for the current year should also be somewhat higher than we assumed in September, by 1.5–2%. However, the underlying economic momentum has not changed. For next year we expect to see GDP growth of about 2%. Under this assumption, the underutilisation of economic capacity will decline only gradually. We are also expecting only a modest recovery on the labour market. Monetary and financial conditions I will now turn to monetary and financial conditions. After a long period in negative territory, inflation has been hovering around zero for over a year. The minimum exchange rate has prevented deflationary developments, but inflation still lies towards the bottom of the range that we equate with price stability. Moreover, according to the available surveys, medium-term inflation expectations have fallen steadily in recent years. Yet, at around 1%, they are still close to the long-term average inflation rate. Interest rates, too, have remained very low across all maturities in the past few quarters. Mortgage rates have declined further, reaching a new low in October. Government bond rates have also fallen to new lows. My colleague, Fritz Zurbrügg, will discuss developments on the financial markets in more detail. Despite falling mortgage rates, mortgage lending growth slowed again. At the same time, real estate prices continued to rise. However, as in 2013, price momentum is weaker than in previous years. This suggests that the measures to contain developments on the mortgage and real estate markets are starting to have an impact. Yet the imbalances that have built up on these markets in recent years remain the same. It is still too early for an all-clear. The SNB will continue to monitor the situation closely. My colleague Jean-Pierre Danthine will discuss this topic in more detail in his presentation. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Since the last monetary policy assessment, the Swiss franc has moved closer to the minimum exchange rate, and has thus strengthened against the euro once again. At the same time, both it and the euro have depreciated against the US dollar. Overall, the export-weighted real external value of the Swiss franc is virtually unchanged compared to last year, and thus continues to lie considerably above its long-term average. The Swiss franc is still high. In view of the elevated deflation risks, the minimum exchange rate remains the key instrument for ensuring appropriate monetary conditions. A further appreciation of the Swiss franc would have a major impact on wages and prices, and would push inflation well into negative territory. Companies in Switzerland would once again be forced into drastic price cuts, in order to remain competitive. In such a scenario, price stability would be seriously compromised. The minimum exchange rate helps to reduce such deflation risks. SNB monetary policy Let me close with a few additional explanations of SNB monetary policy. On 30 November, the Swiss voters rejected the gold initiative. The initiative demanded that the SNB hold at least 20% of its assets in gold, that it sell no more gold and that it store all its gold in Switzerland. We are relieved that the gold initiative has been rejected. As we have pointed out on several occasions, had the initiative been accepted this would have seriously impaired the implementation of a stability-oriented monetary policy. Let me just take this opportunity to reiterate that, in an international comparison, the SNB’s gold holdings are high. Gold has always been, and will remain, an important component of our currency reserves and we have no intention of selling gold. In the prevailing international environment, the monetary policy challenges facing the SNB remain considerable. The situation is still particularly difficult in the euro area. In order that the SNB is able to fulfil its mandate – of ensuring price stability while taking due account of economic developments – in the best possible way, it must make full use of its room for manoeuvre in monetary policy. For this reason, the SNB will not hesitate to take further measures to fulfil its mandate, should they prove necessary. Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Pentti Hakkarainen: Banking Union – the “game-changer” in the European financial Markets Speech Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, to Ambassadors and representatives of the EU-countries in Helsinki, Helsinki, 11 December 2014. *      *      * Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Finland’s website. Your excellences, it is a great pleasure for me to tell you today about the Banking Union and give a short overview on where we are today. The Banking Union creates a comprehensive legal and institutional framework providing authorities powers and tools to deal with ailing banks. Major steps have been taken already, but there is still some work ahead. The key lesson we have learnt is that economic dislocations without proper arrangements to tackle troubled banks have devastating effects on the real economy, taxpayers and the whole society. And regaining growth proves to be painfully slow and long-lasting. The Banking Union is the game-changer and it will bring a new culture into the financial markets. The Banking Union The Banking Union is comprised of three different, although integrated, parts. The Single Rulebook provides a foundation for the Banking Union. It is based on the idea of harmonised regulatory requirements, such as capital adequacy rules for banks. These are achieved through European legislation and lower-level technical standards. The second main pillar of the Banking Union is the Single Supervisory Mechanism which started its practical operations just over a month ago in the beginning of November. The third important pillar is the Single Resolution Mechanism. The SRM will gradually start its practical operation in the beginning of 2015. The Banking Union will help us prevent banking problems. I would argue that there will be fundamental cultural change not only in the supervisory crisis management and regulatory framework for banks but also in the banking industry. In the future we avoid use of taxpayers’ money as a rule and bail-out would be only as a rare exception. This in turn means also correct incentives in banking and hence a more stable financial system. The Single Supervisory Mechanism After the successful comprehensive assessment process, the SSM is up and running. The SSM was established to ensure that strong supervisory standards are applied in a consistent manner across the euro area. And the fundamental goal is to strengthen the confidence and resilience in the banking sector. To achieve these goals, the SSM, with the ECB at its centre, has been entrusted with an extensive set of micro- and macro-prudential powers, covering all key tasks relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions. The SSM possesses also early intervention powers in accordance with the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive. The early intervention powers are significant and make it possible to take action with respect to banks which are approaching the point of non-viability i.e. before a bank is too deeply in trouble to be saved by ordinary supervisory measures. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Governance of the SSM The governance structure of the SSM has been designed to separate the ECB’s monetary policy and supervisory roles, and it also makes the position of different participating countries as fair as possible. The Supervisory Board is responsible for the supervisory functions of the SSM. While the decisions are formally and finally adopted by the Governing Council of the ECB, the Supervisory Board is, de facto, the main decision-making body in supervisory matters. The Governing Council cannot alter the decisions of the Supervisory Board, but only prevent their entry into force. Such a veto power could be exercised when the decision is seen to be in conflict with monetary policy. New macroprudential role The crisis has shown that micro-prudential supervision at individual bank level is not sufficient, and that macro and micro risks can actually be mutually reinforcing. This calls for very close cooperation between the macro- and micro-prudential functions. The ECB has powers also in the macro-prudential area, which is a shared competence with national macro-prudential authorities. The ECB will be consulted on national measures and it has the possibility to tighten national measures if they are deemed inadequate. Macro-prudential instruments could also be applied to the euro-area financial system as a whole. This is completed and supported by the work of another macro-stability authority, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). While the ESRB doesn’t have as directly impacting tools, it covers all EU member states and the whole financial system rather than only the banking sector. Bank resolution The Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) begins its operations as of 1 January 2015. The SRM creates a single authority alike the SSM. It consists consisting of the Single Resolution Board and the national resolution authorities. The SRM is responsible for swift and orderly resolution of banks in the euro area and participating member states. The SRM includes also the Single Resolution Fund at the Banking Union level. The SRM ends the era of the bail-out and moves us to the culture of the bail-in. Bail-in will be the rule, bail-out a rare exception. As from the beginning of 2016, or in some countries even earlier, the BRRD requires bail-in of shareholders and creditors equal to at least 8% of the total liabilities of a bank. The new powers to bail-in bank debt holders are a crucial, element of the future resolution mechanism, which should limit the use of bail-outs significantly. The SRM with its supranational decision making body and resolution powers, ensures efficient decision making procedures, adequate resolution financing arrangements and equal treatment. It has the same institutional and geographical scope as the SSM. Single resolution board The regulation provides for a single resolution board with broad powers. Upon notification by the European Central Bank that a bank is failing or likely to fail, or on its own initiative, the board would adopt a resolution scheme placing the bank into resolution. The board will consist of a Chair, a Vice-Chair, four full-time appointed executive members and the representatives of the national resolution authorities of all the participating countries. It will exercise its tasks in either a plenary or executive format. It will determine the application of resolution tools and the use of the single resolution fund. Decisions by the board will enter into force within 24 hours of their adoption, unless the 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Commission or the Council, acting by simple majority on a proposal by the Commission, objected or called for changes. The national resolution authorities will be responsible for the practical implementation of the resolution schemes. However, the board ensures that there is no national bias and the identical cases are treated identically. Single Resolution Fund The SRM includes a special resolution fund to provide resources for implementing resolution tools. The Single Resolution Fund will be financed via levies on the banking sector itself. The fund will ensure the availability of medium-term funding to enable the bank to continue operating while it is being restructured. It has a target level of €55 billion and can borrow from the markets if decided by the Single Resolution Board. It will reach the target level over eight years, starting in 2016. During that transitional period, there will be national compartments which will be progressively merged. The fund makes banks not only less likely to fail but also safe to fail – meaning that they can be resolved without cost to the taxpayers and without significant disruption to the financial markets or the economy at large. The fund is not to capitalize banks but ensures ability to implement restructuring and other resolution tools. Conclusion The Banking Union corrects flaws we have had in our internationally integrated financial markets. And in doing that, national interests, and I argue that banks’ interests as well, are taken care of when matching regulatory and supervisory institutions with the reality of banking business. A structure which for the first time in the history of the European Union will allow the banking supervision and resolution mechanism to be based on a truly European mandate. By giving up a small part of the national sovereignty, the countries belonging to the Banking Union have gained an access to the European level decision making on key areas of supervision, crisis prevention and management as well as regulation of European banks. The Banking Union, with its SSM and SRM and their broad powers will not only give tools to handle problems but it will also have a powerful preventive effect. It enhances responsibilities of banks themselves and reduces moral hazard. I foresee such a change in the financial markets which takes place only once in a generation. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Ivan Iskrov: Review of 2014 as a starting point of reflection on the challenges ahead in Bulgaria Speech by Mr Ivan Iskrov, Governor of the Bulgarian National Bank, before the Association of Banks in Bulgaria on the occasion of the Banker’s Day, Sofia, 4 December 2014. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, I’m happy that we are together again on our professional holiday – on the celebration of the Banker’s Day, Saint Nicholas Day. Keeping the tradition, this year again, with the BNB Governing Council members we are marking the occasion with you – the management representatives of the banks in Bulgaria. Please accept our presence here as an expression of acknowledgement of your work and professional attitude in running your entrusted institutions. Also, today we would like to underscore our appreciation of the efforts and contribution of many of you here for safekeeping the financial stability in our country. The banks deserve congratulations for the positive results the sector has achieved amid a very unfavourable market, media and political backdrop in 2014. At the same time, let us use the recapitulation of this year as a starting point of reflection about the challenges that may lie ahead. The passing year has proved one of the toughest for the banking system in Bulgaria since the time of the big crisis in 1996–1997. The reasons for this have been several and I would conditionally divide them into two groups. Within the first group fall all those challenges in 2014 that were not at all unexpected. We have commented these challenges in previous years. Thus, for instance, the forecasts that this year also the economic growth would not accelerate, have materialised. That has held back the quality of bank assets from improving more tangibly. Accordingly, loan demand from enterprises and households has stayed weak. As a result, for yet another year, the banks’ profitability has been subdued and their possibilities for income from lending, i.e. their core activity, have remained limited. Also expected were the tasks related to the transposition into the Bulgarian legislation of the Capital Requirements Directive and the Capital Requirements Regulation adopted in 2013 by the European Parliament and the Council of EU. This time last year in my statement before you I qualified this as a kind of a “supervisory revolution” and the largest one-off change to have occurred in our supervisory framework over the last more than 15 years. Earlier this year, amendments were adopted in the Law on Credit Institutions and in the regulatory framework, including by dropping out a few key BNB ordinances, Ordinance No 9 being one of them which governed the specific provisions for credit risk. In place of the specific provisions allocated until then, the banks made additional accounting provisions under the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), thus reducing the book value of loans past-due by more than 90 days. The second group of challenges, with which 2014 will undoubtedly be remembered, includes those events that put the very resilience of the banking system to the test. A point was even reached where questions were raised in the public space about the BNB effectiveness, in particular the banking supervision thus far exercised. The events in question started with the severe liquidity attack against several banks in the middle of the year. 2014 will go down in history also with the huge misappropriations of depositors’ money, malpractices of governance and breach of regulations revealed in the second half of the year in the fourth largest bank in the country – “Corporate Commercial Bank” AD (KTB). 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches The KTB case was finally resolved with the effective application of the statutory guarantee on deposits. By coincidence, exactly today, 4 of December 2014, the long-awaited payment of guaranteed deposits with KTB has started. The depositors in this bank had no access to their deposits for a very long time. The central bank truly wished to see the KTB issues resolved in the shortest time possible. Unfortunately, as it is well known, with a large part of the documentation missing and the absence of legal means for quick restructuring of KTB, voluminous actions were needed to restore the credit files in KTB. Gathering this information was a necessary condition for the independent auditors to perform a complete analysis and assessment of KTB assets. Without such analysis and assessment, the actual status of KTB’s capital position could not be determined and, respectively, the BNB Governing Council could not have the legal grounds to adopt the necessary decisions. On 12 December, CB Victoria will also open for business and its depositors will have access to all their deposits there. The very scale and power of manifestation of the problems in 2014 were unprecedented and unpredictable. The banking sector in Bulgaria, however, had the huge advantage of meeting the critical times prepared and in excellent condition – just as it coped to meet the global crisis several years before. Our banks had managed to accumulate high liquidity and capital buffers owing to their sound governance and the BNB’s focused conservative policy over the years. The available buffers plus the measures taken since June by both the BNB and the government, as well as by the banks, helped safeguard the banking and the overall financial stability in the country. This way, the KTB crisis remained an isolated case and did not affect the operation of the rest of the banking sector. A proof of this is the depositors’ behaviour who continued to entrust their savings to the banks despite the occasionally irresponsible public speaking against the banking sector and the incessant public attacks on the BNB. Only household deposits picked up by BGN 2.8 billion (7.8%) annually to October, exceeding the stock of deposits in May (the last month before placing KTB and CB Victoria under special supervision). This clearly indicates restored confidence in the system. Besides, the banking system is about to end the year with excellent capital adequacy and liquidity indicators. I say the banking system, meaning all banks, excluding KTB and CB Victoria. As at September, the total capital adequacy ratio stood at 22.16%, and only Tier 1 capital ratio was 19.91% (just to remind you that the EU provisions in the New Basel Capital Accord, also known as “Basel III”, require 8% total capital adequacy and 6% tier 1 capital ratio, respectively). The liquid assets-to-liabilities ratio in the banking system as at October reached 29.75%. In 2014 the share of non-performing exposures past-due for more than 90 days has continued to stabilise. At the end of October this year, at system level, their book value was 10.62% of the system’s loan portfolio book value (i.e. practically the same as at the end of 2013 when their share was 10.28%). The balance-sheet share of non-performing exposures reflects the already provisioned risk through the impairments already made. The provisioning level itself is high, with a total of BGN 5–6 billion provisions in the form of impairments allocated by the banking sector under IFRS until October. The banking system continues to generate profit, which is a source of additional capitalisation and is thus a reserve for maintaining stability. We expect the sector to end 2014 at a positive financial result of circa BGN 700 million (i.e. above last year’s result). This performance applies to the whole system without the bank whose license was revoked and CB Victoria which is still under special supervision. All these indicators and results are especially rewarding because they have been achieved in a very harsh year! At the same time, however, nobody entertains the illusions that the hardships and trials to the banks in our country are over. Because most likely in 2015 as well the banking community 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 will work in a testing business environment, where I do not rule out the possibility of new attempts to deliver blows against the sector, motivated by the intertwining economic, political and media interests, such as those we saw against the Bulgarian banking system right after KTB and CB Victoria were placed under special supervision. The passing 2014 year has shown how dangerous to society, as well as useless for their authors, such attacks can actually be. Remember how, right here before you, a year ago I called your attention to the fact that we could expect political tension to rise and the topic of banks to be turned into an object of pre-election campaign and party bickering. Regrettably, this unpleasant prediction has come true. Throughout the past year we were not spared statements by party representatives who administered negative public judgments and pronounced the gloomiest of predictions about the banks in the country. The air of political insecurity bred all sorts of populist acts, including irrational legislative proposals with regard to both the banks and the BNB. Could it be, however, that in 2015 we would witness a radical change in the thinking and actions of the political representatives and media circles towards more prudence and better awareness of the key role the banking sector has for the financial stability, economic growth and welfare of society? I don’t know. But I do hope very much it would be so. Dear Colleagues, Outside the issues related to the national specifics of the environment the banks operate in, I would take the opportunity to note some forthcoming amendments in the regulatory framework in 2015 relating to the introduction of new uniform European norms and practices with a direct impact on the work of credit institutions in Bulgaria. In 2015 the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive in the EU will come into effect, aiming to introduce EU-wide rules and tools for the Member States to deal with banks in trouble and to take timely and adequate measures to rescue viable institutions. This directive is going to be transposed in the Bulgarian law by means of new legal provisions and amendments to the existing legal framework (e.g. the Law on Credit Institutions, the Law on Bank Bankruptcy, and the Law on the BNB). Strategic decisions need to be made on establishing relevant competent authorities tasked with the responsibility of resolving banks and investment firms, on setting up resolution funds, and on the drawing up by the supervised entities of adequate plans for recovery or controlled restoration of their viability by restructuring. In connection with the new EU capital framework CRD4, in 2014 the BNB began to implement the new reporting framework for supervisory purposes (the so-called FINREP and COREP), consisting of over 100 separate reporting forms. The additional supervisory reporting will meet the accumulated information needs of the Banking Supervision Department and will tackle the most sensitive sources of risk in banks’ portfolios. In 2015 it is expected that the EU-wide banking supervision rules will become more and more common in banking practices. Numerous technical standards, developed by the European Banking Authority (EBA) and adopted by the European Commission, are going to be put in place. In supervising the subsidiaries of euro area banks, the BNB is going to cooperate actively with the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) which started in November 2014. Last but not least is the BNB’s intention to initiate an asset quality review of the entire banking system, which will cover all banks operating in Bulgaria. This will also be a key requirement if the government should decide, at some point, to start talks with the ECB for joining the SSM. The methodology of this review will be based on the highest standards already developed and applied by the ECB in the recently completed asset quality review in the euro area largest banks prior to their transition to the SSM. This review will be carried out with the help of an independent external consultant. It should start not later than the end of next year, depending on how the implementation of the new Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive advances, including the creation of the respective resolution fund. I assure you that 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches the BNB is going to get commercial banks familiar, at an early enough stage, with the main elements of the methodology of the forthcoming asset quality review, so that each bank could budget the relevant costs (by analogy with the euro area where banks have borne the costs of their asset quality review). Dear friends, The passing 2014 will regrettably be remembered for the vicious public pressure on the BNB. The central bank was under systematic and orchestrated attacks behind which one could see narrow corporate interests and political dependencies. Such focused, fierce and continuous attacks against the central bank are unheard of in today’s advanced societies, and are certainly far from the European norms. Information about who paid for these attacks and whose money was spent on them is already becoming public knowledge. Even more interesting details may continue to come out in the months ahead. Then, I hope, it will become quite clear even to the public at large who has in fact defended the public interest and who has acted against it. This multi-month campaign against the central bank (which by the way is still going on) has consumed impressively large financial, media and political resources. All of you have also observed the biased attempt of nationally representative organisations to misrepresent the BNB’s actions and, ostensibly by accident, to divert the attention of the Bulgarian public from those who has abused people’s trust and deposits. But all along while it was solving the case of KTB and CB Victoria, the BNB did not allow to be misled and deviate from the letter and spirit of the law. If somebody believed that by using Jimmy Hoffa’s1 methods they would force a strong institution like the BNB, with an earned reputation nationally and internationally, to circumvent the law or to obey personal or group interests, they were obviously mistaken. In this regard please let me share a few general observations relating to the topic of frauds in KTB, the responsibility of the banking supervision, and the role of the central bank. The KTB case can be compared with a series of cases in other countries. Over the last years alone in the EU and USA there were dozens of failed banks and banks in which frauds for billions of euros were discovered. However, it should be noted that in all those cases no central bank was pressurised to take the full responsibility and to be scapegoated, unlike the continual public attacks here against the BNB. In other countries the responsible institutions and politicians have always held the understanding that the central bank’s authority is of paramount importance for the calm of depositors and the stability of the banking system as a whole. All across the world that authority, and the independence of the central bank, are considered to be a long-term asset of the country. Consequently, central banks’ actions have not been compromised under the pressure of temporary economic or political emotions. All said so far does not mean that the BNB has no intention to draw conclusions for improving the efficiency of the banking supervision. Quite the opposite, the BNB has already undertaken serious steps in this direction. Back in the summer we publicly announced a number of measures and actions for reviewing the supervisory framework and practices. I wish to remind you that as early as in July we sent an official letter to the EBA inviting them to carry out an independent review of the quality, capacity, practices and procedures of the BNB’s Banking Supervision Department. In August we sent another letter to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) requesting them to organise a mission of the IMF and World Bank in Bulgaria under the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP). On recommendation of the IMF, World Bank and EBA, the                                                  1  James Riddle (“Jimmy”) Hoffa (1913–1975), a famous American labour union leader who in the 1960s was charged with and then convicted of ties with organised crime, corruption and financial fraud. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Banking Supervision Department is now already working to assess the compliance of the supervisory practices in Bulgaria with the “Basel Core Principles”2 for effective banking supervision as a first stage of the FSAP. In addition, the BNB has already drawn up and proposed to the Members of Parliament a draft of amendments to the Law on the BNB and the Law on Credit Institutions, designed to rectify some weaknesses in the legal framework and to allow the BNB Governing Council to have more control over the banking supervision functions. Because all of you here are well aware of the facts, but they were cunningly ignored and avoided by those who were attacking the BNB. Since June 1997 by law the BNB Governing Council has been the body that adopts all banking regulations (i.e. the ordinances defining the norms and requirements for banks’ activities). However, supervision is exclusively entrusted to the deputy governor in charge of the Banking Supervision Department (no matter what his or her name is), who acts separately and independently. The crisis with KTB, and not only that one, clearly demonstrated that such immense concentration of power and responsibility in one official is a mistake of legislation. And we want to change this. Because bearing responsibility is not possible without having the relevant powers. Whatever happens ahead, the events in 2014 will not rewrite the BNB’s history of proven success in recent years. It is a fact that, thanks to the consistent efficient work of the central bank, including the banking supervision, during the global financial crisis not a single bank went bankrupt in Bulgaria. In other countries, even in the EU, problems with banks led to public costs running into hundreds of billions of euros. The Bulgarian citizens and taxpayers were saved from all that. The long-standing achievements of the BNB, and BNB’s banking supervision in particular, should not be forgotten or erased easily – even if it turns out that some omissions may have been made in the KTB case. It is also a fact that since June to date the BNB, the government and the commercial banks (under the strong leadership of the BNB) have successfully confined the negative effects on the rest of the banking sector after placing KTB and CB Victoria under special supervision. Making huge efforts, we continue to safeguard the financial stability in Bulgaria. In an extremely unfavourable situation of unprecedented public pressure, ferocious criticisms and direct attacks against the central bank, the BNB has once again managed to do its best. The good news is that this year the BNB has practically stood a real and very heavy stress test. We have passed an exceptionally serious stress test of our independence. We have proved how our country, business and society have a strong institution they can rely on as a pillar of stability and for protecting the long-term public interest, an institution that does not give in to pressure and opportunistic interests. On a day like this, when we normally weigh up past events, our thoughts could go further back in time, long before the worries of this passing year. Some events can often be more wisely judged when looked at from a longer historical perspective. If we take such a look back into the 135-year history of the BNB, we would see many examples demonstrating the strength of our central bank and its insusceptibility to coteries’ intrigues and shallow trivial debates (which only absorb energy from the public creative resource, before vanishing in time). But our history has witnessed obscurantist episodes too, when the BNB was suppressed to obey political or other temporary interests. The implications of such interventions have always been tragic for the country. Here is one brief example. On the famed date of 9 September 1944 the BNB Governing Council set a “buying” rate for the Soviet rouble (15 levs for 1 rouble) after being instructed on the telephone by the then Minister of Finance. Two days later, on 11 September 1944, the government ordered the BNB to stop buying the                                                  2  Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision of 14 September 2012. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches roubles, and instead the BNB was obliged to pay out to the Soviet armed forces passing through our country “the amounts they needed at their request” and those amounts were to be accounted for as a debt of the country.3 We do hope such times would never again return in Bulgaria. Bolshevik enthusiasm and decisions made under street pressure are the most dangerous approach when it comes to public policies regarding the monetary regime, banking supervision or financial stability. Today, once again we are called to stand up for the professionalism and independence of the central bank – with responsibility and concrete actions. The public interest requires that the reputation of the central bank be respected and its institutional independence and continuity in its work be safeguarded. The strength of institutions in a country is a pre-condition for stability and economic growth, while the weakness of institutions is the first sign of forthcoming economic or financial failure of a country. It is not a coincidence that in the countries which usually serve us as an example of democracy and prosperity, the strong public institutions by rule outlive the individuals and the political parties too. Dear Colleagues, Finally, please allow me to convey the best wishes on behalf of the BNB Governing Council and me for success of the banks run by you and for professional and personal achievements of all of you in the coming year of 2015. Happy Banker’s Day, dear colleagues! Thank you for your attention!                                                   3  See “Archives are speaking”, Bulgarian National Bank; a compendium of documents, volume ІV, 1930–1947, pp.1018–1019. (These archives are publicly accessible on the BNB’s website.) 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Luis M Linde: Situation of and challenges facing the European and Spanish banking industry following the start-up of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) Opening address by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 10th Banking Industry/IESE (Escuela de Negocios de la Universidad de Navarra) Meeting, Madrid, 10 December 2014. *      *      * I much appreciate Professor Juan José Toribio’s kind invitation to me to participate in this 10th Banking Industry Meeting. In my address I shall review the situation of and the challenges facing the European and Spanish banking industry following the start-up of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). Since the height of the tensions in mid-2012, the position of the Spanish banking industry has improved notably. This improvement has been due to a series of factors, ranging from far-reaching changes in European institutional arrangements to common monetary policy measures and, no doubt, to the reforms in Spain. Clearly, however, the improvement cannot be explained without recalling the changes made in our banking system. Recapitalisation, restructuring, downsizing and reform of the savings bank sector have spearheaded the Spanish banking industry reform and have contributed to correcting the imbalances that had built up. The improvement in Spanish banks was substantiated by the interim assessments made by the European (the ECB and the European Commission) and international (IMF) authorities until the European Union’s financial assistance programme for the recapitalisation of Spanish banks was successfully concluded in January this year. These assessments have been recently upheld by the comprehensive assessment exercise for the European banking system carried out by the ECB, in collaboration with national supervisors, as a prior step to the start-up of the SSM. The Spanish banking industry can claim today to have healthy balance sheets and to be considerably resilient to potentially adverse macroeconomic scenarios with a limited probability of occurrence. The European banking industry following the comprehensive assessment exercise From a European standpoint, the exercise identified certain banks whose solvency had to improve, a matter which will no doubt be among the priorities of the SSM, to which I will later refer. Broadly, the exercise highlighted the fact that European banks evidence ample solvency and that the asset quality review did not detect significant valuation failings or substantial provisioning shortfalls. In short, the ECB’s comprehensive assessment contributed to allaying doubts over the vulnerability of European bank balance sheets and over their resilience, both of which had been identified as factors of risk to financial stability. That said, the European banking industry faces a series of additional challenges stemming from the changes under way in regulation and supervision, which have arisen as a response to the financial crisis. I shall now turn to some of these challenges, beginning with those linked to the current macroeconomic and financial situation. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches First, it is a concern that in some market segments investors, in their search for yield, may be taking on excessive risks. Financial conditions might be adversely affected were there to be a sudden reversal in this process, in particular if that reversal were to bring about sharp price corrections, especially in less liquid market segments. Second, there are also worries about low profitability. The comprehensive assessment deemed solvency to be comfortably acceptable, but profitability in the banking industry remains prone to downside pressures, particularly in a macroeconomic setting that is worse than was expected some months back. Low returns hamper organic capital accumulation and raise doubts over the medium-term sustainability of banking activities. Banks will have to adapt their strategies and business models to enhance their profitability in a sustained fashion. Finally, I would highlight the risk of concerns re-emerging over the sustainability of sovereign debt, especially against a background of low nominal growth. This risk has not fully abated and might rear up again in the event of a substantial macroeconomic downturn. These three risks are not mutually exclusive. Indeed, a common denominator they share is the current weakness of euro area economic growth. But, irrespective of the transmission channels through which sluggish economic growth may translate into financial instability, it is precisely this weakness in nominal growth in the European economy that is the main risk to the area at present. The Spanish banking industry The Spanish banking industry is not immune to these risks. To date in 2014, the rate of decline of lending to the resident private sector has shown signs of easing, in terms both of bank lending to households and of that to non-financial corporations, especially those not pursuing real estate or construction-related activities. In any event, the performance of lending at the aggregate level is affected by the need to continue redressing high private-sector debt. The NPL ratio of the Spanish banking industry continues to post higher levels than those observed a year ago. However, it has improved slightly in 2014. This correction has come about despite the fact that lending, the denominator of the ratio, has continued posting negative rates of change. Hence, the comparatively larger fall in NPL in 2014 has been the main determinant of this reduction. In the first half of this year, the Spanish banking industry posted somewhat lower consolidated profits than in the first half of 2013, although they were far removed from the heavy losses of 2012. In a setting still marked by low volumes of activity, low interest rates and a still-high level of non-earning assets, banks’ ability to generate interest income remains subject to downside pressure. These factors were offset by the decline in operating expenses and by lower losses attributable to asset impairment. As to the industry’s solvency, Spanish banks as a whole had a CET1 ratio as at June 2014 that comfortably exceeded the required minimum. The firming and intensification of these trends will largely depend on developments in the Spanish economy and on recovery taking root. The outlook for the economy remains favourable; so far, it has proven resilient to an external environment in which growth forecasts for the global economy have been revised downwards, and in which the recovery in European countries – those most important for our economy – has lost momentum. Thus, on the domestic front at least, it would be necessary to embed the reforms under way, thereby enhancing our capacity for recovery. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 The start-up of the Single Supervisory Mechanism Among the challenges posed by the SSM is that of attaining quality bank supervision, applying strengthened and uniform standards and making the most use possible of the acquired knowledge of the various national authorities, while setting in place a common supervisory culture. In light of the work undertaken to date and the intense collaboration between the ECB and the national authorities, these goals are realistic. The Banco de España is striving to ensure this is a successful process, cooperating with the ECB and the other SSM participants. We have adapted our organisational arrangements and working methods to smooth interaction with the SSM and the ECB. A further key challenge will be to maintain a level playing field in the member countries, applying uniform supervisory principles. That is a major challenge, given that in Europe there is a wide diversity of banking models and legal systems. Further, while the heterogeneity of regulatory frameworks has recently been lessened following the entry into force of the Capital Requirements Directive and Regulation (CRD IV and CRR), differences persist and must be discussed. Such differences include most notably so-called national discretions and options. On one hand, the new framework provides for a gradual transition to the new capital requirements, in line with the Basel III Accord. The regulation gives countries some discretion in setting the pace of convergence towards the new requirements, which may give rise to temporary differences in the treatment of some specific aspects. For instance, a country may decide to bring forward the application of the new capital conservation buffer, initially envisaged for 2016, or the deduction of certain capital components. Moreover, the regulation provides for a series of national options that might give rise to permanent differences in the treatment of specific aspects. It is logical that the SSM should work to achieve a degree of harmonisation, seeking to restrict national options of a permanent nature. It is perhaps less logical to take steps in the case of temporary discretionary arrangements, which by their very nature must disappear within a few years. Different accounting practices, especially as regards provisioning, also significantly affect the uniformity of capital figures and should be a supervisory concern. It is thus reasonable to expect the SSM to contribute to convergence in the interpretation of international accounting standards. And it is essential that the SSM should strive equally to revise the calculation of risk- weighted assets. That will call for a detailed review of the risk models used by banks and the adoption of corrective measures should unjustifiable deviations be detected. Macroprudential policy Macroprudential policy, insofar as it seeks to identify systemic risks, prevent them and increase the industry’s resilience, has an important role to play. The very nature of these risks is global in dimension, meaning that coordination between the various authorities with responsibilities in this field is needed. At the same time, it should be borne in mind that while the risks may be considered common to the euro area as a whole, their impact and intensity vary from country to country. This heterogeneity not only depends on the characteristics of each country, but also on the particular juncture of the financial cycle. For example, at present certain euro area countries evidence risks associated with excessive real estate market prices, while in others this risk is not discernible. Macroprudential policy thus requires a coordinated approach by the various institutions, and at the same time attention must be paid to considerations of a national nature. In a monetary 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches union like the euro area, the heterogeneity of the member countries’ financial cycles may be an important issue when it comes to designing these policies. The European Systemic Risk Board was set up in late 2010 as the authority responsible for macroprudential oversight in the European Union, empowered to issue warnings and recommendations in this connection under the “act or explain” principle. Further institutional developments have since followed. Thus, without going into the details of the organisation of macroprudential regulation and supervision in the euro area, the member countries are moving ahead with the creation of national macroprudential authorities, while the ECB has been assigned responsibilities in European regulation. The institutional form of the national macroprudential authorities depends on the specific characteristics of each country, although, on the recommendations of the European Systemic Risk Board, their common feature has to be the major role played in one way or another by the central banks. Challenges for the banking sector posed by changes in international regulation and supervision Let me conclude by looking at the challenges for the banking sector derived from the major changes in banking regulation and supervision in the international sphere. I shall briefly describe the basic matters being discussed by the Financial Stability Board, or, as we all call it, the FSB. In November 2008, the G20 agreed on an ambitious “action plan” and asked the FSB to overhaul international financial regulation, a reform which was to go to the root of the crisis and pave the way for a sounder and safer financial system allowing sustainable financing of economic growth. The task has been both extensive and intensive. A substantial portion of the reforms needed to fulfil the mandate from the G20 have already been agreed, particularly with regard to the banking industry. Apart from the reform of the Basel framework for banks (commonly known as Basel III), a basic pillar of the regulatory reform undertaken by the FSB is the new treatment of so- called “systemic institutions”. Or, in other words, the problem posed by institutions which are too big and complex to fail, meaning the authorities have to recapitalise them with public funds when they are in distress. Identifying an institution as “systemic” has consequences. They are subject to larger capital charges and to a stricter supervisory regime aimed at reducing the likelihood of them getting into difficulties. That said, if there is in fact a key differentiating factor to reduce the impact of the potential failure of a systemic institution, it is unquestionably the new resolution framework. This new framework encompasses (a) legislative reforms; (b) the requirement that institutions have resolution plans in place; (c) assessment of the effective resolution ability of the authorities of the respective Crisis Management Groups; and (d) the need for institutions to have the loss-absorbing capacity or funds to ensure that, in a situation of resolution, it can be carried out “from within”, i.e. without need for capital injections by the relevant authorities and without destabilising the financial system as a whole. Allow me to take a moment to talk about loss-absorbing capacity in resolution, or Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity (TLAC). On 10 November the FSB published a proposal on the TLAC requirement to be met by systemically important banks, the final design of which is scheduled for the end of 2015. The consultative process of the TLAC proposal will be conducted in parallel with an impact study which will include (i) an analysis of the TLAC needs for each institution which may have to be resolved; (ii) a survey to assess the depth of the market in each jurisdiction 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 involved; (iii) an analysis of the historical losses incurred by global systemic banks at the height of the crisis; and (iv) an assessment of the economic impact of the proposal, both at institution level and as to how it will affect the supply of credit. The difference from the Basel requirements lies in the instruments eligible for meeting the new requirement. Thus, in addition to all the equity instruments envisaged under Basel, the proposal permits, and in fact requires, the inclusion of debt instruments, generally subordinated debt instruments. Experience shows that capital may disappear in a crisis, and quickly so. The authorities must, therefore, have debt and equity instruments which (through debt reduction and/or conversion into equity instruments) allow them to resolve and recapitalise institutions from within, without need for bail-out by the public authorities. Will this be the end of the reforms? I think not, at least as far as other financial sectors are concerned. The considerably higher prudential requirements on banks naturally cause some credit intermediation to shift to other financial sectors, in a phenomenon commonly known as “shadow banking”. The FSB has set in train two courses of action to prevent an excessive concentration of banking risk off the balance sheets of banks: first, it monitors their size, activities and risk characteristics; and second, it is working on the introduction of measures both for institutions (particularly closed-end money market funds) and for activities (particularly certain forms of alternative funding, such as securitisation or the funds obtained through the repo market or securities lending). Lastly, increasing emphasis will be placed on monitoring the implementation of reforms. One of the lessons learned during the crisis was that international standards must not only be appropriate, but also effectively and uniformly implemented across jurisdictions to avoid situations of lack of competitiveness, regulatory arbitrage or creation of systemic risk. I am sure that, as in previous years, your Meeting will be extremely interesting and informative. There is no shortage of issues and problems. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jwala Rambarran: Monetary policy presentation for November 2014 Speech by Mr Jwala Rambarran, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at the Chaguanas Chamber of Industry and Commerce, Port-of-Spain, 1 December 2014. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank the Chaguanas Chamber of Industry and Commerce for graciously agreeing to host our third Monetary Policy Forum. Events such as this Monetary Policy Forum are important to Central Bank’s communication strategies, as communication is now the new monetary policy tool for central banks around the world. From Debe to Tobago and now Chaguanas, this Forum provides a platform to explain the thinking behind our monetary policy actions, interact with stakeholders and account to the national community, who we are here to serve. As we enter the final month of 2014, global economic prospects are muted compared to the more optimistic sentiments which prevailed at the start of the year. Recovery from the global crisis is taking longer than anyone expected. More than a half decade onwards and many countries are still struggling with painful legacies of the crisis, including extraordinarily high debt and soaring unemployment and it’s not yet over. The Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, Christine Lagarde, at the recent Annual Meetings of the IMF and World Bank, talked about the “new mediocre” as the descriptor for low economic growth which is now the new reality. In the advanced economies, the United States grew at its fastest pace in over decade and the United Kingdom is showing encouraging signs of steady growth. Recovery in the Eurozone remains fragile. Japan’s economy has slipped back into its fourth recession since 2008. Emerging markets, which fuelled a great deal of global activity in the recent past, are likely to do their heavy lifting at a slower pace than before. Output growth in China, the world’s second-largest economy, has slowed to a five- year low. The Indian economy is rallying, while the other two members of the BRIC bloc, Russia and Brazil, are facing significant headwinds to growth. Still on the international front, there are dark clouds gathering. These clouds coming from the United States are bringing murky conditions associated with normalization of US monetary policy. These conditions have the potential to have a powerful impact on emerging market economies such as Trinidad and Tobago, when they reach us. As expected, the US Federal Reserve ended its era of quantitative easing at its October 2014 meeting. Next year, for the first time in eight years, we are likely to see a hike in the Fed funds rate, probably in summer of 2015. There is considerable uncertainty in global financial markets about the pace and magnitude of these expected increases in US interest rates. For Trinidad and Tobago, this uncertainty could result in a weakening of capital inflows or acceleration of capital outflows. Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago is already putting measures in place, through available monetary policy tools, such as increasing its policy interest rate, to insulate our economy, as much as possible, from the shocks we are expected to feel by rising US interest rates. Apart from the dark clouds hovering in the United States, geopolitical risks are mounting in various parts of the world. We started 2014 with a possible escalation of conflict between Russia and Ukraine. We are ending the year with an Ebola outbreak in Africa and an upsurge of ISIS in the Middle East. So, you will realize I have gone through the trouble of first raising these murky international matters as they are early warning signs for global financial markets. Developments on 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  battlefields across the world can have an impact on our small island state. This is why I have raised them as they set the tone of how things are likely to unfold. Recent economic developments I’ll begin with a brief overview of domestic economic conditions. Following no growth in 2010 and in 2011, our economy recovered by approximately 1 ½ percent in 2012 and grew by 1.7 percent in 2013. In early 2014, Central Bank expected the Trinidad and Tobago economy to have continued its recovery, with growth projected at 2½ percent. For a number of reasons, this did not materialize. Central Bank’s latest economic review of the year now indicates economic growth is likely to be a modest ½ percent for 2014. This, of course, is well below our forecast for economic growth, made at the beginning of the year, of 2 ½ percent. So what accounts for this deviation? How could we the experts, as well as other agencies such as the IMF, S&P and our own CSO, get it so wrong? The unexpected slowdown in the economy was caused by a dismal performance in the energy sector, with declines most pronounced in natural gas and LNG production. Energy companies had indicated, in October 2013, the planned supply shutdowns and stoppages that had been taking place for the past two years would be no more and energy production would have normalized in 2014. However, supply disruptions mainly from the two largest energy companies continued throughout 2014 and stifled the recovery process. In January and May 2014, bpTT took down the company’s largest production platform, Savonette, to facilitate drilling activities. BGTT had a planned shutdown of its Dolphin platform for five days in June 2014 to facilitate the installation of equipment required for the Starfish development programme. BG also took the opportunity to undertake a parallel maintenance exercise. These are just a few instances of shutdowns by the country’s two largest natural gas producers. Routine maintenance by Atlantic LNG Train 2 facility and Petrotrin’s oil refinery worsened the situation in our energy sector. Energy output, therefore, contracted by an estimated 1 ½ percent in the first nine months of 2014. Energy production rebounded to an extent – within the last two months but not strong enough to compensate for the prolonged sharp drop in output. NGC’s gas pipeline leak over the last few days, which led to the shutdown of the country’s main power provider, is expected to be resolved soon and should not have a significant impact on production. Central Bank expects growth in the energy sector to decline by a little over 2 percent in 2014. This is the harsh reality to which we are tied in an energy- based economy. The bright spot of news in the midst of all these dreary developments came from the non-energy sector, as its steady performance prevented the economy from veering completely off its growth trajectory. Output in the non-energy sector increased by just over 2 percent in the first nine months of 2014 and indications of non-energy performance remain encouraging in the final quarter of 2014. Overall growth in the non-energy sector is expected to be around 3 percent in 2014, which surpasses Central Bank’s projected growth rate of 2 percent. Much of the growth in the non-energy sector has been concentrated in three areas – construction, distribution and finance. In the construction sector, local sales of cement have been expanding strongly, reaching almost 8 ½ percent in the first nine months of 2014. Higher construction activity reflects several on-going, large public sector projects such as the Point Fortin Highway, the Children’s Hospital, the National Aquatic Centre and the Port at Galeota. Further impetus is coming from private sector projects breaking ground, such as the “C3” movie and shopping complex in Corinth, South Trinidad. New car sales – a main indicator of distribution activity – are still hitting double-digit rates. Dealers sold just under 14,000 new cars in the first nine months of 2014. At the end of 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  November, we had already reached near the 4,500 marker on the PDE series. For the first time in five years, new car sales have surpassed 18,000 units on an annual basis. Low interest rates, high liquidity and the cautiously optimistic sentiment of the business community have supported the expansion in private sector lending. The recovery in business lending which emerged in the first quarter of 2014 strengthened as the year progressed. Over the nine months leading up to September 2014, business lending increased by an average of 4 ½ percent compared to an average decline of nearly 4 percent over the same period in 2013. Consumer loans continued to accelerate into 2014. The expansion in consumer loans averaged 7 ½ percent over the period January to September 2014, up from an average increase of 5.0 percent over the first nine months of 2013. A disaggregation of consumer credit showed strong growth of loans for the purchase of vehicles, home renovation and debt consolidation. Record low mortgage rates continue to spur demand for real estate mortgage financing. I now turn to a matter grabbing headlines and generating intense interest in the country over the past month – falling international crude oil prices and the impact on the budget. Prices for West Texas Intermediate (WTI) fell by 30 percent since the start of the fiscal year on October 1st to a four-year low of US$66 per barrel, last Friday, following OPEC’s decision not to cut output. This is lower than the 2014/2015 Budget estimate of US$80 per barrel. The weakness in oil prices is due to abundant global supply from OPEC and the United States combined with slower growth in world demand especially from Europe and China. The general expectation is lower crude oil prices could persist for some time. There are several reasons why we should be concerned about falling oil prices but I hasten to add, we should not suffer a panic attack or hyperventilate yet. First, we have become accustomed to using the oil price as a psychological barometer of our economic forecast of sunny skies or murky weather. Oil prices rise…we feel euphoric; oil prices fall…we feel “doom and gloom” and reach for a paper bag to breathe into. This see-saw sentiment neglects the fact there is another even more important, but apparently not as well known, barometer of our economic outlook. I refer to the natural gas price. This is not breaking news, ladies and gentlemen, and members of the media. Trinidad and Tobago became a gas-based economy 18 years ago in 1996. Last year, we produced about nine times more natural gas than crude oil on an energy equivalent basis. A large portion of our energy production and exports are natural gas-based. At Central Bank, we estimate natural gas now contributes roughly 70 percent to Government revenue and oil the remaining 30 percent. The second reason we should not panic over plummeting oil prices is because budgeted revenue estimates are based on the Henry Hub natural gas price in the United States, even though less than 10 percent of our LNG exports go to the United States. We now have more varied LNG export markets which consist of South America, Europe, the Middle East and Asia. This means our LNG is sold at different prices in these various markets. Government’s natural gas revenue is based on the net back price for LNG at Point Fortin, which is an average price tallied from the various markets for our LNG exports. The Henry Hub natural gas price is currently trading at US$4.00 per million British thermal units, that is, 45 percent above the budgeted natural gas price. The netback price for LNG at Point Fortin is currently around US$5.50 per million British thermal units, which is double the budgeted natural gas price. However, in some regions, such as Asia and Europe, natural gas prices are indexed to oil and can move in tandem with movements in oil prices. Even so, Central Bank estimates the netback price for LNG at Point Fortin would have to fall by 50 percent for an extended period of time to significantly compress energy revenues. Therefore, the bottom line is this: falling oil prices should not have an immediate impact on our budget, as 70 percent of our revenue comes from the sale of natural gas-based exports which are currently trading at double the budgeted natural gas price. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The third reason we should avoid hysteria over falling oil prices is that the Minister of Finance and the Economy has several fiscal options he can exercise to adjust to a shortfall in energy revenues. Last Friday, Minister Howai, indicated his plan of action would be to slash $1.3 billion in expenditure across Ministries. The Minister also has the option to access the Heritage and Stabilization Fund to partly finance budgetary shortfalls. However, as I’ve advised Government, the current situation does not warrant withdrawals from the HSF, and further expenditure cuts should be made if shortfalls in energy revenues persist for an extended period of time. We have lived with oil price volatility for more than 100 years. Trinidad and Tobago survived the collapse of oil prices in the mid1980s and, more recently, in 2008 when oil prices dropped by more than 30 percent. What is important, as I have advised the Minister of Finance and the Economy, is the need to exercise prudence when making choices to stabilize the fiscal position. I would now like to turn to another murky matter that has grabbed headlines for most of the year – foreign exchange, but not just foreign exchange, everyone’s needs for precious US currency being unfulfilled, from the vacationer wanting US$500, to you, the business community being unable to pay for goods, and seeing your credit standing being affected. Foreign exchange has been turned into a murky matter by some with agendas and others who pretend to be ignorant about how our system works. I’m sure when the business reporters write the 2014 year in review, they will probably say the so called, “foreign exchange shortage” is the business story of the year and perhaps it is – but there are always three sides to a story… yours, mine and the truth… and may be after a year and more, some of you will see the truth today. Let’s start at the beginning. As banker to the Government, we receive the country’s revenue from the energy sector through the taxes energy companies are required to pay every quarter in US dollars. That money forms most of the country’s “Official Reserves”. Central Bank invests the reserves and we use the interest income we make from those investments to fund the operations of the Bank itself. Central Bank is not funded by the taxpayer, and we do not receive funding from the Government. In fact, it is the other way around. At the end of the fiscal year, we send our surplus to Government. We also use the reserves to service Government’s external debt payments and to sell foreign exchange to the banking system to meet shortfalls in supply. Through our sales of US to the financial system we foster orderly conditions in the foreign exchange market, thereby maintaining exchange rate stability. As you are well aware, demand for foreign exchange from the business community and the public is perennially high, but supplies come to the market at discrete intervals, usually when energy sector companies convert foreign exchange with the banking system to pay local bills. So foreign exchange supplies to the country come in two ways: 1. Directly to the Central Bank when energy companies pay their quarterly taxes in US dollars and; 2. When energy companies convert US dollars through the banking system year-round to meet local commitments. However, demand is always higher than supply and these gaps result in shortfalls in the system and it is at these points when Central Bank steps in to meet the shortfalls by selling foreign exchange from our stock of official reserves. Therefore, Central Bank only enters the system to meet shortfalls in foreign exchange supply, not to provide the entire supply to the financial system. Right now we account for just over 25 percent of the total foreign exchange supply while the money that comes directly from the energy companies account for the rest. What then, based on this structure, has created all the noise in the past year? There was a time when shortfalls would occur seasonally, close to Christmas and the hectic August travel period. Over the last two decades, demand for foreign exchange not only expanded but its composition has also changed to reflect new patterns of consumer spending, for example, 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  use of credit cards for making online payments. Today is now known as “Cyber-Monday” in the United States and many locals will flood US retailers’ websites from the comfort and warmth of their homes in Trinidad and Tobago thanks to the Internet, credit cards and US delivery addresses. Foreign credit card purchases devoured US$570 million for the year so far. That excludes today’s Cyber-Monday sales and upcoming Christmas purchases. Last year, foreign credit card payments consumed US$530 million. That is more than US$1 billion spent foreign credit card purchases in just two years. Commercial banks must meet these credit card payments before they meet any other foreign exchange demand. That’s one source of demand, then there’s that double-digit growth in sales of new cars, many of which are higher-end luxury vehicles. For the year so far, we’ve spent US$205 million on purchases of new cars; last year that figure was US$340 million. That is nearly US$750 million on purchases of new cars in two years. Foreign currency deposits are another source of foreign exchange demand. Currently, we have US$ 3.3 billion dollars in foreign currency deposits in the banking system. Here’s where it gets interesting, and the foreign exchange story gets a bit murkier. There are many business leaders who often give their opinions freely on foreign exchange, many go the media and have been extremely vocal on the matter. Many businesses have legitimate requests for foreign exchange and we acknowledge your requests are not always met on time, and it is for this reason Central Bank has taken US$1.7 billion dollars from our reserves for the year so far to help meet your unsatisfied demand. However, we’ve noticed a trend, where businesses make noise for foreign exchange to pay bills for trade-related purposes and actively lobby the authorized dealers and Central Bank for US dollars. When the money is provided, the funds are promptly deposited in their foreign currency account and left unused and the noise about not being able to get money for business continues. I do have one tip for businesses trying to get foreign exchange; it helps if you don’t conduct business with companies with terrorist links as we have strict laws on Anti-Money Laundering and Combatting the Financing of Terrorism. As I indicated before, Central Bank steps into the market to meet the shortfall in foreign exchange supply and that presently accounts for just over 25 percent of total supply. So why can’t we supply 50 percent or 80 percent, or even all? Why must we ensure that we have enough official reserves put aside? Well...let me ask you this...What if the global financial crisis goes on for another five years? What if the Fed raises interest rates faster and more than expected next year and causes tremendous volatility in global currency, stock and bond markets? What if the Ebola virus spreads to the Caribbean region? When we factor in the chance of these external events happening, we have to ensure we have enough official reserves as insurance just in case something does happen. The plan is to ensure we don’t deplete these reserves, as we once did in the late 1980s, because it took us 30 years to finally reach to today’s US$11 billion. And yes, this US$11 billion includes US$1.175 billion from proceeds from the sale of MHTL. In benchmarking, we have just over one year’s worth of official reserves. This means if I took all the official reserves and gave it to the business community, you would actually be able to buy everything you need for a year. Is that enough?  Should I keep using the country’s official reserves to ensure every commercial activity that demands foreign exchange gets it from Central Bank? I will not be the Governor who ran down the country’s reserves to make everyone happy. I prefer to continue to be the Governor, who all armchair economists say disrupted the foreign exchange market, because of improvements I know will benefit you and the entire country in the long run, than the one who tried to get everyone to like him and make friends by playing loose and fast with the country’s foreign exchange reserves. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Central bank’s monetary policy actions I now turn to Central Bank’s monetary policy actions. At its November 2014 meeting, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of Central Bank resolved to again increase the “Repo” rate by another 25 basis points to 3 ¼ percent. This is the second hike in just two months, after holding the Repo rate at an historical low for nearly two years. The MPC is sending a signal it believes higher interest rates are now necessary in our financial system to mitigate the disruptive effects of higher portfolio capital outflows and to pre- empt a potential rise in inflationary pressures. The MPC based its decision to start a gradual withdrawal of the accommodative monetary stance of the past four years on three main factors. First, forward guidance from the US Fed has altered market expectations about the time frame for the end of quantitative easing and the start to an increase in the Fed funds rate. As indicated before, the US Fed ended its quantitative easing programme in October 2014 and is expected to gradually increase its policy interest rate from around summer of 2015. At current interest rates, US dollar assets are more attractive to TT dollar assets, prompting movements of portfolio capital in search of higher yields. We need to stay well ahead of the curve if we are to enhance the appeal of TT dollar assets. Second, headline inflation is accelerating, reaching just shy of 10 percent double-digit territory in October 2014, up from 3 percent at the start of the year. This was the highest headline inflation rate since July 2012, when I assumed office as Governor. The pick-up in headline inflation is mainly due to an escalation in food price inflation, which is currently hitting almost 20 percent. Rising food prices reflect lower domestic agricultural output partly due to the cessation of planting by Caroni Green Limited as a consequence of its prolonged organizational restructuring. With the recent heavy rainfall and flooding in some parts of Trinidad, we expect further increases in food crop prices. Looking ahead, higher public spending through the expansionary 2014/2015 Budget is already adding to elevated liquidity levels (currently nearly $8 billion) and may further push up core inflationary pressures. Third, the non-energy sector has delivered fairly respectable growth for 14 consecutive quarters to September 2014 and the near-term outlook is for continued steady performance in non-energy output. This suggests the non- energy sector is developing enough resilience to withstand a gradual increase in interest rates. In addition, growth is strengthening in the United States, and this augurs for CARICOM countries which are the major market for our non- energy exports. Apart from increases to the Repo rate, Central Bank has been very active over the past year managing excess liquidity. The main source of this liquidity arises from financing Government’s net domestic budget deficit. For the year-to-date, net domestic fiscal injections added over $11 billion into the system, while the maturity of two Central Government bonds previously issued for liquidity absorption purposes, also returned approximately $1.5 billion into the system. In order to effectively manage liquidity levels, the Bank utilized several tools at its disposal. Given the increased limits under the Treasury Bills and Notes Acts, over the period January – October 2014 the Central Bank intensified its use of open market operations and withdrew $10.7 billion from the banking system. Of this amount, $7 ½ billion in open market securities were issued to sterilize or lock away the liquidity arising from an extraordinary, one-off purchase of US$1.175 billion in foreign exchange from a bank. In addition, Central Bank rolled over three commercial banks’ fixed deposits totalling $4.5 billion and facilitated the issue of a $1 billion liquidity sterilization Treasury bond in June 2014. Further, Central Bank sales of foreign exchange to authorized dealers indirectly removed $9.1 billion from the system over the review period. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  The Bank plans to re-open the un-issued portion ($440 million) of the $1 billion liquidity Treasury bond issued in August 2013 as well as use other liquidity absorption measures to rein in excess liquidity in coming months. Short-term prospects I would like to turn now to the outlook for 2015. We are facing weaker global growth prospects with significant downside risks. Perhaps the most immediate downside risk to Trinidad and Tobago stems from market volatility about the future path of US monetary policy. Against this backdrop, Central Bank’s outlook is circumspect for 2015. Several factors support central bank’s 2015 outlook: • First, we expect energy production to return to more reasonable levels next year, providing a firmer boost to economic growth. This, of course, is dependent on many factors. So far, both bpTT and BGTT, the two main gas producers, have given no indication of any major planned supply disruptions. We expect some resolution to the on-going negotiation of gas supply contracts. In addition, oil production appears to have stabilized driven by Petrotrin and the smaller, independent producers. • Second, we expect the non-energy sector to maintain its respectable growth performance. With general elections due in 2015, construction activity is likely to remain strong even if Government slows down its heavy capital expenditure programme which plays a critical path in providing fiscal stimulus to the economy. This, combined with other projects undertaken by the private sector, is expected to further boost non-energy activity. • Third, we are guarded in our 2015 outlook, as results from the third Business Confidence Survey, conducted by Central Bank and Arthur Lok Jack Graduate School of Business, once again point to cautious optimism among the local business community. Just over half of respondents anticipate improvements in the local economy over the coming year, while 65 percent expect their financial outlook to improve over the next 12 months. Businesses in Central Trinidad and in Tobago remained the most confident about the business and economic outlook in the short-term. Conclusion As I conclude, I know many of you will leave here today with the ½ percent growth in our economy as the number on your mind, and the projected growth that didn’t happen. What you need to contemplate as you walk out of here is this: the biggest threat to our economy’s growth prospects at this time will not come from the weak performance of the energy sector nor will it come from falling oil prices. The peril that has the potential to test us the most in 2015 will come from those storm clouds gathering over increases in US interest rates. Two consecutive increases in the Repo rate by Central Bank will mean higher lending rates. However, it is difficult and painful action needed to shield the Trinidad and Tobago economy from the murky weather ahead. Central Bank will continue to make the difficult and tough choices to help keep our economic house in order. I thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Richard W Fisher: Monetary policy and an annual Texas economic review Remarks by Mr Richard W Fisher, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, before the Dallas Business Club, Dallas, Texas, 3 December 2014. *      *      * The charts can be found at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas’ website  The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. Thank you, Alden [McCall]. I feel right at home in a room full of MBAs. As many of you know, I am not a PhD economist like the majority of my colleagues sitting on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). I admire my colleagues tremendously for their intellectual capacity and their well-trained insights into the dismal science of economics and the arcana of monetary policy, but I am proud of just being an MBA. I was privileged to attend all those schools Alden mentioned: the Naval Academy, Harvard and Oxford. But I feel that the MBA program at Stanford Business School prepared me best for my career as a banker, a money market operator, and for the past decade, a policymaker at the Federal Reserve. (Though plebe year at Annapolis probably best equipped me for the sleep deprivation and the pressure we operated under during the financial crisis). So Alden, I begin with a tip of the hat to the MBAs you have assembled this evening. I am going to talk about Texas tonight, this being my annual report on the status of the Texas economy. I will walk you through a series of slides that illustrate the strength of the Texas economy, a series of economic records we have set this year, and to provide a balanced view, some of the growing pains that we are encountering. But first, I want to make a comment on monetary policy.  Thinking outside the box It strikes me as timely for the Fed to consider implementing one of the possible options under the “normalization principles” the FOMC articulated in September: allowing our security holdings to run off as the bonds in our massive portfolio mature.1 Before you jump out of your skin at this “radical” thought, let me ask you to consider the following. The 10-year Treasury note has rallied in price and declined in yield to 2.29 percent. German 10-year bunds, the equivalent market-anchoring European security, are trading to yield 0.74 percent; the Japanese 10-year yields 0.42 percent. The spread between the U.S. and the German sovereign yields is slightly narrower than it was at the end of third quarter 2014, but it remains historically large and attractive for investors.2 Hold that thought. Now, if you read page C3 of today’s Wall Street Journal, specifically the article titled “Watchdog Warns of Risks in Markets” about the risks of a repeat of the bond market turmoil of October and concerns about market stability as seen through the eyes of the Office of                                                 1  The FOMC’s “Policy Normalization Principles and Plans” released on Sept. 17 is available at www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm. 2  Over the past 15 years, the U.S. long rate has averaged about 40 basis points higher than the German long rate. Since January 2013, the yield spread has widened by 110 basis points to about 1.50 percent. Over the same period, German 10-year inflation expectations have dropped from 1.9 percent to 1.0 percent, or 90 basis points. U.S. 10-year CPI inflation expectations have dropped from 2.3 percent to 2.2 percent – just 10 basis points. So it is worth noting that the drop in German inflation expectations relative to U.S. expectations can account for most of the widening of the yield spread between these two sovereigns. For investors who measure performance in terms of nominal returns or returns against nominal indexes, however, the currently widened spread is relatively attractive. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Financial Research (a bureaucracy of some 225 people and growing, created by the Dodd-Frank law), you would have noted the following sentences: “A reduction in securities that are available to lend against in financial markets – such as Treasury bonds and asset-backed securities – also is fueling...volatility. The securitization markets have shrunk since the financial crisis and the Federal Reserve has further reduced the amount of available securities by snapping up trillions of dollars in bonds in recent years.” Let me repeat that last clause: The Federal Reserve has further reduced the amount of available securities by snapping up trillions of dollars in bonds in recent years. To be precise, $1.7 trillion of Treasuries and asset-backed securities were purchased under QE3, on top of the $2 trillion purchased under the previous rounds of quantitative easing. To be sure, we have instituted programs to counter this problem: We have developed sophisticated operations whereby we sell assets in our portfolio and promise to buy them back at a later period. This is known as our overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility, and its net effect is to shift longer-term securities out of our portfolio and into the hands of market operators. This has expanded the traditional reach of our New York desk, where the aggregate portfolios of the 12 Federal Reserve banks are traded under directives given it by the FOMC. Thus the Fed's reach – some would say intrusion – into trading markets has been expanded. Now, let's bring together these observations with the thought I asked you to hold earlier. It strikes me that given current circumstances, it would do no harm to start slowly trimming our holdings by letting them roll off as they mature. My sense is that presently, we could do this: (a)  While still maintaining the attractiveness of investing in Treasury and agency securities relative to other highly liquid sovereign markets and not sparking significant increases in rates; (b)  Simultaneously providing some alleviation of the collateral shortage we have helped create, and; (c)  Reducing the need for the New York desk to perform the complicated jujitsu we at the FOMC have tasked it with in creating alternative strategies that stretch its traditional mandate and which may give further rise to congressional criticism of the Federal Reserve and a New York Fed that some influential lawmakers already consider to be either too big for its britches or not being able to fill out its suit. This would make crystal clear to Congress and the public our stated desire to make the ON RRP facility a temporary one that will be eliminated when it is no longer necessary. Mind you, the above proposition does not imply any rush to raise the fed funds rate or its equivalents, such as the rate on excess reserves. That will depend on progress made toward meeting our dual objectives of maintaining price stability around the FOMC’s 2 percent target while facilitating full employment. Nor should it be interpreted as a criticism of the very able people we have on the trading desk: I hold them in highest regard; they perform their duty admirably. It simply is addressed at seizing the moment to kill three birds with one stone and do so with minimum violence to the market. Of course, a more effective way to put collateral back into the market would be to sell outright a carefully measured portion of our portfolio. There could even be room for the market to stomach this in its current condition. But in my opinion, this might be too radical a departure from the exit principles we announced and would risk undermining confidence in the FOMC. This is my personal view. I realize it represents thinking “outside the box”. But in my final four months at the Fed, I plan to urge my colleagues to think more outside the box in this and other ways in the interest of securing sound money, a sound economy and sound markets. And now to some Texas brag. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Texas brag Allow me to walk you through some charts and comment on each on them. Thank you. And now in the great tradition of central bankers, I would be happy to avoid answering any questions you and your colleagues might have. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Improving and expanding Malaysia’s cross-border financial flows and capital market transactions Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Official Launch of the Expansion of SWIFT Office in Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur, 24 November 2014. *      *      * It is my pleasure to be here today on the occasion of the opening of this expanded SWIFT Kuala Lumpur Corporate Services Centre. We are most honoured with the presence of Her Royal Highness Princess Astrid of Belgium. Allow me to, first of all, welcome Her Royal Highness Princess Astrid of Belgium. It is also my pleasure to welcome His Excellency Didier Reynders, Federal Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs and European Affairs of Belgium, and His Excellency Pieter De Crem, Federal Secretary of State for Foreign Trade of Belgium to Kuala Lumpur. It is my honour to address such a distinguished gathering including the practitioners from the financial fraternity. We are pleased to welcome the expansion of the SWIFT office in Kuala Lumpur. Malaysia has aspired to be an important destination for international corporations and organisations to operate in. Malaysia has well-developed infrastructure, a dynamic workforce and cost-competitive environment to provide an enabling environment for mutually reinforcing benefits. Malaysia is now home to more than 5,000 foreign companies from more than 40 countries. Additionally, it also includes global and regional shared services hubs that serve world-leading financial services providers and international corporations. Malaysia is also the host to a number of the international institutions in the area of finance that include the Islamic Financial Services Board, and more recently, the Alliance for Financial Inclusion. We are very pleased that SWIFT, an important market infrastructure service provider to the global financial community, has selected Kuala Lumpur as its Corporate Services Centre. Malaysia’s financial sector has in this recent decade made significant strides in facilitating the country’s cross-border economic linkages with other economies. Malaysia is part of a vibrant region, comprising ASEAN and of the greater Asia. The region has prevailing strong foundations and significant growth prospects with strong inter regional connectivity. Malaysia’s volume of cross-border trade and foreign exchange settlements with ASEAN economies alone has grown at an average rate of 10% in the recent four years, reflecting Malaysia’s increasing integration with the regional markets. A vibrant foreign exchange market has supported this growth, where the overall Malaysian foreign exchange market volume has increased by more than five-fold in a period of 8 years to USD11.1 billion per day, at a ratio of about 6 times of total trade. Like most regional blocs, the integration process for ASEAN seeks to promote greater regional connectivity which will in turn expand and reinforce the region’s growth potential. The aim of reinforcing the regional linkages in the payment and settlement systems is to enable the establishment of risk mitigation mechanisms such as Payment versus Payment (PvP) and Delivery versus Payment (DvP) to reduce the foreign exchange and securities settlement risk. Since the ASEAN region is largely within the same time zone, the ultimate aim is to achieve same day settlement and funds availability. In this regard, the ASEAN Working Committees have been working to create an enabling environment to promote efficient and effective linkages for intermediation of cross-border financial flows and capital market transactions. A crucial pre-requisite to this is the adoption of common messaging standards and platform such as that provided by the SWIFT global messaging standard to facilitate interoperability and efficient processing of transactions. Market infrastructure service providers, and operators of payment systems, and the banking industry, have a significant role in supporting this financial integration process, while ensuring safety, reliability and security. I understand SWIFT and the Association of Islamic Banking 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Institutions Malaysia and other stakeholders in the Malaysian Islamic financial community are also collaborating on the development of a new rulebook for the usage of SWIFT messages for Islamic financial transactions. This will provide an efficient platform for the exchange of messages for Islamic finance transactions based on such standardised formats and bring us a step further at the frontier of Islamic finance. Let me now turn to the developments in Malaysia’s payment system. The Malaysian payment system is undergoing a major transformation. Like other successful financial market infrastructure globally, concerted efforts are being made to enhance the reliability, security, efficiency and inter-connectedness of the Malaysian payment system for the benefit of all stakeholders in the payment value chain. For large value payment system, RENTAS, the systemically important payment system for transfer and settlement of high value interbank funds and scripless securities transactions, is continuously being enhanced to support cross-border payments and settlements. In this regard, a Payment versus Payment infrastructure for interbank settlement of USD/RM trade transactions was implemented in 2006 in collaboration with Hong Kong Monetary Authority and a cross-border link with Euroclear was established in 2012. In addition, RENTAS has also been equipped with the capability to support Renminbi denominated funds and securities transactions. On the retail payment front, measures are also geared towards enhancing the efficiency, accessibility and quality of retail payment infrastructure and services. To this end, Bank Negara Malaysia has focused on creating the enabling environment to accelerate the country’s migration to electronic payments (e-payments), to enhance economic efficiency and increase our competitiveness. This has been done by establishing a conducive pricing and incentive structure, enhancing the e-payment infrastructure and promoting awareness and confidence in the use of e-payments. These initiatives to modernise our financial system has already begun to yield results bringing about the desired cost savings. In concluding my remarks, let me congratulate SWIFT on this occasion of the expansion of their operations here. I also wish the management and staff of the Kuala Lumpur Corporate Services Centre every success in your endeavours and look forward to its contribution to our economy as we advance forward in this significantly challenging and rapidly evolving economic environment. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Yuba Raj Khatiwada: Development of regional capital markets in Asia – issues and challenges Speech by Dr Yuba Raj Khatiwada, Governor of the Central Bank of Nepal and Chairman of the SEACEN Board of Governors, at the 50th SEACEN Governors’ Conference, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, 20 November 2014. *      *      * 1. Asia is the fastest growing economic region of the world and the engine of global economic growth. But its growth is still dependent on (i) external demand from advanced economies and (ii) external capital and direct investment. The region has the highest saving rate and keeps on funding the fiscal deficits of many economies of the advanced world. At the same time, the region lacks sufficient long term fund for promoting investment for high economic growth. Sustaining high economic growth in the Asian region requires huge investment in both public and private sectors. Big infrastructure projects are likely to demand high amount of capital even above the capacity of domestic market; and resorting to international market for the same is not always practical. This is where the development of regional capital markets in Asia is called for. 2. A regional capital market implies that there are no barriers to the movement of capital and the provision of investment services within a geographic region. This implies that domestic savers find suitable instruments for saving in the region and investors/issuers can invest or raise capital in other countries along with domestic markets, all knowing that they will encounter broadly similar regulations, information, trading systems, settlement systems, accounting standards and governance standards throughout the region. While development of regional capital market is necessary to promote investment and economic growth in Asia, it is also instrumental to strengthen domestic capital markets and provide liquidity, scale, and capacity and ultimately put Asia in the position to integrate with global market. However, the development of capital markets in Asia has not kept pace to that of economic growth in the region relative to other regions of the world. This has led to the Asian investors’ continued dependence on the markets of advanced economies for mobilizing long term capital. 3. Developing a regional capital market leads to the convergence of risk adjusted returns on financial assets of similar maturity across the region. Further, it helps the deepening of domestic capital markets, increases competition, and widens the range of instruments available for savings and investments. These changes, in turn, lead to more efficiency and innovation in the provision of services to savers, investors, and issuers. More innovation in such financial services extends the range of products to attract a wider range of participants, leading to greater financial inclusion, which is a big policy challenge at the current state of financial development. 4. There are substantial benefits to be derived from regional integration of capital markets. A regional capital market brings greater portfolio and risk diversification by providing domestic individual and institutional investors and savers a wider range of investment opportunities. As savers can diversify risk by choosing varied instruments, investors can have an optional mix of debt and equity. Besides, retail investors will benefit as costs are reduced and innovative providers compete for their business. Cross border collective investment schemes will be able to reach a wider investor base, leading to economies of scale. Increased competition will bring innovations and ensure that investment products more closely reflect the needs of retail investors. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  5. Individual countries will benefit from more efficient, more liquid, broader, and cheaper capital markets. Easier, cheaper capital raisings encourage companies to raise money for investment through public issues. More public issuances reduce reliance on bank borrowing. More equity issuance develops corporate profiles so companies can further diversify their issuance. Overall, integrated capital market means better allocation of capital, enhanced portfolio diversification, more efficient sharing of risks and lower cost of capital. 6. A regional capital market also brings some substantial risks, which should not be ignored. With market integration, institutions and individuals invest in new markets and instruments across different countries. This increases the possibility of faster and multiple contagion of systemic risk. As evidenced in the Asian financial crisis of 1997 and global financial crisis of 2008, in an integrated regional capital market, shocks arising in any one economy could easily and quickly transmit to other economy. Capital market integration can lead to crises even in countries with sound fundamentals and even in the absence of imperfections in their capital markets. If a country becomes dependent on foreign capital, sudden shifts in foreign capital flows can create financing difficulties and economic downturns. 7. The development of the regional capital markets- both debt and equity- is contingent upon many factors. The depth of debt market is determined by the presence and level of transaction of convertible currency denominated long term loans and bonds market while the level of equity market is determined by the nature and volume of issues and secondary markets in convertible equity instruments. While low level of Asian financial market development is contingent on foreign exchange regulations, the low regional market integration is reflected in poor cross border presence of banks and financial institutions. 8. Along with infrastructure development and investment banks, cross border presence of commercial banks is also instrumental in the deepening of the regional capital market. Cross border banking is, of course, determined by trade and investment flows. Trade and foreign direct investment (FDI) in Asia – both intra-regional and international – is growing by more than 10 per cent, almost twice the growth in G-7 countries. But the growth of financial integration is still limited with home country banking business being more than three fourth of their services. Given the intra-regional trade flow, trade finance implies greater transaction banking opportunity, but the financial institutions have yet to grab the opportunity. As such, cross border presence and transactions of banks depends upon the size of capital and volume of transaction. Further, regulatory and supervisory issues along with growing compliance requirement on anti-money laundering, know your customer (KYC) and level of home and host authority coordination are important determinants of cross border banking presence particularly when it is the case for branch banking. 9. Asian region is the highest saver in the world and thus a potential source of capital market development from the supply side. The volume and growth of sovereign wealth funds in the public sector, provident and pension funds, insurance and corporate profit allocation funds, and high savings at the household level indicate that there is flush of funds available in the Asian market for investment in long term instruments –both debt and equity related. In the demand side, Asia requires huge investment in infrastructure projects to attain and sustain high economic growth. Such infrastructure projects suffer from both equity and debt financing challenges. Equity financing is linked to risk taking by the savers who want to invest while debt financing related to the limitations of banks and financial institutions to invest for long term. The banks which are flush with funds also often are reluctant to perform their term transformation role – converting short term savings into long term loans. Cross border financing becomes even more difficult by the restrictions on capital account transactions; and this is the reason why domestic banks are sometimes 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  flush with investible fund while at the same time local projects are looking for long term debt financing services. As such banks are worried about two aspects in financial dealings: (i) currency mismatch in transaction and (ii) maturity mismatch in their balance sheets – short term deposits versus long term loans. Addressing the first issue is related to currency convertibility in cross border transactions while the second is related to regulatory and macroprudential norms along with the risk taking capacities of the banks. Policy makers thinking about developing a stronger Asian regional capital market will have to assess this situation in depth. 10. Various potential barriers, which may be related to regulations, taxation, or monopoly, pose serious challenges towards the capital market integration. Regulatory barriers like exchange controls and restriction on foreign listings restrict the movement of capital towards its efficient use. Taxation barriers alter the economic comparison between different activities or participants leading to narrower markets and higher costs. Monopolistic structures like limitations on the total number of stock exchange members prevent access to particular parts of the market, reduce competition, and increase costs for all users. 11. Also important are fairness barriers and information barriers. Fairness barrier such as explicit discrimination against foreigners or a perception that such discrimination exists deter them from entering the market. Likewise information barriers could exist when there are significant differences in accounting standards or disclosure requirements, and lack of transparency of trading, which prevent nonlocals from seeing the state of the market. A multidimensional approach with strong regional cooperation is required to overcome such potential barriers and move towards the regional integration. Efforts should be directed towards harmonizing rules and practices by addressing major differences in laws, regulations, and tax treatments that prevent investors from building regional portfolios. Emphasis should be given to convergence with globally accepted standards and best practices, which will also facilitate easier global integration later. 12. A major challenge faced by Asian nations towards developing a regional capital market is the building of necessary market infrastructures. Establishing links between national clearing and payment systems, creation of regional credit rating agencies and benchmarks should be emphasized to enhance the depth and liquidity of capital markets. 13. One more challenge to the Asian capital market is the limitation of bond market. Currently, more than 80 per cent of the Asian bond market is contributed by government bonds. Corporate bonds issues are still limited and companies are often inclined to bank loan financing than resorting to the issuance of bonds. In future course of time, government bond market is expected to saturate for the reason that (i) public debts are on the rise and such debt levels do not allow governments to incur high deficits and issue bonds to finance the deficit, and (ii) the past fiscal profligacy and subsequent macroeconomic imbalances of some of the Asian countries have taught strong lessons on not incurring high fiscal deficits. Therefore, if the development of the Asian capital market in terms of bonds is concerned, there is a need to look into the corporate bonds market and that also at the cross border level. Again the provisions of currency convertibility in the capital accounts would be instrumental in this regard. 14. So far as equity markets are concerned, many larger economies of this Asian region have already been able to raise capital from the international market. Further liberalization of the foreign exchange regime and developing a regional market for the same would be instrumental to see that such capital could be mobilized at the regional level. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  15. While developing the regional capital market, the Asian region would help global financial stability in three ways: (i) by promoting economic growth in the region to support the financial sector growth and eventually avoiding financial crisis as in the recent past, (ii) by retaining the savings of the region within the same region and avoiding a big vulnerability related to global capital outflows, inflows and their reversals, and (iii) by reducing the load of excess financial flows to the European and American markets and preventing the banks and financial institutions in these economies from over-leveraging with the availability of easy funds. 16. Overall, development of regional capital market in Asia has remained slow compared with the pace of economic growth. This is also because of the limited cross border presence of banks and financial institutions. As such, banks which also play a critical role in capital market development in terms of their equity trade and long term credit flows have limited cross border presence. Financial integration and the cross-border equity investment within the Asian region have grown only at a modest degree and domestic bond markets have grown considerably in some countries are dominated by government bonds. Improved macroeconomic conditions, proper credit ratings, stable exchange rates, and gradual capital account liberalization have all helped to attract foreign capital into the Asian region’s domestic bond markets. However, as there are limited secondary market opportunities for the bonds, investment on bonds has been a distraction from liquidity management perspective. On the other hand, as volatile global market conditions can lead to sudden withdrawals of capital during periods of heightened global uncertainty or financial stress as witnessed in 2008 onwards, the region’s policymakers require having at their disposal a broad array of policy instruments for maintaining financial stability, both at the domestic and regional levels. 17. As the global financial crisis of 2008 has shown, greater the financial integration – greater is the risk of cross-border contagion of financial distress. A strong framework for prudential regulation and supervision is thus necessary to ensure that risks arising from integration are being assessed and managed well. Move towards risk-based supervision, and changes in prudential regulation and supervisory oversight to address cross-border activities would be important steps in this regard. 18. For successful integration, economic fundamentals need to be and remain strong. Local markets need to be properly regulated and supervised. If market fundamentals deteriorate, speculative attacks will occur with capital outflows generated by both domestic and foreign investors. The benefits of integration would not be equally spread among the countries of the region. Opportunities and challenges exist for all types countries. It is likely that the more innovative and efficient countries will be most successful in the new environment. The likely impacts, both beneficial and less beneficial, will affect different countries in different ways. 19. Finally, talking about regional capital market, the presence of regional financial institutions is a must. The recent initiative for the establishment of Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank is a welcome step in this regard. Equally important will be the initiatives for higher level of capital account convertibility of the currencies of the larger economies. Besides, further financial liberalization and arrangements for cross border oversight and supervisory functions will be equally important. Harmonization of the regulations regarding AML/CFT, KYC, taxation, use of IT system, and statistical reporting are some other prerequisites for the development of an integrated regional capital market. We, the South East Asian Central Bank (SEACEN) Governors, can collectively take up such initiatives through the platform of SEACEN. Let us work together towards the evolution of the regional financial market that caters the financing need of Asia’s vibrant economic growth. Thank You. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Salvatore Rossi: Monetary policy and the independence of central banks – the experience of the European Central Bank in the global crisis Speech by Mr Salvatore Rossi, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the University of Verona, University complex of Vicenza, Vicenza, 19 November 2014. *      *      * 1. The independence of central banks in theory and in history1 We have been talking about the independence of central banks almost from the time of their inception. In an essay of 1824 David Ricardo accused the Bank of England, founded more than a century earlier, of submitting to the power of the executive.2 Ricardo identified the three pillars of central bank independence: institutional separation of the power to create money from the power to spend it; a ban on the monetary funding of the State budget; and the central bank’s obligation to give an account of its monetary policy. Ricardo’s suggestions were taken up by the Brussels Conference of 1920, held under the aegis of the League of Nations with the aim of identifying the best policies to counter the economic and financial crisis that followed the First World War. Price stability was indicated as the primary objective of monetary policy but – as the Final Report of the conference maintained – if it was to be achieved, it had to be entrusted to central banks that were independent of their governments.3 These principles were forgotten for many years after the Second World War. The conviction that a certain degree of inflation was necessary to support employment and growth came to the fore in economic thought and in the minds of policy makers. In many countries monetary policy was dominated by budgetary requirements (fiscal dominance) and central banks acted as buyers of last resort of government securities when they came onto the primary market.4 The independence of central banks enjoyed little institutional protection. The stagflation of the 1970s suddenly brought to light what farsighted economists, such as Edmund Phelps, had already foreseen in the previous decade:5 in the short term there may be a trade-off between inflation and unemployment, but not in the long term. This radical rethinking of the theory was accompanied by profound changes in the organization and behaviour of central banks. Economic literature once again looked at price stability as a supreme value and pointed to two prerequisites: the independence of the institutions called to guarantee it, i.e. central banks, and the adoption on their part of explicit objectives.                                                 1  This section is based in part on Salvatore Rossi (2013), “Post-crisis challenges to central bank independence”, speech given at the LBMA/LPPM Precious Metals Conference http://www.bancaditalia.it/interventi/intaltri_mdir/300913/rossi_300913.pdf. 2  David Ricardo (1824), Plan for the Establishment of a National Bank, John Murray, London.  3  Franco Spinelli and Carmine Trecroci (2006), “Maastricht: New and Old Rules”, Open Economies Review, Vol. 17, pp. 477–492.  4  For the Bank of Italy, see Eugenio Gaiotti and Alessandro Secchi (2013), “Monetary policy and fiscal dominance in Italy from the early 1970s to the adoption of the euro: a review”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 141.  5  See Edmund S. Phelps (1967), “Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and Optimal Unemployment over Time”, Economica, Vol. 34, pp. 254–281 and Edmund S. Phelps (1968), “Money-Wage Dynamics and Labor-Market equilibrium”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 76, pp. 678–711.  
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The need for a central bank to declare an explicit objective, thus making it more difficult for the political authorities to change it, was already mentioned in an article by Milton Friedman of 1962 entitled, significantly, “Should there be an independent monetary authority?”6 Friedman asks “how else can we establish a monetary system that is stable, free from irresponsible governmental tinkering and incapable of being used as a source of power to threaten economic and political freedom.” He counted on independent experts, although he ruled out entrusting them with wide powers of discretion, preferring fixed rules that assign precise tasks and objectives to monetary policy. In the 1970s Robert Lucas, Thomas Sargent and others complicated the picture: they did not think it was sufficient to assign the task of maintaining price stability to the central bank; private agents have rational expectations, therefore monetary policy must be time consistent to be credible.7 A government will always be tempted to exploit the short-term trade-off between growth and inflation, without worrying about the long-term costs. To avoid this risk a central bank has to be really independent.8 Numerous empirical checks supported these theoretical assumptions.9 2. The European system of central banks The Maastricht Treaty, signed in 1992, drew on this new paradigm. Article 127 of the current version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, which incorporated the principles enshrined in the Treaty of Maastricht, establishes that “The primary objective of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) … shall be to maintain price stability”.10 The Governing Council of the European Central Bank (ECB) later explained that price stability should be understood as an inflation rate below, but close to, 2 per cent in the medium term. Instead independence is affirmed in Article 130, which states that “…neither the European Central Bank, nor a national central bank, nor any member of their decision-making bodies shall seek or take instructions from Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies, from any government of a Member State or from any other body. The Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies and the governments of the Member States undertake to respect this principle and not to seek to influence the members of the decision-making bodies of the European Central Bank or of the national central banks in the performance of their tasks.” The Treaty thus establishes the obligations both for the monetary policy authorities, which cannot bend to political pressure, and for governments, which cannot exercise it.                                                 6  Milton Friedman (1962), “Should There Be an Independent Monetary Authority?”, in Leland B. Yeager (ed.) In Search of a Monetary Constitution, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  7  See, among others, Robert Barro and David Gordon (1983), “Rules, Discretion, and Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 101–122. 8  See, for example, Kenneth Rogoff (1985), “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 100, No. 4, pp. 1169–1189 and Carl E. Walsh (1995) “Optimal Contracts for Central Bankers”, American Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 1, pp. 150–167. 9  Alberto Alesina and Lawrence H. Summers (1993), “Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 25, No. 2,  pp. 151–162. 10  Article 127 also states that “Without prejudice to the objective of price stability, the ESCB shall support the general economic policies in the Union with a view to contributing to the achievement of the objectives of the union as laid down in Article 3 of the Treaty on European Union”, which include full employment. On the ranking of the ESCB’s objectives, see, however, Perassi (2011), “La Banca centrale europea”, published in Enciclopedia del diritto, Annali IV, Giuffrè Editore, Milan. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  It is interesting to note that the Treaty endorsed the proposal that Ricardo had formulated almost two centuries earlier, providing the legal basis for the three principles he developed. The institutional separation between the public powers of creating and spending money was established under Article 128, which states that “The European Central Bank shall have the exclusive right to authorize the issue of euro banknotes within the union.” Monetary funding of the State is prohibited by Article 123: “Overdraft facilities or any other type of credit facility … in favour of Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies, central governments, regional, local or other public authorities, other bodies governed by public law, or public undertakings of Member States shall be prohibited, as shall the purchase directly from them … of debt instruments.” Lastly, Article 284 obliges the ECB to send an annual report to the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission.11 This reporting requirement, linked with a clear mandate, means that the monetary policy authority can be evaluated ex-post and is therefore accountable. So far we have looked at the regulations. What about the substance? A questionnaire was sent out at the end of the 1990s to a large number of central banks, which were asked what independence meant to them. Some 80 per cent of the replies to this question mentioned the freedom of the central bank to choose the most suitable instruments for its objectives;12 in short, real operational independence. We should not be surprised: it has been said that the practice of central banking is more of an art than a science.13 In the field of the natural sciences, specific operational instruments follow from quantitative analysis. Monetary policy also makes use of models, but it cannot do without qualitative evaluations. Paul Samuelson said, “I would rather have Bob Solow than an econometric model, but I’d rather have Bob Solow with an econometric model than Bob Solow without one.” The Statute of the ESCB and the ECB permits them to use a wide range of instruments and to choose any method of monetary control they consider appropriate.14 We know however that real functional independence can only be evaluated on the basis of past experience: we need to check that the instruments available to the central bank, albeit numerous, are not in fact insufficient to address unexpected problems and to be sure that at the moment the need emerges for new instruments there will not be any constraints on operational autonomy. 3. The Eurosystem and the global financial crisis The long period known as the Great Moderation, lasting up to the outbreak of the global financial crisis, did not provide a good test of the efficacy of the Statute and operating arrangements of the Eurosystem. Central banks in all the advanced countries successfully                                                 11  Other reporting obligations are dealt with in Article 15 of the Statute of the ESCB and the ECB, which requires the ECB to draw up and publish reports on the activities of the ESCB at least quarterly. 12  Lavan Mahadeva and Gabriel Sterne (2000), Monetary Frameworks in a Global Context, Routledge, London. There were 60 replies, of which 23 from advanced countries and 37 from emerging and developing countries. 13  See Alan Blinder (1997), “What Central Bankers Could Learn from Academics-and Vice Versa”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 11, No. 22, pp. 17. 14  Article 18 of the Statute of the ESCB and the ECB attached to the Treaty affirms that they may “operate in the financial markets by buying and selling outright (spot and forward) or under repurchase agreement and by lending or borrowing claims and marketable instruments, whether in Community or in non-Community currencies, as well as precious metal and conduct credit operations with credit institutions and other market participants, with lending being based on adequate collateral.” Article 20 authorizes the Governing Council to decide, by a majority of two thirds of the votes cast, upon the use of such other operational methods of monetary control as it sees fit.  
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  preserved price stability with conventional policy instruments, thanks to such formidable facilitating factors as the rise of the emerging economies and the intense downward pressure on prices that they exerted. The crisis changed everything. The exceptional monetary expansion that was required of the central banks, still haunted by the spectre of the errors committed during and after the Great Depression in the 1930s, required unconventional policy measures: unlimited provision of liquidity, purchases of government and private-sector securities on the secondary market, currency swaps, forward guidance, and much more. The effective functional independence of the Eurosystem was demonstrated by the speed with which it deployed a panoply of unconventional measures in response to the crisis. The ECB was the first central bank to counter interbank market strains with injections of liquidity, totaling €100 billion already in August 2007.15 After the default of Lehman Brothers, when the crisis reached a magnitude that prompted fears of the collapse of the entire global financial system, the ECB not only rapidly lowered its policy rates but also introduced fixed-rate, full-allotment auctions for central bank refinancing and broadened the range of assets eligible as collateral. In this way, as early as 2008 the European central bank had expanded its balance sheet by 60 per cent.16 In 2009 and 2010, the severe disruption of financial systems produced by the crisis and the consequent recession were compounded, in Europe, by the “sovereign debt” crisis of some euro-area countries. The revelation of the true state of the public finances in Greece resulted in the collapse of international investor confidence – at first just in Greece; but then, in rapid succession, doubts arose over the sustainability of the public debt in Ireland, because of the bursting of the real estate bubble there and the consequent banking crisis, and in Portugal, given that country’s persistent macroeconomic disequilibria. Beginning in the summer of 2011, following the announcement of the bail-in of private investors in the restructuring of the Greek debt, the strains turned systemic and spread to Spain, which was suffering a sharp contraction of the real estate market that impacted on the most exposed banks; and lastly to Italy, vulnerable for its large public debt and apparent inability to generate economic growth, even in the longer term. Up until then, the illusion had prevailed that the Eurosystem could conduct monetary policy simply treating the euro area as a single nation. The doubts voiced by some analysts about the logical consistency of such a model had been muted by the incontrovertible successes of a decade of single monetary policy. Let me recall two of those expressions of doubt: Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa’s “currency without a State”17 and Carlo Azeglio Ciampi’s “limp”. Ciampi observed that “at the very moment the euro was created, it was born with a limp, an asymmetry between monetary policy and economic policy, the former assigned to the European Central Bank and the latter still largely the province of the national governments. This limp, which we denounced some time ago, is being corrected too slowly.”18 Instead, it was thought that this hobbled Europe was more than good enough to keep up with the swift pace of the modern economy.                                                 15  On the morning of 9 August 2007, following the sudden drying-up of trading and the consequent rise in short-term money market rates, the ECB intervened with a fine-tuning operation of one day maturity, allotting some €95 billion to 49 banks. Similar operations were conducted in the days that followed. 16  Martina Cecioni, Giuseppe Ferrero and Alessandro Secchi (2011), “Unconventional monetary policy in theory and in practice”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 102.  17  He used the expression on a number of occasions. For one, see Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa (2004), L’euro e la sua banca centrale. L’unione dopo l’Unione, il Mulino, Bologna. 18  Public address as part of President Ciampi’s meetings with political, civil and military authorities in Pistoia, 16 September 2002. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  The sovereign debt crisis was a watershed. It made it glaringly clear that the incompleteness of European integration could compromise monetary policy, hindering its transmission between countries and undermining the central bank’s functional independence. This for three principal reasons. First, the sovereign debt crisis stirred fears that the euro could break up. An eventuality that until then had been judged to be of probability zero now, in international eyes, entered the sphere of possibility. The consequence, which materialized mostly in 2011, was investors’ demand for high premiums on government bonds in the countries of southern Europe. The lack of fiscal union thus came to the fore, and the policy limp could be seen in all its destabilizing potential. Second, this resulted in an accentuated segmentation of the European financial market along national lines, marking a brusque regression in the laborious process of integration that had been advancing for a decade-and-a-half. The flows of capital between the North and the South of what should be a single currency area were interrupted.19 Third, all of this engendered a corresponding segmentation of the banking market. The banks whose balance sheets abounded in the government securities that were under fire in the marketplace were subject to the same fears as their “sovereigns”.20 Everyone knows that banks everywhere tend to have a larger portion of their assets in their home country’s government securities. At the origin of the risks investors suddenly perceived there were also, in the countries under pressure, serious disequilibria that had built up well before the global financial crisis. These weaknesses, varying in extent from country to country, comprised excessive public or private debt, poor competitiveness, dubious prospects for economic growth, and external imbalances. The single currency had shrouded the markets’ judgments in a veil of uniformity that was pierced by the sovereign debt crisis, revealing the dissimilarities between the debtor countries. But this must not be allowed to hide the essentially systemic nature of the problems that have struck the entire area. 4.  What could the ECB do? The ECB reacted. In May 2010 it activated the Securities Market Programme for purchases of public- and private-sector securities on the secondary market; the purchases were extended to Italian and Spanish securities in the summer of 2011. In December of that year two longer-term refinancing operations were announced, with the aim of countering the effects that the strains on government securities and capital outflows were having on the wholesale funding of banks in several euro-area countries. In August 2012, amidst resurgent fears of euro reversibility, the ECB announced that it stood ready to carry out outright monetary transactions: secondary-market purchases of government securities issued by countries that agreed to abide by a European programme of financial assistance. To date, no such purchases have been made, nor have the related acts been formally adopted, pending a ruling by the European Court of Justice on the German Constitutional Court’s referral. But their announcement alone was enough to calm the markets. The effectiveness of these measures must not be underestimated. They lessened the tensions in the money and capital markets and averted a sharper contraction in credit, thereby braking the deterioration of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. According                                                 19  Martina Cecioni and Giuseppe Ferrero (2012), “Determinants of TARGET2 imbalances”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 136.  20  Paolo Angelini, Giuseppe Grande and Fabio Panetta (2014), “The negative feedback loop between banks and sovereigns”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 213.  
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  to studies by the Bank of Italy, the overall effect on Italy’s GDP of the measures I have listed can be estimated at a little less than three percentage points in the two years 2012–13.21 These measures also highlighted the operational autonomy of the Eurosystem, which was able to bring a wide array of instruments to bear on the different manifestations of the financial crisis, selecting the most suitable one case by case. However, the success of the ECB’s extraordinary measures must not make us forget the difficulties that monetary policy in the euro area has faced in recent years. The global financial crisis and the sovereign debt crisis have brought risks for the Eurosystem’s de facto independence that it would be naïve to ignore or underestimate. I will mention two of them. The first concerns financial autonomy and derives from the fact that the unconventional measures have expanded the size of the ECB’s balance sheet, though far less, at present, than those of the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan. The quality of the securities held or accepted as collateral for bank refinancing has declined. In principle, monetary measures of macroeconomic stabilization can produce both losses and profits for the central bank adopting them.22 But if a central bank made losses, its reputation would be endangered23 and its ability to pursue its objectives could be put in doubt; ultimately, there could be mounting political pressure to reduce its independence. This is especially true in the case of the Eurosystem, which not only manages a currency without a state but finds itself facing a multiplicity of states which in these years of crisis have become more sensitive to what divides them rather than strengthening what unites them. The second, and far more important, risk consists precisely in the incompleteness of the European construction. Some are calling for amendments to the Treaty in order to expand the ECB’s mandate.24 In particular, on the American example, it is urged that the objective of price stability be flanked by an explicit objective of equal status in terms of unemployment or employment levels; and that the ECB be allowed to purchase government securities directly at issue. Naturally it’s not up to me, a central banker, to say what objectives the political institutions should assign to the central bank. But these risk being false solutions to a false problem. Maintaining a moderate rate of growth in prices in the medium term like that indicated in the ECB’s objective equates to ensuring over the same time horizon that the economy operates at its potential, with physical and human capital fully utilized. Assigning the ECB a dual mandate would not imply any step forward. As for government securities purchases on the primary market, in reality this power, which can put the independence of any central bank in jeopardy, is granted to none of the central banks of the advanced countries, not even to those that have undertaken massive programmes of quantitative easing on the secondary                                                 21  Marco Casiraghi, Eugenio Gaiotti, Lisa Rodano and Alessandro Secchi (2013), “The impact of unconventional monetary policy on the Italian economy during the sovereign debt crisis”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 213. 22  Milton Friedman, “The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates”, Essays in Positive Economics, University of Chicago Press, 1953, pp. 157–203. 23  See, for example, Ulrich Bindseil, Andres Manzanares and Benedict Weller (2004), “The role of central bank capital revisited”, ECB Working Paper Series, No. 392. 24  For a discussion of the objective of financial stability and the related implications for monetary policy, see Ignazio Visco (2014), “The challenges for central banks”, Quarterly Journal of Central Banking, Vol. XXV, No. 1. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  market, such as the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England (which is subject to the constraints of the European Treaty).25 The real problem is that the euro is a currency without a state. Economic theory and the experience of other monetary unions indicate that, regardless of the formal constraints, this greatly complicates life for those responsible for a single monetary policy, especially when it is a matter of taking unconventional measures that can have significant fiscal and redistributive repercussions.26 In the absence of a single fiscal authority, some fear a redistribution “by stealth” among countries, not decided by the representative political bodies and carried out via the Eurosystem’s balance sheet. This fear, deeply felt today in the countries of northern Europe, has conditioned the use of the single monetary policy and, when it was a question of designing OMTs, imposed rigid conditionality, so as to prevent cases of “moral hazard” on the part of the countries in greatest fiscal difficulty and ultimately to impede or limit fiscal transfers between states. But what would have happened in all of Europe if in the summer of 2012 President Draghi had not given assurances that the ECB would do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro? At the time of the euro’s creation, the advisability of accompanying the single currency with a fiscal union was the subject of long debate and there was no lack of contrary opinions, grounded, paradoxically, on the protection of the nascent ECB’s independence. Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa wrote in 1999: “The fact of not being accompanied by ‘his’ minister or ‘his’ government, may make the ECB President feel more independent and safe from unwelcome influences,” however, he hastened to add: “but in the view of the market, the international community and its citizens, “a currency without a state” constitutes an anomaly.”27 The Treaty would protect the independence of the ECB well even if it faced a single fiscal authority. Indeed, in this case it would be easier to use monetary policy to respond to asymmetrical shocks, shocks hitting one or several countries of the area but not others. We have made important progress in this direction: the crisis management mechanisms, the reforms of fiscal and macroeconomic governance, and the still to be completed Banking Union.28 The question remains open: How realistic is it today to imagine further progress towards a fiscal union among the countries that wanted to give themselves a single currency? Is gradual centralization of some public functions conceivable?29 Or even just greater coordination of national budgetary policies that takes account of the situation of the euro area as a whole?30                                                 25  From Section 14 (Open-Market Operations”) of the Federal Reserve Act: “Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any bonds, notes, or other obligations which are direct obligations of the United States or which are fully guaranteed by the United States as to the principal and interest may be bought and sold without regard to maturities but only in the open market.”  26  Kevin H. O’Rourke and Alan M. Taylor (2013), “Cross of Euros”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 27, No. 3, pp. 167–192. 27  Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa (1999), “Moneta, Commercio, Istituzioni: esperienze e prospettive della costruzione europea”, Lecture delivered for the award of an honorary degree in International Trade and Currency Markets Economics, Trieste.  28  See, for example, Ignazio Visco (2014), “The exit from the sovereign debt crisis: national policies, European reforms and monetary policy”, Lectio magistralis, Almo Collegio Borromeo, Pavia. 29  Fabrizio Balassone, Sandro Momigliano, Marzia Romanelli and Pietro Tommasino, “Just around the corner? Pros, cons, and implementation issues of a fiscal union for the Euro area”, Banca d’Italia, mimeo. 30  Interview of Governor Ignazio Visco with Federico Fubini, “Italia, hai poco tempo”, Repubblica, 7 September 2014.  
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  5. Points of convergence and divergence in Europe today When the euro was created, the economies that adopted it were marked by differences and divergences. On the one hand was a group of less advanced, rapidly growing, countries with higher rates of inflation, and on the other, the core economies, with slower growth but higher levels of per capita income and basically stable prices. Italy was already in an anomalous situation of lower growth combined with higher inflation. In its first decade of existence the euro created the conditions for a virtuous, upward, convergence. The last six years of crisis have reversed this trend, in the direction of a “bad equilibrium”. The euro area is on the brink of deflation. In October consumer prices were just 0.4 per cent higher on average than a year earlier. Low inflation is a widespread phenomenon: in only 2 countries out of 18 is the inflation rate above 1 per cent. The slowdown in prices raises real interest rates, discouraging investment by firms and dampening demand for credit; it also increases the burden of debt service.31 A falling rate of inflation verging on deflation has particularly serious repercussions for the euro area today: it hinders deleveraging in countries with high public or private debt; it slows the readjustment of relative prices between the various economies, and accordingly the recovery of competitiveness and the elimination of external imbalances where necessary. These price trends were partly unexpected. They were not just determined by the most volatile component (energy and food) but to a great extent by the weakness of demand. They risk disanchoring long-term inflation expectations. Already today expectations one and two years ahead, measured by swap contracts, are below 1 per cent; they do not approach 2 per cent until well past 2020. Expectations five and ten years ahead are for less low inflation, but still below 2 per cent. The central bank’s credibility in meeting the price stability objective is being called into question. In June and September the Governing Council of the ECB announced a series of new measures including the launch of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) and outright purchases of ABS and covered bonds. The measures are designed to enhance the functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, support lending to the real economy and have a positive effect on the financial markets. As reiterated by President Draghi, the Governing Council is unanimous in its commitment to using other unconventional instruments within its mandate in order to cope effectively with the risks of an excessively long period of low inflation. It is important that we do not doubt the central bank’s ability to stimulate aggregate demand when this is needed to ensure price stability in the medium term; even less should we doubt the ECB’s independence and the strength of the institutional safeguards envisaged under the Treaty: those on the basis of which governments pledged to delegate the conduct of monetary policy and not interfere in it. There are two possible lines of reasoning in respect of today’s situation, one “economic” and one “political”. They ought to proceed in parallel but at times they diverge. The economic line of reasoning provides clear indications to those who are currently responsible for economic policy in the euro area. Almost all economists concur in identifying a serious shortfall in aggregate demand, caused by uncertainty and lack of confidence on the part of firms and households that every day must make investment and consumption decisions. Accordingly, they call for monetary and budgetary policies to be as expansionary                                                 31  See the box “The risks of low inflation for the financial stability of the euro area”, in Banca d’Italia Financial Stability Report No. 2, November 2014.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  as possible, as well as clear and credible, such as those adopted elsewhere in the advanced world: the United States, Japan and the United Kingdom. The political line of reasoning appears to indicate a different path. The sovereign debt crisis has roused a sleeping monster in Europe: distrust among nations. This is the most poisonous fruit of the crisis. This mistrust is undoubtedly based on objective truths. Northern countries in particular rebuke their Southern neighbours for reckless public expenditure over the years, the many wasted opportunities to reform their economies and make them competitive again. These views are widely held by public opinion in these countries, whose rulers – democratically elected political leaders – must take them into account. The result is a strong insistence on balanced public accounts: in the indebted countries so that they can be consolidated and in the financially sounder countries because they should set a good example. In all the euro-area countries opinion groups hostile to the euro and the European edifice are gaining traction. In the area’s current cyclical conditions this kind of political thinking, which evokes sound principles of social rigour and public morality, risks, however, contradicting the economic line of reasoning and producing long-lasting damage for the entire area. Monetary policy ought to be protected from this clash of economic and political reasoning by the same statute of independence attributed to the European System of Central Banks, which is responsible for its implementation. Until now this system has acted consistently. The internal debate within the Governing Council of the ECB that is occasionally made public is natural in any collegiate body. It is in the interest of all Europeans that its independence continue to be defended from within and seen favourably from without. However, the political line of reasoning cannot be ignored. The structural reforms in the euro-area countries that have lagged behind in competitiveness, Italy to start with, are vital for two reasons: the first is that they are the only way to unblock the jammed mechanisms of economic development; the second, equally important, is that they help to increase trust among nations. If the present diffidence should put down roots the entire European construction would be in peril. I would like to conclude with another enlightening reference to Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, when he delivered a speech celebrating the euro’s entry into circulation: “The single currency is above all the result of a desire for cohesion which, along with continuity and consistency of ideals, are the driving force of Europe. Cohesion is our greatest asset: it must however be willed, and it must have an identity, and a structure that is also institutional.”32                                                 32  Speech by the President of the Republic, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, delivered on 26 November 2001.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Takehiro Sato: Recent economic and financial developments and monetary policy Speech by Mr Takehiro Sato, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Kochi, 4 December 2014. *      *      * Introduction Thank you for giving me this opportunity to exchange views with people representing the political, economic, and financial arena of Kochi Prefecture. I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincere gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan’s Kochi Branch. In today’s speech, I will begin by focusing on economic and financial developments in Japan and abroad, as well as the Bank’s recent monetary policy. I will then touch briefly on the economy of Kochi Prefecture. Following my speech, I would like to hear your views on actual conditions in the local economy and on the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. I. Recent economic and financial developments in Japan and abroad A. Developments in the world economy As seen in the downward revision of the global growth projection by the International Monetary Fund in its October 2014 World Economic Outlook (WEO), the outlook for the economy has been generally cautious recently for Europe and some emerging economies (Chart 1). International commodity prices, including crude oil prices, have been weak, mainly due to concern over a global economic slowdown. A decline in international commodity prices is a tailwind for consumers – i.e., advanced economies – through an increase in purchasing power, but could exert downward pressure on commodity-exporting countries, mostly in emerging economies. I have been monitoring carefully how fluctuations in international commodity prices will affect the formation and distribution of income around the world, but it is uncertain whether growth in the world economy will strengthen, as projected in the October 2014 WEO, considering how much emerging economies have contributed to the recent world economic growth. Examining the situation by country and region, the U.S. economy has continued to recover steadily, led mainly by private demand, due to an expansion in household spending that reflects a steady recovery in employment. It is expected to gradually accelerate its pace of growth supported by a virtuous cycle. A recent decline in gasoline prices is also a tailwind for consumption. With this economic outlook widely shared by the public, the market has been focusing on the timing of monetary tightening – which is expected to be sometime in 2015 – and its pace (Chart 2). In Europe, by contrast, the adjustment pressure mainly associated with the debt problem remains and a downtrend in the inflation rate has been observed. Household and business sentiment has become cautious, as manufacturing in Germany – the core country of the region – saw a temporary drop during the summer, partly due to the economic deceleration in Russia. The German economy as a trend is expected to continue its moderate recovery, supported by a steady services industry, while production in the manufacturing sector has been more or less flat recently. However, uncertainties remain in France and Italy, which have lagged behind in structural reforms: the consequences of the debt problem and developments toward ensuring the soundness of the financial system warrant continued attention. It also seems necessary to consider the risks of prolongation of low inflation and materialization of deflation in the European economy (Chart 3). To address these risks, the European Central Bank (ECB) implemented additional monetary easing – including the 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  introduction of a negative interest rate – in June and September 2014, and also showed its commitment to further implement monetary easing measures, if needed, at the Governing Council in November. However, the inflation rate in the euro area has not stopped declining clearly since that time. The ECB is aggressive in taking measures to address future risks, and I would like to keep a close eye on its policy actions and the effects. Some emerging economies, such as Russia and Brazil, have been experiencing stagflation driven by the decline in international commodity prices and the effects of the depreciation of currencies and monetary tightening. Differences remain in conditions among emerging economies. Let me touch on China. In proceeding with structural reforms, the authorities seem to value the quality of economic growth and accept marginal declines in the growth rate. While there are downside risks to the economy, due partly to weakness in real estate prices, their policy stance has not changed as they continue to address a further slowdown in growth and uphold economic activity by implementing small-scale economic packages. I understand that the monetary easing measure announced on November 21 underlines the authorities’ commitment to their policy stance. From a medium- to long-term perspective, the potential growth rate is expected to fall relatively sharply, reflecting the demographic situation, with not enough room for a rise; but from a short-term perspective, at least, the economy will generally follow a stable growth path, albeit with downside risks (Chart 4). To sum up, the world economy has been led by the United States, which has been on a relatively steady recovery trend, while the risks of a slowdown are being observed in Europe and emerging economies. However, as the interaction among economies worldwide strengthens, there is a high possibility that the currently steady U.S. economy will be affected by the slowdown in the European and emerging economies (Chart 5). In some other parts of the world, geopolitical risks have been mounting recently, and a spread of the virus infection in West Africa is considered as a new risk factor. B. Developments in global financial markets Global financial markets had been tied up in a Goldilocks situation until summer 2014, in which investors had been searching for yields under low volatility conditions. As the outlook for the world economy became cautious, however, a temporary heightening of investors’ risk aversion and an overall increase in market volatility were observed in early autumn. International commodity prices declined, as mentioned earlier, and long-term interest rates fell in reflection of flight to quality. Such risk aversion has waned recently, and stock prices are firm globally, but international commodity prices remain weak. It is difficult to judge whether these market movements are simply in reaction to the overheating seen until this summer or else imply a spread of the cautious views, such as the recent argument regarding secular stagnation. Interaction between markets during such movements is also hard to explain. However, one factor behind them seems to be the temporary unwinding of excessive optimism, in light of monetary tightening scheduled to be conducted by the Federal Reserve, and the continued effects of the unwinding in the international commodity markets. Another factor seems to be that market participants, particularly in the international commodity markets, are aware of the risk that the slowdown in the European and emerging economies could spread to the U.S. economy, which is leading the world economic growth at present. Let me add a few more things about the unwinding that I have just mentioned. Market volatility is on the rise, and it seems that the progress in international financial regulatory reforms has had an effect on it (Chart 6): with the implementation of the reforms, it is likely that major market makers’ risk-taking activities have been restricted, leading to a decline in the market’s risk-absorbing capacity and the overall liquidity. Such issues had been generally kept below the surface, while the central banks of major countries had supplied ample liquidity to support the market. However, market participants have become aware of these 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  issues as the Federal Reserve began to convey information on its exit strategies to the public – that is, specifics of the measures with regard to raising the policy interest rate and reducing liquidity supply. As for the outlook, during the phase of monetary tightening, the effects on the market brought about by the regulations might be much stronger. Indeed, the regulations are necessary in order to prevent a large-scale financial crisis such as the Lehman shock from happening again. At the same time, however, it is desirable to maintain a balance when implementing regulations so as not to excessively hinder market participants’ risk-taking activities and the functioning of the market’s price formation mechanism. C. Developments in Japan’s economy With regard to Japan’s economy, some weakness has remained in consumption of durable goods – including automobiles – and housing investment, due mainly to the effects of the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike, and weakness in consumption, such as of automobiles, has impacted the production side until recently. However, somewhat weak developments in exports have come to a halt, and the spread of mini-scale inventory adjustments – mainly in automobiles – to related sectors is likely to continue only for a short term. Furthermore, corporate profits have been favorable with the firm employment and income situation continuing, and the mechanism for economic recovery has been operating steadily; therefore, the economy is likely to follow a moderate recovery path as effects including those of the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase dissipate gradually (Chart 7). The economic outlook I have just mentioned may sound optimistic in a situation where the first preliminary estimate of the real GDP growth rate for the July-September quarter of 2014 was negative for the second consecutive quarter, and the coincident index within the indexes of business conditions has suggested a possible change in the underlying trend. I admit that the current firm employment situation does not necessarily suggest future firmness of the economy, because such indicators as those of employment are lagging indicators. In fact, the number of new job openings and the ratio of new job offers to applicants – both of which are leading indicators of employment – temporarily showed signs of peaking out toward summer as firms’ stance on employment seemed to have become cautious, reflecting somewhat prolonged production adjustments in manufacturing. Nevertheless, the past few Tankan surveys (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) indicate that a sense of labor shortage among firms has been around a level that has not been observed since the bubble period in the early stage of the 1990s, and manufacturers’ business sentiment remains resilient, although Japan’s production has been unfavorable (Chart 8). The resilience in business sentiment can be attributed in part to firms’ high consolidated profits, reflecting the favorable business performance of their overseas subsidiaries. Firms’ favorable performance on a consolidated basis seems to have been playing a complementary role to the recent weakness in exports. This may mean that a new pattern of generating income is strengthening, through the repatriation by Japanese firms of their overseas subsidiaries’ profits in the form of dividends (Chart 9). Although some weakness certainly remains in Japan’s economic indicators, I feel that it is necessary to make a more comprehensive assessment, taking into account the current globalization of firms. Risk factors to the outlook for Japan’s economy also warrant attention. The first factor is developments in exports. Japanese manufacturers are likely to continue shifting production sites to overseas – although the pace is slowing – amid uncertainty over whether overseas economies will steadily increase their pace of growth. Therefore, it is uncertain whether the recent further depreciation of the yen will support the recovery in exports. The second factor is the effects of the yen’s depreciation. While the decline in energy prices will raise the real purchasing power of households and firms, clearly exerting positive effects on Japan’s economy, the depreciation of the yen will become a downside factor in terms of trade for the nonmanufacturing industry, which accounts for a large share of GDP and is a driving force of 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  the current economic recovery. The third factor is developments in household and business sentiment. Sentiment indicators – especially of manufacturing – had been resilient, despite the weakness in Japan’s economic indicators; however, sentiment now seems to have weakened, as evidenced by the fact that developments in the diffusion indices (DIs) in the latest Economy Watchers Survey have become more sluggish recently. Developments in these DIs warrant attention as these indices are leading indicators of the economy in the short term. Looking at the comments made by the survey’s respondents, those regarding the second round of the consumption tax hikes, irregular weather, and depreciation of the yen stand out. The effects of these factors on sentiment warrant attention. D. Developments in prices The year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI, for all items excluding fresh food and excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike) has been around 1¼ percent for almost a year, since end-2013, and despite the depreciation of the yen, it has been around 1 percent recently due to the effects of the decline in international commodity prices, including crude oil prices. These developments may be partly attributable to the fact that firms’ price-setting behavior was affected by the prolonged decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike (Chart 10). As for the outlook through around the first half of 2015, on the assumption that crude oil prices and foreign exchange rates will be more or less unchanged from the current level, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI could remain sluggish given the reversal of the price rise that occurred in the first half of 2014. I believe that the decline in international commodity prices implies a decrease in income transfers from Japan to commodity-exporting countries, which is clearly a positive factor for Japan’s economy and also for prices from a longer-term perspective. As far as supply-side statistics are concerned, the effects of the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase have almost dissipated, and such developments will likely have some positive influence on firms’ price-setting behavior, which had become somewhat cautious under the decline in demand. Regarding the mechanism of a price rise from a longer-term perspective, the Bank is focusing on production resources – namely, the utilization of labor and capital – as described in the recently released Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices. In particular, the recent labor shortage – or tight labor resources – seems to be exerting upward pressure on wages on the whole, and this seems to be affecting prices to a considerable degree. On this point, it can be expected in the immediate future that consumption will pick up in reflection of the winter bonuses, which are likely to be firm, and eventually have positive effects on prices. What is important for sustainable economic recovery and price stability is a wage increase that is in line with growth in labor productivity; furthermore, from a longer-term perspective, such an increase relies on firms’ stance toward business fixed investment. It can be considered that Japan’s economy continues to be at a critical point in terms of whether (1) it can further improve its labor productivity by leveraging tight labor market conditions as a driving force to stimulate investment aimed at labor saving, or (2) it will fail to significantly improve its labor productivity due to firms’ passive stance toward fixed investment, thereby making wage increases unsustainable. As for firms’ stance toward fixed investment, I would like to add that, although investment continues to be made mainly for replacement and maintenance, it is encouraging that their positive actions are being observed in investment to promote rationalization and labor saving, and in that for product upgrades (Chart 11). Reflecting recent developments in the foreign exchange market, some firms have begun to review the balance between domestic and overseas production. Firms’ decision on production network strategies is not directly affected by short-term factors such as exchange rate movements, because it is based on a longer-term outlook. It is therefore unlikely that they will start shifting production back to 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Japan immediately in response to the recent market developments. However, their decision may change as firms review the medium- to long-term outlook for the exchange rate, and as a result gain confidence that the yen will not appreciate to the extremely high levels seen in the past. II. Monetary policy for the immediate future A. Expansion of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 31, 2014, the Policy Board decided to expand QQE. As I cast a dissenting vote on this decision, I may be in a delicate position to talk about this policy change. I will therefore provide my views to the best possible extent. First of all, I judged that additional monetary easing was not necessary. This is because, in my view, the virtuous cycle of economic activity and prices is basically being maintained, as I have mentioned. For the time being, the year-on-year rate of increase in the core CPI will be in the range of around 1 percent to slightly below 1 percent, as the effects of a decline in energy prices outweigh the effects of the yen’s depreciation. This may suggest that the achievement of the 2 percent price stability target now seems to be somewhat far away. In my view, the Bank’s decision of additional monetary easing aims at offering a kind of insurance against such downside risks to prices. To be sure, I consider that the underlying trend in prices is more important than monthly fluctuations in price indicators. In this regard, the declines in international commodity prices, such as the recent decline in crude oil prices, will surely exert downward pressure on the core CPI. On the other hand, as I mentioned earlier, from a somewhat longer-term perspective it clearly will have positive effects on Japan’s economy by reducing income transfers. In assessing the degree of achievement of the price stability target, what is important is not to focus on monthly fluctuations in specific indicators but to examine a wide range of indicators in a forward-looking manner. For example, it is important to examine whether various economic entities such as firms and households will in fact form business plans or adapt their behavior toward consumption based on the assumption of around 2 percent inflation. More generally, it is important to examine whether people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations – which, under the deflation that lasted for over 15 years, are said to have consistently remained lower than those in the United States – are projected to be re-anchored at around 2 percent, comparable to the level in the United States (Chart 12). It should be noted, however, that medium- to long-term inflation expectations are not tied to specific economic indicators, and thus are difficult to measure. It might be possible to retroactively acknowledge developments in such expectations as changes in the intercept of the Phillips curve. However, one should be careful in assessing a real-time measurement – even if it can be done – with the estimation bias taken into consideration. After all, it seems that whether or not people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations have changed or will change can only be judged qualitatively by, for example, behavioral patterns of various economic entities. In this regard, let me give an example of wage negotiations this fiscal year. Many firms raised their base pay for the first time since the Lehman shock. This was attributed not only to the government’s initiatives to realize wage increases, such as the setting up of three-way discussions among the government, employers, and labor unions, but also to efforts both by employers and labor unions. Specifically, as economic conditions changed, as seen in the rise in the inflation rate, both sides gave renewed attention to the ultimate goal of achieving wage increases that are in line with price increases – which had been almost forgotten under deflation – and this was reflected, albeit partly, in the actual wage increases. In light of this, QQE can be assessed as exerting certain effects. Obviously, if asked whether wage increases observed thus far are enough to re-anchor people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations at 2 percent, I would say we are only 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  halfway there. However, if developments in prices in the past fiscal year and the outlook for prices will be somewhat taken into consideration in the wage negotiations between management and labor unions toward the next fiscal year, thereby realizing a rise in base pay for two consecutive years, this in turn will lead to a greater breakthrough in changing people’s fixed idea that wages, base salaries in particular, will not rise under deflation – in other words, their deflationary expectations. I am therefore carefully monitoring developments in wage negotiations toward the next fiscal year. My understanding is that what is truly essential to achieve the price stability target is a rise in productivity through efforts by various entities to carry out structural reforms and the resultant increase in the potential growth rate of Japan’s economy. On this basis, the inflation rate would increase moderately and wages would continuously improve in line with the increase in productivity, and consequently people would enjoy benefits from the overcoming of deflation. B. Effects of QQE Second, attention needs to be paid to the diminishing marginal effects brought about by the expansion of QQE. Interest rates are expected to decline further owing to such expansion; however, considering that nominal interest rates are already at historical low levels while real interest rates are substantially negative, it is judged that the marginal upward pressure from such easing on economic activity and prices will not be large. Moreover, the effects of QQE will increase in a cumulative manner with the progress in asset purchases by the Bank. These effects have become clearly evident in both the front and back ends of the yield curve, and are expected to strengthen further with the progress to be made in such purchases. There seems to be insufficient need for the Bank to accelerate this development process by expanding QQE, considering the accompanying costs and benefits. Now, I would like to touch on the effects of QQE on interest rates. The Bank has committed to purchasing Japanese government bonds (JGBs) at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen on a net basis – an amount substantially exceeding the planned amount of newly issued JGBs by the government. For this larger amount, the Bank consequently will directly or indirectly reduce the amount outstanding of JGBs in the markets. Partly due to financial regulations, many of the institutional investors holding JGBs have a compelling reason to do so as there is no better alternative, and therefore their preference for JGBs is strong. If the Bank conducts asset purchases in the form of decreasing the net amount outstanding of these investors’ holdings of JGBs, the effects – in terms of price formation in the market – will strengthen as the Bank’s purchases continue. That is, there will be a tendency for the price of JGBs to rise further and their interest rates to decline. In Japan’s money markets, the effects of asset purchases have become more clearly evident and interest rate formation frequently has been observed in negative territory. Regarding such formation, as arbitrage between the market rates and the interest rate of 10 basis points applied to the complementary deposit facility will work, the market rates will not decline significantly further into negative territory, unlike the situation for the ECB, which imposes a negative interest rate on excess reserves. However, it is necessary to carefully monitor whether such interest rate formation in the markets will create some kind of distortions on economic activity or lead to an accumulation of financial imbalances, or whether such formation will unexpectedly affect deposit rates as well as the broadly-defined settlement system, including money market funds and money reserve funds. C. The time frame for continuing QQE Third, the Bank has committed to continuing the newly expanded QQE in an open-ended manner, aiming to achieve the price stability target as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. I have been of the view that the price stability target is a flexible concept in which there is an allowance for a certain range for upward and downward deviations of the actual inflation rate from the target. Therefore, I have been proposing that 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  “as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner” – which is the wording on the time frame in the public statement – should be assessed as flexible targeting based on forecasts. Some may point out that such flexible targeting lacks transparency of the conduct of monetary policy. I believe that the expansion of easing this time was decided primarily because the Bank has committed to an outcome – that is, achieving the price stability target of 2 percent – based on such recognition. Central banks in major economies are similarly experiencing the tradeoff between transparency and flexibility in policy, and even if these central banks try to improve transparency, policy conduct based on a simple rule is not actually easy to accomplish. It seems that an important lesson can be drawn from the case of the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England, in that they have abandoned the rule based on economic indicators in deciding on policy changes and returned to a comprehensive assessment. A rule-based monetary policy seems easy to conduct at first, but various issues arise during the process, and I am therefore of the position that monetary policy conduct should be treated flexibly in considering future economic and price conditions. Prices reflect the state of the economy and are not a variable that can be directly operated by a central bank. Generally speaking, channels in which the effects of a central bank’s policy spread to prices are considered to be through a decline in interest rates, or via foreign exchange rates or asset prices – all of which are indirect channels. On this point, surgical precision with regard to aiming at a specific inflation rate within a specific time frame seems unreasonable, and if such an aim cannot be achieved, a central bank may be exposed to the risk that its credibility will be undermined. D. Importance of fiscal consolidation Lastly, I would like to again touch on the importance of fiscal consolidation, in view of the postponement of the second round of the consumption tax hikes. As mentioned earlier, the Bank has been conducting purchases of JGBs with an amount significantly exceeding that of newly issued JGBs by the government and working to raise people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations. However, the final outcome depends on the commitment to fiscal consolidation by the government. Furthermore, whether or not such commitment is being fulfilled is judged neither by the government nor the Bank, but by the markets. If concern over the government’s commitment heightens in the markets, effects will materialize in the form of expansion in risk premiums in the JGB market; however, the Bank’s prescription for a response is limited (Chart 13). From a longer-term perspective, in the future process of finding an exit from QQE, the government’s efforts toward fiscal consolidation are indeed important to the Bank in terms of smoothly starting toward an exit. On this point, coordination between fiscal austerity policy and monetary policy was consequently established in the United States, and long-term interest rates are at lower levels as a trend relative to the levels seen at the time the Federal Reserve began conveying information on its exit strategies to the public. As I mentioned earlier, the declining trend in the level of long-term interest rates in major economies is due not only to fiscal austerity policy, but may also be affected by the argument regarding secular stagnation, and an assessment of the U.S. experience should be made with caution. On the point of coordination between fiscal and monetary policies, there seem to be some lessons to be learned. Concluding remarks: economic activity in Kochi prefecture My concluding remarks will touch on the economy of Kochi Prefecture. In terms of gross prefectural production, a feature of the industrial structure of Kochi Prefecture is that the share of manufacturing in this prefecture is smaller than that in the 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  country overall, while the share of nonmanufacturing, such as the construction and services industries, is relatively large. The prefecture’s economy therefore is supported by domestic demand rather than exports. Thus, it had been stagnant for a prolonged period during the economic recovery phase in Japan during the 2000s, led by export industries. Since 2013, however, as with the country’s economy as a whole, the prefecture’s economy has continued to improve – led by domestic demand, particularly public investment – albeit with some differences in the degree of momentum and pace of improvement. Regarding recent developments, recovery in sales was disturbed by considerable losses – mainly in the retail, tourism, and agriculture industries – incurred from irregular weather during this summer through autumn. However, as the employment and income situation, which underpins private consumption, has stayed on an improving trend, and as business sentiment has been solid, the moderate recovery trend in the prefecture seems to be maintained (Chart 14). Nevertheless, from a longer-term perspective, there are concerns about market shrinkage and labor shortages in Kochi Prefecture, as it has been confronted with structural issues such as a low birth rate and aging population, as well as a declining population. These issues – which have been exacerbated by the prolonged economic stagnation – have arisen in the prefecture more than ten years earlier than in the rest of the country. In addition, there are momentous issues such as the implementation of measures in preparation for a massive Nankai Trough earthquake and tsunami, from which it is assumed there would be extensive damage. However, it is encouraging that efforts are being made from various quarters toward tackling these issues. For example, Kochi Prefecture is proceeding with the second Industrial Development Project, in which the private and public sectors are making joint efforts toward industrial development in a wide range of areas. The specifics of the efforts include the following: (1) strengthening local production for local consumption and for external sales; (2) strengthening primary industry and promoting senary, or sixth-order industry; (3) nurturing new industries, such as those relating to disaster prevention and new energy sources; and (4) promoting the tourism industry with the intent to encourage more tourists to visit from other prefectures and overseas. I am greatly impressed with this strategy, which aims to generate sustainable development of industries in the prefecture under the brand Kochi-ke, or “the Kochi family,” by working to facilitate manufacturing and primary industry and by promoting external sales to other prefectures and overseas markets, amid concerns about the aging and declining population. Kochi Prefecture has produced many great historical figures, including patriot samurai in the closing days of the Tokugawa shogunate, and I have heard that it is a region where an enterprising spirit is rooted. I hope the economic activity in Kochi Prefecture will become more active through aggressive and bold cooperative efforts among industry, government, academia, and financial institutions.   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9     
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11       
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches      
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 13     
   14 BIS central bankers’ speeches       
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 15     
   16 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Per Jansson: Swedish monetary policy after the financial crisis – myths and facts Speech by Mr Per Jansson, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the SvD Bank Summit 2014, Stockholm, 3 December 2014. *      *      * “The Riksbank has in recent years conducted a monetary policy experiment where it has aggressively, using a high repo rate, attempted to prevent household debt from rising. The results have been more or less devastating for the Swedish economy. Eventually, the Riksbank has realised that its policy was wrong and has made a 180 degree turn.” This is roughly how some critics have described the monetary policy conducted in recent years. This description has received quite a bit of attention and been widely spread, and many who follow the monetary policy debate have probably gained the impression that this is actually what has happened. I argue that this description is wrong and I now intend to explain why. I shall divide the criticism into three different parts, or claims, and discuss them one by one. I will present these claims in the form of quotations, but this does not necessarily mean they are exact quotations. However, they capture the spirit of the criticism and I believe that those who have followed the monetary policy debate will recognise them. It is important to meet the criticism, for several reasons One question one might begin with, is why it is so important to respond to these claims. It is a natural part of the economic debate that the Riksbank is being criticised, isn’t it? Wouldn’t it then be better to ignore the criticism and look ahead instead? No, I don’t think so. One important reason is that in the wake of the financial crisis there has been a discussion on the activities and tasks of central banks, what central banks should do and how they should do it. It is, of course, important that our debate on this here in Sweden is anchored in reality and based on how monetary policy has actually been conducted and what it has actually achieved. But meeting the criticism is important not just for the discussion here in Sweden. The debate on Swedish monetary policy also has an international interest and has been followed abroad, not least by other central banks.1 The reason is that a central issue in the international discussion has been to what extent central banks’ policy rates should be used as a complement to macroprudential policy, to counteract the build-up of financial imbalances, for instance, by trying to prevent lending and housing prices from rising too quickly.2 This is what is often called a policy of “leaning against the wind”, and I will hereafter use this expression for the sake of simplicity. Monetary policy in Sweden has in this context been regarded as particularly interesting, as the Riksbank is one of few central banks that, at least this far, has been explicit about taking such considerations into account in its policy-rate decisions. It would of course be unfortunate for the continued international discussion if the conclusion of the Swedish experiences were that when the policy of leaning against the wind was attempted in practice, it led to a very poor, or even catastrophic, result. Because this is not the case.                                                  1  See, for example, Visco (2014) and Yellen (2014). 2  See, for example, Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia and Mauro (2013), Borio (2014), Carney (2013), Smets (2013), Stein (2013) and Woodford (2012). 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Before I continue, I would like to make it clear that my purpose here today is not to justify every single decision the Riksbank has made. It is natural that different observers make different assessments regarding economic developments and thus reach slightly different conclusions regarding what exact policy should be conducted. With hindsight, it is clear that monetary policy could have been somewhat more expansionary if we had known that inflation would be as low as it is now. This is a natural and unavoidable consequence of the fact that monetary policy has to be based on forecasts, which are uncertain. However, most of the recent criticism has gone far beyond discussing this type of difference in assessments. Instead, it has claimed that the policy conducted by the Riksbank was wrong on a more fundamental level. This is the type of criticism I intend to focus on here. “The Riksbank has aggressively, using a high repo rate, tried to prevent household debt from rising” The first part of the criticism can in turn be divided into different parts. For one thing, it claims that the Riksbank has leaned against the wind aggressively, and for another thing that household debt has been the main, if not the only, reason for this policy. I intend to comment on these points one by one. So how much has the Riksbank in practice leaned against the wind in recent years? My view here is clear. The monetary policy conducted after the crisis has for the most part been governed by traditional monetary policy motives, that is, the expected development of economic activity and inflation over the coming years. Giving consideration to the risks associated with the developments in household debt and housing prices has been part of our assessment, but a relatively minor part. The picture painted in the criticism has been quite different. Here the starting point is instead that the Riksbank’s concern over developments in household debt was the main motive for raising the repo rate after the financial crisis. Much of the criticism even seems to assume that household debt was the only motive for raising the repo rate. In a so-called counterfactual analysis that has played a central role in the criticism, the actual policy conducted is compared with the alternative of not raising the repo rate at all, but leaving it unchanged at 0.25 per cent since the crisis.3 The latter is assumed to represent a policy that does not lean against the wind. The Riksbank and other economic analysts made similar forecasts So what support do I have for my view that concern over household debt has only had a limited influence on the repo-rate decisions? To begin with, one can look at the Riksbank’s motives as stated in the press releases following the monetary policy meetings. If one does this, it is pretty clear that the focus has been on economic activity and inflation in the coming years. Certainly, it is often mentioned at the same time that the policy conducted is expected to contribute to less risk of imbalances building up with regard to indebtedness and housing prices, but more as a side-effect and not as a main reason. The overall impression is that the policy would have been marginally different if this risk had not been addressed – not that it would have been completely different. One can also look at the discussions that were conducted within the Riksbank. It is a well-known fact that there were differing opinions within the Riksbank, but how different were they? The situation in July 2011 is an example. The repo rate had then been raised to 2 per cent, the highest level it reached before it was reduced again. The minutes of the monetary policy meeting show the Executive Board members’ view of the appropriate monetary policy in the years ahead. In Figure 1, the dotted blue line shows the future repo-rate path                                                  3  See, for example, Svensson (2014). This counterfactual analysis has been presented in a number of essays, articles and blog entries.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 advocated by a majority of Executive Board members, while the dotted yellow line shows the path advocated by the two members who argued that monetary policy should be more expansionary. One of these, Lars Svensson, is the Riksbank’s most outspoken critic in recent times and also the originator of the counterfactual analysis I mentioned earlier. It is clear that opinions differed. But it is also clear that the differences concerned at what pace the repo rate should be raised and not that any member advocated that the repo rate should never have been raised after the crisis, but remained at 0.25 per cent. Of course, it would have been difficult at that time to advocate a large cut immediately or in the near future. But if one really thought that the repo rate should have been 0.25 per cent, it is difficult to understand why one would advocate a repo-rate path that did not turn down at all over the coming three years, but rose throughout the entire forecast period and reached 3.8 per cent in the middle of 2014.4 So what was the view outside of the Riksbank? At around the same time, in June 2011, the National Institute of Economic Research forecast that the repo rate would be 3 per cent at the end of 2012 and that at the end of 2014 – that is, around now – it would be just over 4 per cent.5 The NIER’s forecasts are often something of a benchmark for other analysts and on this occasion, too, they were a good reflection of how most analysts perceived the situation. The forecast for the repo rate was also fairly well in line with the Riksbank’s view (see Figure 2). This policy was considered compatible with a balanced resource utilisation in 2014 and a CPIF inflation rate close to 2 per cent in 2013–2015. It is thus obvious that this is a picture of a policy that was essentially governed by traditional monetary policy motives and where concern over household debt certainly did not play a major role. How did international analysts view the Swedish economy at this point in time? The OECD’s Economic Outlook in May 2011 expected the robust growth to continue, with increases in real GDP of on average 3.3 per cent in 2010–2015. It was expected that the policy rate would need to be raised gradually as economic activity improved.6 A similar assessment was made by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in July 2011. GDP growth was assumed to gradually decline to 3 per cent in 2014, when inflation was expected to amount to 2 per cent (measured in terms of the HICP). It was assumed that the interest-rate increases that had begun would need to continue.7 One conclusion I draw from this is that many unexpected events have occurred in recent years. The situation today is rather different than all analysts – both on the Executive Board of the Riksbank and outside the bank – were expecting at this time. I shall return to this later. Another conclusion is that the general picture was that the Riksbank’s policy was on the whole well-motivated and essentially based on traditional monetary policy deliberations. Although there were different opinions on exactly how high the repo rate should be, as there always are, the policy was thus not perceived as odd or conspicuous. Neither the Riksbank nor any other analyst perceived the monetary policy conducted to be leaning against the wind to any large extent, and the general impression was definitely not that the repo rate should have been left at the level to which it was cut during the financial crisis, that is, 0.25 per cent.                                                  4 In the minutes, Lars Svensson presents estimates where the dotted yellow repo-rate path is assumed to give an inflation rate of 2 per cent from the beginning of 2013 and onwards and an unemployment rate that would reach what he assumed to be an equilibrium level of 5.5 per cent at the beginning of 2014. It may also be worth noting that at the ensuing meeting, in September 2011, all of the Executive Board members thought that 2 per cent was a suitable level for the repo rate, given the economic situation in Sweden. 5  National Institute of Economic Research (2011). 6  OECD (2011), pp. 191–192. 7  IMF (2011), p. 25 and Table 9. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches A strange assumption Given this, it is very strange to claim that an evaluation of the Riksbank’s policy should rely on the assumption that the alternative of not leaning against the wind would be to hold the repo rate at 0.25 until today. If no one perceived it as such at the time, it appears very strange to paint this picture retrospectively. Basing an analysis on such an assumption is therefore not a reasonable way of evaluating the advantages and disadvantages of leaning against the wind. One needs to assume not just that the Riksbank has lied about its motives, but also that well-known and prominent external economic analysts have said one thing but really meant another. Nevertheless, this is the starting point for the counterfactual analysis many appear to rely on when drawing conclusions about the Riksbank’s monetary policy.8 In Sweden, this analysis has been given considerable scope, for instance on Dagens Nyheter newspaper’s editorial pages, where the Riksbank’s policy has been described as more or less incomprehensible and contrary to the prevailing opinion at that time – an ”interest-rate increasing experiment in summer 2010”.9 One might think it is strange that the claim that the Riksbank’s repo-rate increases were only about leaning against the wind, and moreover that the increases were made contrary to prevailing opinion, has become so widely spread. After all, one does not need to make a more in-depth check of the facts than I have provided here to see that neither claim is correct. It doesn’t require very much digging to be able to conclude that not only the Riksbank but also external domestic and international economic analysts found it natural, even after the repo rate had been raised to 2 per cent, that the increases would continue – and this without any particular reference to household debt. According to, for instance, Dagens Nyheter newspaper’s editorial pages, the policy was instead “an interest-rate increasing experiment”, based on the Riksbank governors spreading “misleading pictures of the future”.10 The only explanation I can think of for this claim nevertheless being repeated and referred to so often and so uncritically, is that people simply assume that it must be true because it has been expressed with such emphasis and intensity. A hazardous policy But claiming that it has all been about leaning against the wind is not only a misleading description of the policy conducted and the motives behind it. There is also good reason to wonder whether a policy whereby the repo rate had remained unchanged since the crisis might not have been rather risky, regardless of what one claims it would have represented. According to the counterfactual analysis, there were only gains and no problems: inflation would have been close to the target and employment would have been higher if the repo rate had not been raised. But I also believe that there would have been a major risk of other, less pleasant things happening that is disregarded in the analysis, consciously or unconsciously.                                                  8  See, for instance, Visco (2014): “An actual example of the debate on the macro-prudential use of the policy rate relates to the tightening of monetary policy by the Sveriges Riksbank that began in July 2010 and peaked in July 2011. Deemed a leaning-against-the-wind move out of concern for financial stability, and specifically the risk that maintaining a lower repo rate could have increased the already high ratio of household debt to disposable income, this policy stance has been questioned on the basis of a counterfactual analysis emphasising the macroeconomic costs in terms of below-target inflation and higher unemployment.” Another example is the Financial Times (2014): “Sweden’s central bank has been lambasted by critics for trying to use interest rates to combat signs of a housing bubble. It lifted rates in 2010 and 2011 as it publicly worried about what it saw as high household debt levels.” A further example here is Münchau (2014), who says that the Riksbank “raised interest rates to rein in a domestic housing bubble.”  9  Wolodarski (2014). 10  Wolodarski (2014). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 Something that has received considerable attention since the crisis is that a lot of things can happen with regard to expectations and risk-taking in an economy where interest rates are very low for a long period of time. Expectations regarding, for instance, how high interest rates will be in the future and how the housing market will develop in the years to come can become distorted, and risk-taking in the economy in general could increase in a way that may create problems.11 This is something that cannot be captured in a good way in the economic models available today.12 But this should not be an excuse to completely disregard such aspects. In the alternative path that is assumed to represent a policy that does not lean against the wind, the repo rate would have been close to zero since July 2009, that is, for more than five years. This in an economy that began to recover from the crisis very quickly and where the temperature on the housing market cooled only temporarily. We can see today, when the repo rate has once again been cut to very low levels, that housing prices have begun anew to soar (see Figure 3).13 Lending to households increased by almost 10 per cent a year when the repo rate increases began in July 2010 (see Figure 4). And lending has begun to rise once again as the repo rate has been cut. Another important element here is that there was no framework for macroprudential policy for most of the time when the repo rate, according to this alternative, should have been at 0.25 per cent. It was not until August 2013 that the allocation of responsibility for macroprudential policy was clarified and the Swedish government had set formal guidelines for this.14 As yet, it remains to be seen how well this framework will actually work in practice. Given this, advocating a repo rate of 0.25 per cent for more than five years and entirely disregarding the risks of distorted expectations and problems with developments in housing prices is quite remarkable. Had this policy been implemented, I believe that the situation today would have been much more worrying than it is – and as we know, the situation today is hardly without problems. Two relevant questions Before I continue I would like to take up two questions it is natural to ask in this context. As I have noted, the repo-rate decisions have mainly been governed by traditional monetary policy motives, and consideration to risks associated with the development of household debt and housing prices has played a fairly subordinate role. But what exactly do I mean by “a fairly subordinate role”? That is the first question.                                                  11  Summers (2014) writes, for instance: “[A] strategy that relies on interest rates significantly below growth rates for long periods of time virtually guarantees the emergence of substantial bubbles and dangerous build-ups in leverage.” For a review of the links between monetary policy and financial imbalances, as well as further references to the literature, see Adrian and Lang (2014).  12  This is discussed, for instance, in Blanchard (2014). One problem with counterfactual estimates where economic policy changes a lot is that they are sensitive to what is known as the Lucas critique. This states that it is very difficult to quantify the effects of a completely different policy (for instance, a much lower interest rate over a long period of time) in a reliable manner. The reason for this is precisely that the expectations of the economic agents change. 13  Remarkably, an excessively low repo rate was something that Dagens Nyheter’s editorial pages warned against in December 2009, when Lars Svensson entered a reservation against holding the repo rate at 0.25 per cent and advocated cutting it to zero and they commented on his “input to the Executive Board of the Riksbank being reminiscent of a captain slavishly following his nautical chart, even when the ship hits an iceberg. It was one thing to cut the repo rate in an acute situation during the crisis to ward off a depression. But now that the economy has begun to recover, a zero interest rate would only add fuel to the housing price fire.” (See Wolodarski, 2009).  14  Of course, some measures were taken earlier, but the introduction of the framework must nevertheless be regarded as an important condition for being able to conduct macroprudential policy systematically. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Unfortunately, I believe one must accept that this cannot be quantified in a very precise way. I can only note for my own part that if I had not found the developments in household debt and on the housing market problematic, I would have advocated a somewhat more expansionary policy – but definitely not that the repo rate should remain at 0.25 ever since the crisis. But it is difficult to be more precise than this. For example, it is not possible to argue at a given monetary policy meeting that “of the 25 basis points I feel the repo rate should be raised, 5 points are aimed at dampening risks linked to household debt and housing prices. The remaining 20 basis points are aimed at stabilising inflation and economic activity in the short run”. Monetary policy decision-making just does not work like this. Moreover, the Executive Board consists of six individuals. Each of them has very likely had his or her own view of what role the risks linked to debt and housing prices have played in their decisions. It is therefore not possible to respond to the question of how much the Riksbank has leaned against the wind with a quantified measure. But what I am quite convinced of is that none of those deciding on the repo rate has had as their main reason, much less their only reason, that monetary policy must lean against the wind. The second question is whether the policy of leaning against the wind has had any tangible effect, given that consideration to risks linked to the development of household debt and housing prices, as I said, has played a fairly subordinate role in policy-making. I am convinced that the policy has played an important role, despite the element of leaning against the wind being much more modest than the critics claim. The Riksbank’s strategy has been to combine a marginally higher repo rate with communication that emphasises the fact that we perceive the development of high growth in credit and rising house prices to be worrying. The slightly higher repo rate does have some effect in itself, but perhaps its main function is as a concrete reminder of the risks, and it has thereby been an important part of the communication. In my opinion, this has had an impact, not least in increasing general awareness of the problems. The discussion of these questions now going on underlines that this has been the case. More extensive problem than just indebtedness After thus having responded to the first part of the first claim – that the Riksbank has leaned aggressively against the wind – I intend to move on to the second part, namely that the purpose of the policy of leaning against the wind has been to limit household debt. As I have pointed out, the element of leaning against the wind has not been particularly large, but has been there to some extent. However, it is too easy to say that this has only been aimed at getting households to borrow less, or as it is sometimes portrayed, that the Riksbank has a target as to how high debt may become in relation to income, for example. Even though developments in household debts are definitely an important part of the problem, the picture is much more complex. A fairer description is that the Riksbank has tried to do its bit to slow down a trend where housing prices and indebtedness have been rising rapidly and simultaneously for quite a long time now – where there appears to be some slowdown in periods of weaker economic activity, but where the direction is upwards, no matter what the economic situation, and there are few signs that this trend will be dampened. The longer such a trend continues, the greater the risk that it will be broken in the same abrupt way as in many countries in connection with the financial crisis – that is, when housing prices and debt finally adjust downwards, it is in a dramatic manner, with substantial price falls and drops in consumption, with large and long-lasting negative effects on the economy.15 In general, there is solid empirical support for the idea that the more households                                                  15  Mian and Sufi (2014) describe this sequence of events in the US economy in connection with the crisis. In a really bad scenario, problems may also arise with regard to financial stability, see for instance Financial Stability Report 2014:1, Sveriges Riksbank.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 and companies borrow during an economic upturn, the greater the risk that this upturn will be followed by a deep recession and a very slow recovery.16 One can make a few reflections here. One is that the macroeconomic instability resulting from this type of development could make it more difficult for the Riksbank to stabilise economic activity and inflation in a sustainable manner. It is therefore hardly remarkable that the Riksbank has tried to counteract it, and it is difficult to see that this is something outside of our mandate, as some have claimed. Another reflection is that, as the problems with a trend of rising household debt and housing prices affects many parts of the economy, it is necessary for several policy areas to cooperate to be able to achieve a lasting solution. Regardless of what measures are taken, neither monetary policy that leans against the wind nor macroprudential policy are sufficient on their own – and probably not even these two combined. Other policy areas, and especially housing policy, need to be included in the equation. This is something that the Riksbank has highlighted and discussed on other occasions and I do not intend to discuss it further here.17 A third reflection is that when it comes to the risks of a development of this type, the critics have not been very clear, in my view. At the same time as they have put a lot of effort into criticising the Riksbank’s policy, they have often said very little about how they themselves view the potential risks and how they should be managed.18 A common argument has been, to simplify somewhat: “Firstly, the risks probably aren’t so great, and if there are risks they can always be managed effectively by macroprudential policy.” Here I think one ought to be able to demand greater clarity from the critics. Do they think that there is no problem with this kind of upward trend? Or will the trend slow down on its own before problems arise, and, if so, what mechanisms will achieve this? If it slows down but at a level where debt and house prices are elevated, what risks will this entail? Is the fact that housing prices and lending have now begun to accelerate after the Riksbank cut the repo rate nothing to worry about? If there are nevertheless risks, how should they be managed? If macroprudential policy is so effective, exactly what measures should be implemented? And what dosage is appropriate? Are macroprudential policy measures enough, or do other policy areas also need to be involved? These questions are very relevant ones and I wish they had been given as much attention in the debate as the Riksbank’s monetary policy. “The results of the policy have been devastating for the Swedish economy” The picture that critics like to paint is of a high repo rate pushing down demand and creating a more or less deflationist situation in the Swedish economy. This is something that some international analysts in particular seem to have latched onto, interpreting the situation in Sweden today to be similar to that in Japan in the 1990s.19                                                  16  See, for instance, Schularick and Taylor (2012) and Jordà, Schularick and Taylor (2013). 17  See, for example, Jansson (2014). 18  In some cases, the critics have also had diametrically opposed views. Paul Krugman appears to think that Sweden has probably already had a housing bubble for some time, and that as it is too late to do anything about it, the Riksbank should not conduct a policy that leans against the wind (see Andrén Meiton, 2014). Lars Svensson, on the other hand, appears to think that there is no great risk of a housing bubble building up (see Svenska Dagbladet newspaper, 2014a) and that a policy that leans against the wind for this reason is not needed, but is harmful. 19  See, for instance, Krugman (2014a, 2014b) who as well as likening Sweden to Japan, has also characterised monetary policy in Sweden as an example of ”sadomonetarism”. Among Swedish critics it is less common to make comparisons with Japan. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches It should already be clear from what I have discussed so far that this is a misleading description. As monetary policy has not leaned against the wind to any great extent, this can hardly have had any particularly devastating effect on the economy. With what is by now a rather worn but at the same time very telling likeness, the Riksbank has not during this period hit the repo-rate brake, but rather eased up on the accelerator somewhat. No deflationist development driven by a weak real economy This picture is confirmed if one examines how, for instance, GDP and employment have developed since the crisis. Figure 5 summarises the percentage change in GDP per capita and the employment rate in relation to the pre-crisis figures in the countries Sweden is normally compared with. As can be seen, Sweden is not right at the top, but nor is it very far from it. There are only a few countries, according to these statistics only New Zealand and Germany, that have had a better development in both GDP and employment, that is, that are above and to the right of Sweden in the figure. Some claim that the development of unemployment has been less favourable. But here we must bear in mind the fact that the labour force in Sweden has increased relatively substantially during the period. This is essentially positive, but in the short run it will also contribute, purely mathematically, to keeping up the unemployment figures. The differences in this respect in relation to the United States, for instance, are fairly striking. The United States has had a more favourable development in unemployment, but quite a lot of this can be explained by the fact that labour force participation in the States has actually declined (see Figure 6). Of course, the relatively good development is not solely due to the monetary policy conducted by the Riksbank. Economic policy in general plays a large role, as does the fact that Sweden was not hit so hard by the crisis, for reasons not necessarily related to the policy conducted. It is also possible to have different views regarding exactly how good one thinks developments have been. But at a very minimum, it should be clear that it is difficult to find support in actual figures for an overly tight, “aggressive” monetary policy having sent the economy into a state of deflation, driven by poor development in the real economy. If one looks ahead, then? Could it not be the case that the Swedish economy has managed fairly well so far, but that things will go badly in the future, as a result of the policy conducted? Of course, one cannot make any guarantees with regard to the future, but one can in any case note that the National Institute of Economic Research, the Ministry of Finance and the Riksbank are all currently forecasting growth of around 2 per cent this year and around 3 per cent in 2015–2016. This is hardly the picture of an economy in a state of recession or crisis. Low inflation difficult to predict – for the Riksbank and others But what about inflation? It has become very low and prices have even fallen at times, at least when measured in terms of the CPI. Is this not a sign that the policy has failed and that the repo rate should never have been raised? It is important to understand two things here. Firstly, it should be clear from what I have just described that the low inflation is not a result of an economy that has been brought to its knees. The picture of high interest rates causing a more or less recession-like state that has in turn resulted in low inflation, and sometimes deflation, is thus incorrect. Secondly, as I have also mentioned, a lot has happened in recent years that has had an effect on inflation. Remember the National Institute of Economic Research’s forecast in the middle of 2011, which I mentioned earlier. In this, the repo rate was expected to continue to rise, from the 2 per cent level it was at then, to around 4 per cent in 2014. This policy was considered compatible with an inflation rate of around 2 per cent in 2013–2015. The reason I 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 am returning to this forecast is that I don’t think anyone would question that the National Institute of Economic Research is a serious and competent forecaster – and it can scarcely be accused of deliberately spreading “misleading pictures of the future”. And as I said, the National Institute of Economic Research’s forecasts were not in any way unique, but reflected well how forecasters in general viewed the situation. Anyone who claims to have predicted the current low inflation back when the repo rate increases began in 2010 must thus have had much greater insight than all of the Swedish and international analysts. I would rather argue that this instead is a good illustration of the fact that things have happened in the economy, which could not be predicted and which have pushed down inflation in an unexpected manner. Unexpected international economic slowdown in 2011 and even lower inflation in 2013–2014 I would like to give examples of two occasions in recent years when developments have turned out rather differently than expected. The first is the slowdown in international economic activity that became apparent during the second half of 2011. Global growth prospects deteriorated in connection with increased unease over the sovereign debt problems in the United States and euro area. Uncertainty over the future led to increased pessimism among households and companies and also affected the financial markets. Towards the end of the year, there were clear signs that growth in the Swedish economy had also slowed down, partly due to reduced demand for Swedish exports. Figure 7 shows how the Riksbank and other analysts revised down their forecasts for the increase in Swedish exports in 2012 during the second half of 2011. The second occasion is when inflation began to fall from already low levels during the latter part of 2013 and the beginning of 2014. This happened in connection with a sequence of negative inflation surprises indicating that the underlying inflationary pressures in the economy had fallen. For example, inflation had appeared unusually low for a time in relation to the increase in unit labour costs (see Figure 8). Even after that, inflation has been lower than expected, most recently in September this year. Figure 9 shows how the forecasts for CPIF inflation in 2014 have been revised down from just over 1 per cent to around 0.5 per cent. It is clear in both of these examples that it is the general picture that has changed, not that the Riksbank suddenly realised something that everyone else had known for a long time. The fact that inflation has been surprisingly low is by the way not a specific Swedish problem, but very much an international phenomenon. “Eventually, the Riksbank has realised that its policy was wrong and has made a 180-degree turn.” The last part of the criticism is that the Riksbank rather late in the day realised that it had been wrong all the time and therefore made a 180-degree turn. I have indirectly answered this in part as well. Let me, to be able to make the points I wish to make, describe how I view the way the Riksbank has been conducting monetary policy. In the same way as the conventional flexible inflation-targeting framework in some situations needs to find a balance between stabilising inflation and stabilising economic activity, one may sometimes also need to take various risks into account in the deliberation. The risk that the Riksbank has included to some extent has thus been that a rapid and persistent rise in housing prices and debt could cause setbacks later on and potentially lead to major problems for the development of the economy in general and for monetary policy. 
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches Leaning against the wind is a question of degrees – not either or But it is important to realise that it is a question of achieving a balance. Allowing risks of this nature to influence policy-rate decisions does not mean neglecting the traditional monetary policy objectives. For one thing, the purpose of trying to manage the risks is to stabilise inflation and economic activity in a sustainable manner, by avoiding, or at least alleviating, dramatic downward adjustments in housing prices and indebtedness. But inflation and economic activity in the shorter run – during the normal forecast period – also play a major role in the decisions. A monetary policy that leans against the wind is thus, like most economic policies, a question of degrees. It is not the case – as one might sometimes believe from the debate – that one either refrains entirely from leaning against the wind or leans against the wind one hundred per cent and disregards everything else. It is thus no 0–1 variable. As I have explained, the Riksbank’s policy in recent years has been at the same time to support the recovery and get inflation to rise towards the target, and to some extent to address the risks that may be a threat to sustainability. When things happen in the economy, this balance is of course affected. As I mentioned earlier, inflation has for some time been lower than the Riksbank and other analysts have expected, and it has now undershot the target for a fairly long time. Moreover, long-term inflation expectations have fallen. Although these are only a few tenths of a percentage below the target of 2 per cent, the trend has been downward for some time (see Figure 10). As the basis of an inflation-targeting policy is that long-run inflation expectations are anchored around the target, this development has made it even more important to prioritise bringing up inflation. In other words, the cost of taking risks into account by holding the repo rate a little higher has increased. It is in light of this that the Riksbank’s gradual cuts in the repo rate down to zero should be regarded. It is thus a question of adapting monetary policy to changed circumstances and not of a 180-degree turn as a result of a sudden insight that the policy conducted has been wrong from the start. Criticism also from other quarters However, cutting the repo rate to zero has not only been criticised for being a “last-minute conversion”. It has also been criticised from other quarters. There are those who say that the Riksbank’s attempts to give consideration to the risks linked to indebtedness and housing prices have been well-founded, and that a very low interest rate over a long period of time is risky – like “throwing petrol on a fire”.20 Without doubt, the situation with regard to the housing market and household debt will become more problematic the lower the repo rate is and the longer it remains low. Nevertheless, I think that the Riksbank has made the right decision and that there has not really been any other alternative. In the end, a central bank’s main task is to maintain confidence in price stability and when there is a risk that this will fail – when the scale starts to tip – there is no other possibility than to give top priority to a faster return to the inflation target. Even if the risks linked to debt and housing prices are as large as before, or have even increased as a result of the repo-rate cuts, the problems linked to low inflation have become relatively more important. However, it is unavoidably the case that this places greater responsibility on other public authorities and policy areas with regard to managing developments in household debt and housing prices. I consider it important to note that there has also been criticism from this quarter – as a counterweight to the opinion that in principle everything the Riksbank has done in recent                                                  20  See, for instance, Malmqvist (2014), Svenska Dagbladet (2014b, 2014c) and Mitelman (2014). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 years, and in particular the leaning against the wind, has been wrong, unjustified and harmful. My most important messages Let me conclude by summarising my main messages. The purpose of my review has been to point out the flaws in several notions of how monetary policy in Sweden has been conducted in recent years and what the results have been. One thing I hope I have made clear is that it is not reasonable to regard the difference between what the repo rate has actually been in recent years and a fictitious interest-rate development of 0.25 per cent since July 2009 as a measure of how much the Riksbank has leaned against the wind. This is a rather odd reconstruction after the event. Nevertheless, much of the criticism has been based on this assumption, for instance, the claim that the Riksbank’s policy of leaning against the wind after the crisis has cost 60,000 jobs. As I have shown, the general view among forecasters at the time when the repo rate had been raised to 2 per cent was that it would be necessary to continue to raise the repo rate – and for traditional monetary policy reasons. The increase from 0.25 to 2 per cent was thus not perceived as particularly remarkable or as purely justified by concern for household debt. I also hope I have convinced you that the low inflation rate in Sweden today does not reflect an economy that has developed very poorly since the crisis as a result of misguided, tight monetary policy. On the contrary, the Swedish economy has developed relatively well and has definitely not been in a state of deflation driven by a weak real economy. The main focus for the monetary policy conducted after the crisis has been to support the recovery and bring inflation back towards the target. Giving consideration to the risks linked to developments in household debt and housing prices has been part of the assessment but has not played a major role. The fact that inflation has been low is to a large degree, as always, a reflection of events over the course of time that have been difficult to predict. Examples are the slowdown in international economic activity which became evident during the second half of 2011 and the fall in inflation at the end of 2013 and the beginning of 2014. It is easy to verify that these events were difficult to predict – and not merely something that everyone but the Riksbank was aware of in advance – by examining how forecasters in general viewed developments at the time. Thus, I think it is quite clear that the current low inflation is not a logical and predictable consequence of the repo rate not being held at 0.25 per cent after the crisis. As I mentioned at the start, there is an international debate on to what extent the central banks’ policy rates should be used as a complement to macroprudential measures to try to prevent lending and housing prices from rising too quickly, or more generally to counteract the build-up of financial imbalances. This is an important discussion and it would be very unfortunate if the critics’ alarmist but incorrect conclusions regarding the Swedish experiences, which can roughly be summarised as ”don’t try this at home – you may burn down your house”, were to be regarded as a truth in the debate. It is important that monetary policy is evaluated. But one condition for drawing the right conclusions is that the evaluation is based on a correct description of what has actually happened. The recent criticism has, in my opinion, become alienated from actual events.   
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches References Adrian, Tobias and Liang, Nellie (2014), Monetary Policy, Financial Conditions, and Financial Stability. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 690, September 2014. Andrén Meiton, Louise (2014), Krugman tror att Fed håller räntan två år till. (Krugman believes the Fed will hold its policy rate unchanged two more years) Svenska Dagbladet newspaper, 24 January. Blanchard, Olivier (2014), Where Danger Lurks. Finance and Development 51(3), September 2014. International Monetary Fund. Blanchard, Olivier, Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni and Mauro, Paolo (2013), Rethinking Macro Policy II: Getting Granular. IMF Staff Discussion Note 13/03. International Monetary Fund. Borio, Claudio (2014), Central-Banking Post Crisis: What Compass for Uncharted Waters? In Goodhart, Charles, Gabor, Daniela, Vestergaard, Jakob and Ertürk, Ismail (eds.), Central Banking at a Crossroads: Europe and Beyond. Anthem Press, London. Carney, Mark (2013), Monetary Policy After the Fall. Speech at the University of Alberta 1 May 2013. Bank of Canada. Financial Times (2014), Sweden slides further into deflation, October 14. IMF (2011), Sweden: 2011 Article IV Consultation. IMF Country Report No. 11/171, July 2011. Jansson, Per (2014), How do we stop the trend in household debt? Work on several fronts Ekonomisk Debatt no. 3, 2014. Jordà, Oscar, Schularick, Moritz and Taylor, Alan M. (2013), When Credit Bites Back: Leverage, Business Cycles, and Crises. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 45(p2). National Institute of Economic Research (2011), The Swedish Economy June 2011. Krugman, Paul (2014a), Sweden Turns Japanese. The Opinion Pages, The New York Times, April 20. Krugman, Paul (2014b), Apologizing to Japan. The Opinion Pages, The New York Times, October 30. Malmqvist, Peter (2014), Låg ränta bäddar för överhettning. (Low repo rate paves the way for overheating) Svenska Dagbladet Opinion, 19 July. Mian, Atif and Sufi, Amir (2014), House of Debt. University of Chicago Press. Mitelman, Henrik (2014), Nu blir Ingves börsens bästis. (Now Ingves is the stock market’s best friend) Dagens industri newspaper, 29 October. Münchau, Wolfgang (2014), What central banks should do to deal with bubbles. Column, Financial Times, July 13. OECD (2011), OECD Economic Outlook, No. 89, May 2011. Schularick, Moritz and Taylor Alan M. (2012), Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870–2008. American Economic Review 102(2). Smets, Frank (2013), Financial Stability and Monetary Policy: How Closely interlinked? Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2013:3. Jubilee issue. Stein, Jeremy C. (2013), Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses. Speech at “Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter”, research symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 13 Summers, Lawrence (2014), Washington Must Not Settle for Secular Stagnation. Financial Times, 5 January. Svenska Dagbladet (2014a), Krugman har fel om svensk bubbla. (Krugman is wrong about a Swedish bubble) Interview with Lars Svensson, SvD Näringsliv (business section of Svenska Dagbladet newspaper), 14 January. Svenska Dagbladet (2014b), ”Nollränta är som att kasta bensin på en brasa”. (Zero repo rate is like throwing petrol on a bonfire) SvD Näringsliv online version, 31 October. Svenska Dagbladet (2014c), “Riksbanken bäddar för kris”. (Riksbank paves the way for a crisis) Interview with Lars Jonung, SvD Näringsliv (business section of Svenska Dagbladet newspaper), 7 November. Svensson, Lars E. O. (2014), Inflation Targeting and “Leaning against the Wind”. International Journal of Central Banking 10(2), June 2014. Visco, Ignazio (2014), The challenges for central banks. Central Banking Journal Volume XXV, August. Wolodarski, Peter (2009), Iskallt uppdrag. (Icy mission) Signed editorial, Dagens Nyheter, 27 December. Wolodarski, Peter (2014), Noll rätt för Riksbanken de senaste åren. (Zero right for the Riksbank in recent years) Sunday column, Dagens Nyheter, 2 November. Woodford, Michael (2012), Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability. NBER Working Paper No. 17967. Yellen, Janet L. (2014), Monetary Policy and Financial Stability. Speech at The 2014 Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture. International Monetary Fund, 2 July.   
   14 BIS central bankers’ speeches Figure 1 Repo-rate paths at the monetary policy meeting in July 2011 Per cent  Source: The Riksbank  Figure 2 The Riksbank’s and the National Institute of Economic Research’s  repo-rate paths in summer 2011 Per cent  Note. The repo rate and the Riksbank’s forecasts refer to quarterly averages. The National Institute of Economic Research’s forecast refers to the repo rate at the end of the year. Sources: The National Institute of Economic Research and the Riksbank    012345012345060708091011121314Repo rateMajorityAlternative path0123450123450405060708091011121314Repo rateThe Riksbank, PPR July 2011NIER, June 2011
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 15 Figure 3 Price developments for houses and apartments Index: January 2005=100  Source: Valueguard  Figure 4 Lending to Swedish households Annual percentage change  Note. Refers to the MFIs’ lending to Swedish households including HIOs (households non-profit organisations), with a home as collateral, adjusted for reclassification and bought and sold loans. Source: Statistics Sweden   0246810121402468101214060708091011121314
   16 BIS central bankers’ speeches Figure 5 GDP per capita and employment rate compared with pre-crisis figures Change in per cent 2007–2013 and 2008Q1–2014Q2  Note. GDP per capita, annual data, constant 2005 USD (adjusted for purchasing power parity), 2007–2013; Employment rate, 15–64 years,  2008Q1–2014Q2. Seasonally-adjusted data. Sources: The OECD and the World Bank WDI  Figure 6 Unemployment and labour force in Sweden and the USA Percentage of labour force and percentage of population  Note. Refers to 15–74 age group. Seasonally-adjusted data. Sources: Eurostat and the OECD   AUSCANUSANORGERAUTBELFRAJPNNEDGBRDENFINIRLESPPORITAGRENZLSWEEUSUI-22-18-14-10-6-226-22-18-14-10-6-226-23-18-13-8-327Employment rateGDP per capita5860626466687072740246810121416060708091011121314United States, Unemployment (left scale)Sweden, Unemployment (left scale)United States, Labour Force (right scale)Sweden, Labour Force (right scale)
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 17  Figure 7 Forecasts 2011–2012 for export increase 2012 Annual percentage change, annual average  Sources: Respective forecasters (6 of them), Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank  Figure 8 CPIF and trend in unit labour costs Annual percentage change  Note. The trend is calculated using an HP-filter (=1600) on a series extended with the Riksbank’s forecast. Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank   -202468-202468jan-11jul-11jan-12jul-12Exports, actual outcome 2012Other analystsThe Riksbank01234012340002040608101214Unit labour cost, trendCPIF
   18 BIS central bankers’ speeches Figure 9 Forecasts 2013–2014 for CPIF inflation 2014 Annual percentage change, annual average  Sources: Respective forecasters (8 of them), Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank  Figure 10 Inflation expectations, money market participants Annual percentage change  Source: TNS Sifo Prospera  0,00,51,01,52,00,00,51,01,52,0jan-13jul-13jan-14jul-14The RiksbankOther analysts
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Lael Brainard: The Federal Reserve’s financial stability agenda Speech by Ms Lael Brainard, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, The Brookings Institution, Washington DC, 3 December 2014. *      *      * Although its founding statute makes no explicit mention of financial stability, the Federal Reserve was created in response to a severe financial panic, and safeguarding financial stability is deeply ingrained in the mission and culture of the Federal Reserve Board. Today, financial stability is more important than ever to the work of the Federal Reserve Board. With the lessons from the crisis still fresh, we are in the process of strengthening our financial stability capabilities.1  In carrying out the work of financial stability, the Federal Reserve is seen as the agency with the broadest sight lines across the economy and one that has some important stability tools, as well as a critical first responder when a crisis hits. But the Federal Reserve also faces limitations as a financial stability authority: It is predominantly a supervisor of banks and bank holding companies2 in a system with large capital markets, several independent agencies have responsibilities for regulation of nonbank financial intermediaries and markets, and no U.S. agency yet has access to complete data regarding bank and nonbank financial activities. Recognizing these limitations, the Federal Reserve is likely to actively utilize the tools under its authority, which means placing a strong emphasis on structural resilience in the largest and most complex institutions, while strengthening less tested time-varying tools to lean against the buildup of risks and, in some circumstances, looking to the unique capacity of monetary policy to act across the financial system. It will also need to cooperate closely with other regulators to develop well-rehearsed working protocols and a joint sense of responsibility for financial stability, while respecting that each independent agency has its own specific statutory mandate and governing body. Financial stability agenda In the wake of the financial crisis, the Congress and the Federal Reserve itself became more deliberate and explicit about the responsibility for safeguarding the stability of the financial system. The Dodd-Frank Act, enacted in July 2010, charged the Federal Reserve with specific authorities for the purposes of safeguarding financial stability. At the Federal Reserve, we created the Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research to strengthen our cross-disciplinary approach to the identification and analysis of potential risks to the financial system and the broader economy and to support macroprudential supervision of large financial institutions and, following its creation, participation on the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC). This work is carried out by staff in that office as well as in many areas across the Board and is overseen by the Board’s newly created Committee on Financial Stability. This work is proceeding in four pillars, which are in varying stages of advancement.                                                 1 See Ben S. Bernanke (2013), “A Century of U.S. Central Banking: Goals, Frameworks, Accountability”, speech delivered at “The First 100 Years of the Federal Reserve: The Policy Record, Lessons Learned, and Prospects for the Future”, a conference sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass., July 10.  2 More precisely, it is predominantly a supervisor of depository institutions and depository institution holding companies.  
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  First pillar: surveillance The first pillar is surveillance of the possible risks that could threaten financial stability. Research and historical case studies suggest that increasing valuation pressures accompanied by rising leverage, widening maturity mismatches, and the erosion of underwriting standards often provide important warning signals. Drawing on this information and other analysis, each quarter Federal Reserve Board staff systematically assess a standard set of financial vulnerabilities, including asset valuations and risk appetite, leverage, maturity and risk transformation, and interconnectedness in the broad financial system, and borrowing by households and businesses. The research that informs this work, by helping to identify financial patterns likely to be associated with rising risks of financial crisis, continues to grow. But its predictive power is still limited; it remains difficult to identify ahead of time credit booms that are likely to cause severe damage, such as the subprime housing crisis, from those that do not, such as the high-tech boom, in part because risk-taking by financial market participants cannot always be well-observed.3  Over time, our and others’ surveillance will benefit as the Office of Financial Research established by the Dodd-Frank Act, makes progress in facilitating the sharing of previously siloed data sets among the independent regulators and as international impediments are overcome, allowing more comprehensive analysis of financial transaction flows across different types of financial intermediaries and activities. This regular, systematic surveillance of financial vulnerabilities is buttressed by three other valuable types of analysis. First, we use the detailed information gathered through bank examinations and loan reviews that are the regular work of our supervisors to assess emerging risky practices; these reviews helped identify deteriorating underwriting standards in the leveraged loan market. Second, we undertake periodic analyses of potential systemwide consequences of possible, particularly salient shocks, such as a sharp rise in the level or volatility of interest rates, including possible bottlenecks that could impede orderly adjustments. Finally, when there is a close brush with specific risk events, we closely study the behavior of markets and institutions for insights into possible structural vulnerabilities that might be revealed and assess possible policy actions. Second pillar: macroprudential policy The ultimate objective of our surveillance is to build resilience of firms and markets and to counter risks early enough to prevent disruptions to financial stability that could damage the real economy. While the macroprudential toolkit is larger than it was pre-crisis, there is a substantial amount of work remaining to implement some of these tools. In particular, as I will discuss in more detail, the ability of the available tools to counteract time-varying risks has yet to be tested in the U.S. First, the Federal Reserve is well along in promulgating an important system of new, through-the-cycle safeguards that together should deliver much greater structural resilience and make excessive risk-taking costly for the large, complex institutions that pose the greatest risks to the financial system. Second, the Federal Reserve is assessing the kinds of broad time-varying regulatory tools that might further buttress resilience during periods in which risks associated with rapid credit expansion are building. Third, the Federal Reserve is exploring tools that can be varied over the cycle to target specific activities, recognizing that we will have limited authorities relative to some foreign financial regulators in operating on                                                 3 According to the International Monetary Fund, only about one in three credit booms have historically ended in some form of financial crisis. See Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Deniz Igan, Luc Laeven, Hui Tong, Bas Bakker, and Jérôme Vandenbussche (2012), “Policies for Macrofinancial Stability: How to Deal with Credit Booms”, IMF Staff Discussion Note Series 12/06 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, June 7).  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  the borrowing side and outside the regulatory perimeter of the banking system. Let’s take each in turn. Tool one: structural resilience We are relatively far advanced, and compare favorably to other jurisdictions, in implementing a framework of rules and supervision that compels large, complex financial institutions to build substantial loss-absorbing buffers and to internalize the costs of undertaking activities that pose risks to the system. This framework represents a substantial improvement on structural resilience relative to the pre-crisis framework across a number of dimensions: It is forward looking in assessing risks under severely stressed conditions, and it is explicitly macroprudential in design so that bank management internalizes risks not only to the safety and soundness of their own institution, but also to the system as a whole. Reforms undertaken in recent years help ensure that institutions that are large, internationally active, and interconnected face significantly higher capital and liquidity charges when undertaking risky activities. The core of the framework is the requirement of a very substantial stack of common equity to absorb shocks and to provide incentives against excessive risk-taking. The new framework imposes “belts and suspenders” on the capital cushion by requiring a simple, non-risk-adjusted ceiling on leverage as well as requiring the largest banking firms to satisfy two sets of risk-based capital requirements: one derived from internal models and a second based on standardized supervisory risk weights. Beyond that, the largest, most complex firms will face an additional common equity requirement that reflects the risk they pose to the system and an additional layer of loss absorbency on top of that to provide adequate support to operating subsidiaries in resolution. Large financial institutions are also required to maintain substantial buffers of high-quality liquid assets calibrated to their funding needs and to their likely run risk in stressed conditions. Similar to the equity cushions, the liquidity buffers are calibrated to affect disproportionately those financial institutions that pose the greatest risks. Regular stress tests of both capital and liquidity at our largest banking firms provide a key bulwark in the new supervisory architecture.4 Minimum capital requirements must be met under severely adverse macroeconomic conditions and, for the very largest firms, in the face of severe market shocks, including the failure of a firm’s largest counterparty. By providing a forward-looking assessment that takes into account correlations among risks under stressed conditions, these stress tests on capital and liquidity are powerful tools for building resilience in our largest banking firms. But they also have some limitations. For instance, while the severity of the stresses can be varied from year to year, it is difficult to introduce entirely new scenarios each year to target specific sectoral risks without introducing excessive complexity. And while the new U.S. framework requires that capital buffers are calibrated for the riskiness of their assets and exposures, the proportion of capital required does not vary systematically to counter the cyclicality that arises through elevated asset valuations and other channels.5                                                  4 The Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review, or CLAR, is the Federal Reserve Board’s periodic simultaneous supervisory examination of firms’ liquidity buffers and risk-management policies. We use CLAR to analyze and adjust our supervisory program for emerging firm practices and risk areas not captured in the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR). For example, CLAR enables monitoring of firm liquidity positions for buildups of concentrations of risk beyond the 30-day threshold. It also allows us to look more closely at risks that may emanate from areas such as intraday credit, which are not captured within the LCR but are captured by firms’ internal stress-testing frameworks.  5 As the Board laid out in its November 2013 policy statement on the scenario design framework for stress testing, it uses a recession approach to develop the severely adverse scenario of the stress tests. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), “Federal Reserve Board Issues Final Policy Statement for Developing Scenarios for Future Capital Planning and Street Testing Exercises”, press release, November 7. The severely adverse scenario is anticipated to feature an unemployment rate over the first six 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Tool two: time-varying broad macroprudential tools While our efforts are far advanced in building structural resilience, progress is less advanced in developing time-varying tools that counter the buildup of excesses across the system broadly or in a particular financial sector. These efforts are in earlier stages of elaboration and more of a departure from recent practice. Here we can learn from financial authorities in other countries that have recent experience deploying a broader array of macroprudential tools. The classic case for time-varying broad macroprudential tools is to lean against a dangerous acceleration of credit growth at a time when the degree of monetary tightening that would be needed to slow it down would be highly inconsistent with conditions in the real economy. The Basel Committee agreed on a common countercyclical capital buffer framework for addressing such circumstances, and the Federal Reserve and the other U.S. banking agencies issued a final rule to implement the Basel 3 countercyclical capital buffer for U.S. banking firms in 2013. Under the rule, starting in 2016 and phasing in through 2019, the U.S. banking agencies could require the largest, most complex U.S. banking firms to hold additional capital in amounts up to 2.5 percent of their risk-weighted assets if the agencies determine it is warranted by rising risks. We are currently considering how best to implement the countercyclical capital buffer. The existing research would suggest that indicators related to debt growth, leverage, and other signs of growing financial imbalances would provide guidance on when to implement the buffer and when to deactivate it. The countercyclical capital buffer may enhance financial stability by building additional resilience at systemic banking institutions near the height of the credit cycle. However, it may prove to be less effective in leaning against credit growth, since, as credit booms progress, there is greater potential for capital to be relatively cheap, asset valuations to be inflated, and risk weights to be incorrect. Moreover the countercyclical capital buffer has some practical limitations: It applies to a subset of the U.S. banking system and is designed to act with a one-year lag. It also cannot be used efficiently to target specific asset classes that appear frothy, a challenge I turn to next. Tool three: time-varying sector-specific tools The countercyclical buffer may be a relatively blunt tool for circumstances where the buildup of risk is highly concentrated in a particular sector. This was, of course, the challenge U.S. policymakers faced early in the recent housing bubble, with home prices rising and capital markets developing the complicated, opaque securities built on subprime mortgages that would ultimately cause damage throughout the financial system. Indeed, property booms are perhaps the most common macroprudential challenge that have confronted financial authorities in advanced economies over the years, although macroprudential challenges                                                                                                                                                    to eight quarters of the scenario that increases between 3 percentage points and 5 percentage points, which is the amount by which unemployment has increased in the most recent three severe recessions. However, if such an increase does not raise the level of the unemployment rate to at least 10 percent – the average level to which it has increased in the most recent three severe recessions – the path of the unemployment rate in most cases will be specified so as to raise the unemployment rate to at least this level. Under this methodology, the increase in the unemployment rate would be slightly greater if the initial unemployment rate were low – as it would be after a sustained long expansion. Moreover, setting a floor for the unemployment rate recognizes the fact that not only do cyclical systemic risks build up at financial intermediaries during robust expansions, but that these risks are also easily obscured by the buoyant environment. Note, however, that while the approach to specifying the severely adverse scenario is designed to avoid adding sources of procyclicality to the financial system, it is not designed to explicitly offset any existing procyclical tendencies. The purpose of the stress-test scenarios is to make sure that banks are properly capitalized to withstand severe economic and financial conditions, not to serve as an explicit countercyclical offset to the financial system.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  have also surfaced in other sectors, such as the corporate lending boom that confronted Korea in the mid-to-late 1990s. In addition to time-varying broad macroprudential tools, such as countercyclical capital buffers and dynamic provisioning, many financial authorities have the authority to promulgate rules that target activity in a specific sector. For instance, Swiss authorities activated, in early 2013, a countercyclical capital buffer that added 1percentage point of capital requirement for direct and indirect mortgage-backed positions secured by Swiss residential property, and then increased this amount in 2014 to 2 percentage points. Time-varying lending-side tools In the United States, there is a more limited set of authorities the Federal Reserve could exercise either on its own or jointly with the other banking agencies to address sector-specific risks. Most commonly, as we have seen with leveraged lending, the banking regulators acting together can use the tools of supervisory guidance and intensive supervision to discourage banks from taking on additional risk on safety and soundness grounds. Moreover, the annual supervisory stress tests can be tailored to increase the severity of losses in specific portfolios of loans or the market shock. However, these authorities fall short of direct restrictions on activities in a particular sector. Such supervisory actions usually flow from microprudential concerns about the safety and soundness of individual institutions rather than macroprudential concerns about the stability of the entire system. By contrast, section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act provides that the Federal Reserve could restrict the activities of banks with assets greater than $50 billion or nonbank systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) designated by the FSOC “to prevent or mitigate risks to the financial stability of the United States”, thus providing potential macroprudential authority. In addition, the Federal Reserve has authority under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 to set initial and variation margin requirements for repurchase agreements and securities financing transactions, which applies across the financial system. This authority was used to curb perceived excesses in the equity markets through the mid-1970s with what was seen as limited success, and it has not been used in such a manner since. There is some interest in exploring whether imposing minimum margin requirements on additional forms of securities credit could prevent margins from compressing during booms and likewise help mitigate destabilizing procyclical margin increases at times of stress, reducing the associated “fire sales” in short-term wholesale funding markets. Consideration of the utility of these authorities is in preliminary phases. It is being undertaken as part of a broad review of macroprudential authorities and not with regard to developments in any particular sector. Time-varying borrower-side tools For purposes of comparison, it is instructive to focus on how central banks in several advanced economies have dealt with housing booms in recent years.6 Financial authorities in the United Kingdom, Sweden, Switzerland, and New Zealand have recently confronted rapidly rising residential housing prices in macroeconomic environments where there were compelling reasons not to use the policy rate as the first line of defense. They responded by imposing strictures on borrowers, through loan-to-value or debt-to-income limits, in some                                                 6 As shown by Elliott, Feldberg, and Lehnert (2013), the United States had an active macroprudential policy that included frequent use of borrower restrictions until 1980; however, the use of borrower restrictions, and the underlying legal authorities, have diminished significantly since then. See Douglas J. Elliott, Greg Feldberg, and Andreas Lehnert (2013), “The History of Cyclical Macroprudential Policy in the United States”, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013–29 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May).  
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  cases in concert with disincentives to lenders, and in many cases in an escalating pattern. Indeed, restrictions on borrowing are among the most commonly employed macroprudential tools and, according to some research, among the most effective in stemming the buildup of borrowing.7  This is not a problem we face today. If anything, the most pressing problem currently facing housing authorities in the United States is to restore vitality to the single-family housing market, where construction activity remains puzzlingly weak. However, if, in the future, a mortgage-credit fueled house price bubble were to reemerge, the banking regulators could perhaps impose higher risk weights on mortgage loans with certain characteristics either directly or through expectations around stress testing.8 This approach would be slow, perhaps requiring upwards of a year to adjust, and narrow in its scope of application, and it may prove ineffective at times when bank regulatory capital comfortably exceeds the required thresholds. Third pillar: working across the regulatory perimeter In some cases, foreign central banks acted in concert with other financial authorities to address the buildup of risk in their housing sectors. In the American context, the Federal Reserve’s work is embedded in a larger web of efforts by other financial authorities. In parallel to the Federal Reserve’s own efforts to formalize its financial stability surveillance and policy making, the network of independent financial agencies is enhancing cooperation through the formal structure and responsibilities of the FSOC as well as through joint rulemakings and joint supervisory efforts.9  It is vitally important that the bank and market regulators actively work to share assessments of risks across the financial system and to develop joint macroprudential efforts to address risks that stretch across regulatory perimeters. Realistically, however, those efforts are in early stages and must respect differences of mission and mandate, authority, and governance structures.  As an example, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) has authority to adjust the definition of qualifying mortgages (QM), which affects mortgage credit at all lenders, whether inside or outside the banking regulatory perimeter. It is worth noting, however, that the CFPB operates primarily under a consumer protection mandate. While the ultimate consequences of a mortgage credit boom have, in the past, proved very costly for families, the danger to consumers in the initial stages of such a boom may be too unclear to warrant timely action.                                                 7 See Stijn Claessens, Swati R. Ghosh, and Roxana Mihet (2014), “Macro-Prudential Policies to Mitigate Financial System Vulnerabilities”, IMF Working Paper Series 14/155 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, August).  8 The Federal Reserve Board and five other federal agencies approved risk-retention rules in October 2014 designed to ensure that securitization sponsors have an incentive to monitor and ensure the quality of the securitized assets underlying a securitization transaction. Sponsors of securities collateralized solely by “qualified residential mortgages”, or QRMs, as defined by the agencies, are not required to hold credit risk in their securitizations. The QRM definition rests, in part, on the debt service-to-income of the mortgage borrower, but it does not include loan-to-value ratios. The agencies have committed to review the QRM definition at five-year intervals, or earlier at the request of any agency, in order to ensure that the definition remains appropriate as mortgage and securitization market conditions and practices change. Altering the QRM definition more frequently would likely be cumbersome and time-consuming.  9 A parallel evolution is also under way internationally across the major financial jurisdictions and the international standard-setting bodies under the umbrella of the Financial Stability Board (FSB).  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  Fourth pillar: monetary policy Recognition of the limits to the macroprudential framework brings us to a consideration of monetary policy – a powerful tool with broad reach, but also relatively blunt.10 Monetary policy is the only tool available to the Federal Reserve that has far-reaching effects on private credit creation across the entire financial system and one of the few tools that can be changed rapidly (although its effects have famously long and variable lags).  While recognizing the far-reaching effects of monetary policy on financial conditions, there are good reasons to view monetary policy as the second line of defense. It is better viewed as a complement to rather than an alternative to macroprudential tools. In many circumstances, standard monetary policy and financial stability considerations will reinforce one another. Nevertheless, there may be times when standard monetary policy and financial stability considerations conflict. In several recent instances, foreign economies have faced some tension between high unemployment and shortfalls in inflation relative to the central bank’s target, on the one hand, and financial stability concerns associated with rapidly rising real estate prices on the other. In the United Kingdom, policymakers put in place a range of measures to limit the buildup of risks in the housing market, and, partly as a result, the housing market appears to be cooling somewhat. Nonetheless, U.K. policymakers have acknowledged the potential for monetary policy adjustments to play a role in the pursuit of financial stability. The Bank of England’s 2013 forward guidance had a specific financial stability “knockout” for monetary policy accommodation if the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) judges that the stance of monetary policy poses a significant threat to financial stability that cannot be contained by the substantial range of mitigating policy actions available to the FPC.11  If, in the future, the United States did face a similar dilemma, where financial imbalances are growing rapidly against a backdrop of subpar economic conditions, the Federal Reserve may consider monetary policy for financial stability purposes more readily than some foreign peers because our regulatory perimeter is narrower, the capital markets are more important, and the macroprudential toolkit is not as extensive. Even in these circumstances, however, it is important to be prudent about the role of monetary policy, recognizing that the necessary adjustments in monetary policy could have broader consequences. For example, a tightening in monetary policy sufficient to limit strong credit growth could depress employment and potentially trigger a sharp correction in financial markets. These limitations should lead us to be circumspect regarding the use of monetary policy as a tool to address financial stability risks, perhaps viewing it as a second line of defense. But it is equally important to acknowledge the potential utility of monetary policy for addressing risks to financial stability and to the broader economy and to continue expanding our work on the appropriate role of financial stability in our monetary policy framework. Conclusion In sum, while the Federal Reserve has an inherent responsibility for financial stability, it has an incomplete set of authorities and a limited regulatory perimeter in a financial system that has large capital markets and a fragmented regulatory structure. It is therefore important that we actively utilize the tools under our authority – which place particular emphasis on building structural resilience at the largest, most complicated institutions through tougher through-the-                                                10 See Janet L. Yellen (2014), “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability”, speech delivered at “2014 Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture”, a lecture series sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, July 2.  11 See Bank of England (2013), “Forward Guidance”, webpage, August 7, paragraph 5.  
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  cycle standards, along with broad countercyclical measures to limit the buildup, and potential consequences, of risks to financial stability, while exploring the design of time-varying sector-specific tools, and, at times, looking to monetary policy as a powerful tool that unlike any other operates across the entire financial system.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Juyeol Lee: Rebalancing an economy after the global financial crisis Opening address by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the Bank of Korea-IMF Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Joint Conference, Seoul, 20 November 2014. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted to welcome you all to Seoul, for the Bank of Korea-IMF OAP Joint Conference. I wish to thank Director Odd Per Brekk of the IMF Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, the conference co-organizer; Senior Fellow John Lipskyof Johns Hopkins University, our keynote speaker; President John C. Williams of the San Francisco Fed, and all program participants including our moderators, speakers, and discussants. The world economy is gradually recovering now, six years after the global financial crisis, but the pace of recovery remains painfully slow. It is well known that at the root of the financial crisis were the global imbalances, accumulated over a long time, and we also know that the structural imbalances, which worsened in each country during the crisis remain in place and continue to limit recovery today. History tells us that the more unbalanced an economy is, the lower its level of growth and the greater its vulnerability to negative external shocks. The correction of economic imbalances is therefore essential for preventing future crises and for achieving sustainable growth. Against this backdrop, I think that this conference focused on the issue of economic rebalancing is both deeply meaningful and timely. Looking back, during the so-called “great moderation” in the 2000s,imbalances in many aspects had been built up and spread, both externally and internally. Globally, the external imbalances between countries running current account surpluses and those running current account deficits worsened. At the individual country level, various internal imbalances were also accumulating, such as financial imbalances, increased fiscal deficits, and widening gaps in output between the service and the manufacturing sectors. From the global perspective, the external imbalances seem to have narrowed somewhat recently. This is due to the sluggishness of demand in the deficit countries, rather than to any improved competitiveness in their export sectors or to expansions in domestic demand in the surplus countries. From the individual country perspective, however, internal imbalances continue to exist, and in some cases have even worsened. And when the global economy picks up, the external imbalances are likely to worsen again. Without fundamental rebalancing, a full-fledged recovery of world economy may be a remote possibility. But rebalancing within a short period of time is no trivial task. It will require more proactive and concerted policy efforts than are currently being made. The recent expansionary macroeconomic policies undertaken in response to the sluggish economic growth are, as I see it, temporary measures, and not ultimate solutions to rebalancing. They serve to mature conditions for carrying out structural reforms that are essential to remedying the imbalances. In this regard, the following can be suggested as structural solutions for rebalancing. First, the current account surplus economies need to expand their domestic sectors, and thereby establish a virtuous circle between output, employment, and income. The current account deficit countries, on the other hand, need to nurture their manufacturing industries, so as to improve their bases for exporting. In individual countries, the imbalances between their real and financial economies, and between their manufacturing and service sectors, need to be corrected, while they must also work to reduce their debts and the disparities between income classes within their populations. To secure the impetus for sustainable growth, countries will also need to work together and combine their wisdom. The Brisbane Action Plan, a set of comprehensive growth strategies 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  presented by the G20 Summit last weekend, is one result of such combined wisdom, arrived at after long discussion among member countries, and will be useful in the future rebalancing in each country. During this two-day conference, we will deal with the topics of rebalancing the economy in five separate presentations, as well as in a panel discussion participated in by former and current policymakers from major countries. I look forward to participants reaping many useful ideas here, and to this conference contributing to rebalancing and to the restoration of sustainable growth. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Karnit Flug: Strengths and challenges facing the Israeli economy Main points of remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Jerusalem Ultra-Orthodox Campus of Ono Academic College, Jerusalem, 1 December 2014. *      *      * The Israeli economy is an open economy that is greatly influenced by developments abroad, which is reflected in growth rates in the economy, which are very much connected to those around the world. The influence of activity abroad is mainly reflected in global trade, which affects demand for Israeli exports, both in goods and in services. Goods exports are in a virtual standstill, due to the standstill in global trade. They declined slightly in 2013 and recovered slightly during 2014. Services exports showed better performance than global trade in services – meaning that the state of manufacturing was more serious than the state of the services industries, which is also a result of developments in the exchange rate. The labor market is in relatively good condition, with the unemployment rate at very low levels despite the continuing trend in the labor force participation rate, and the result is a trend of increase in the employment rate. This is a different picture than what other countries are experiencing, and an indication that the labor market is showing relative robustness, as is also reflected in an international comparison of unemployment rates. Bank of Israel policy acts to achieve the Bank of Israel’s objectives as defined by law. The main objective is to attain price stability, meaning meeting the inflation target and, subject to that, supporting other economic objectives such as growth, employment, and financial stability. In recent months, the inflation rate has been below the target range, and in the past 12 months, prices have declined by 0.3 percent. The main reason for this is the decline in commodities prices abroad, reflecting stagnation in the global economy, apparently low demand abroad, and relatively moderate demand in the Israeli economy. Even though we have not seen a decline in private consumption, we have seen a decline in investments and in exports. Until a few months ago, there was also a sharp appreciation of the shekel, which also contributed to lower prices. The appreciation also made it difficult for Israeli exporters to compete in the global economy, and it therefore definitely bothered us at the Bank of Israel. Monetary policy’s response to these developments was a prolonged reduction in the interest rate, to the historically low level of 0.25 percent, and foreign exchange purchases that acted to moderate the appreciation of the shekel. In recent months, we have experienced a depreciation, which has made it easier for exporters to compete, and is also contributing to a return of inflation to the target range. The Israeli economy enjoys a number of points of strength, which stand behind the technology driven growth of the economy in recent years. Israel enjoys a very high rate of people with post-secondary education, a very high level of research and development, which is carried out mainly by the private sector, and a high percentage of high technology industries in the economy. These are the strong points upon which economic growth has relied thus far. The Israeli economy is also faced with many challenges. The level of per capita GDP is low compared to other advanced economies, so that we still have quite a way to go to reach the global frontline in terms of quality of life. The main explanation for this is that labor productivity in Israel is significantly lower than in other advanced economies, and we are not succeeding in closing the gap over time. The productivity gap is very different among the various industries and sectors. In export-oriented industries, which need to compete with the parallel industries abroad, productivity is relatively high, and in most of them, it is higher than in other advanced economies. The industries that concentrate on production for the domestic economy suffer from relatively low productivity. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Israel has one of the highest levels of income inequality in the world, despite a slight improvement that has taken place in the past few years. The high poverty rates are also a significant challenge. We can see that in households with two wage earners, the rate of poverty is very low. This is not a surprising statistic. In addition, poverty among ultra-Orthodox households (47 percent) and Arab households (54 percent) is much higher than among the general population (12.5 percent). These trends are very much a result of the relatively low labor force participation and education levels, as I will show. In recent years, the achievements of the Israeli education system have been lower than the OECD average, which is certainly a worrying situation, mainly for a country whose growth strategy is based on human capital. We do not have the findings of international tests for ultra-Orthodox boys, but we can see that for girls in the ultra-Orthodox sector, the marks are lower than for girls in the public and public-religious school systems. Employment rates in Israel are similar to those in other OECD countries, and the employment rate for ultra-Orthodox women is very similar to the general average. In contrast, employments rates for men are particularly low. Over time, we can see a sharp increase in employment among ultra-Orthodox women, but we cannot distinguish such a trend among ultra-Orthodox men. This is also obviously a result of education trends – the rate of higher education among the ultra-Orthodox population is particularly low, and we cannot distinguish a higher rate of those holding an academic degree among the younger population, which is certainly a worrying phenomenon. We can see that among the ultra-Orthodox students, there is a focus on professions such as business management and law, and that among women there is also a focus on therapeutic professions. Over time, we do not see growth in the rate of those with higher education among ultra-Orthodox men. There is no doubt that the way to integrate successfully in the labor market is to obtain an academic education. We can see that those holding degrees enjoy much higher rates of employment, and much higher wage levels, than those who do not hold such a degree. There is broad agreement regarding the policy measures required in order to increase education and employment rates among the ultra-Orthodox sector. These need to be implemented: • It is important that the education system provide an infrastructure that will assist in obtaining a higher education later in life. • The variety of higher education fields must be expanded so that it boosts broad and variegated integration in the labor market. • It is important to adapt the professional training program to the needs of the labor market, while relating to various population groups. Investment in professional training in Israel is relatively low, and it is important to expand it among the general population, not just in the ultra-Orthodox sector. • An expansion of the active labor market policy is required. • It is important that employers be ready to absorb employees from all sectors and population groups. Employers who are open to taking on employees from the sectors with which they are less familiar will enjoy a broader variety of manpower that is available to them. These policy tools can provide the opportunity. In the end, it is the individual that needs to take that opportunity. As such, I am very happy to say these things here, before a group of students that have chosen to obtain an academic education and make the required effort to successfully integrate in the Israeli labor market. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Patrick Honohan: The role of the Central Bank in the area of mortgage interest rates Opening statement by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the Oireachtas (National Parliament) Joint Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, Dublin, 26 November 2014.  *      *      * Accompanying slides can be found on the Central Bank of Ireland’s website. There have been quite a few significant developments since I spoke last at this Committee – too many to fully summarise in a short introductory statement. So I will be selective. The reduction of two further steps in the ECB’s main policy interest rate has had a complicated influence on financing conditions in Ireland. On balance the positives for Ireland clearly outweigh the negatives, not least to the extent that the ECB’s expansionary policy will help boost economic demand in the euro area as a whole in the course of bringing inflation back to its target. Irish borrowers on tracker mortgages have seen this further interest rate reduction fully passed on to them, continuing and reinforcing an exceptionally lengthy period of ultra-low interest rates that has helped those borrowers. Because of the impact on trackers, though, the lower ECB interest rates have not directly improved the banks’ profitability, because the average and marginal cost of bank funds does not fall as much. The banks’ drive to restore their profitability, combined with the lack of sufficient new competition, has meant that, far from lowering their standard variable rates over the past three years as ECB rates have fallen, they have (as is well known) actually increased the standard variable rates somewhat. The trends are shown in the attached figure which is based on a simple bank-by-bank average of the advertised standard variable rates for an 80 per cent loan-to-value mortgage. (Since this trend is not evident from the traditional interest rate series published by the Central Bank in line with international standards, we have been working on the assembly on a rigorous basis of additional statistical series on mortgage interest rates, and expect to publish these as from data for January 2015.) These rates indicate that standard variable rate borrowers are still paying less than they were before the crisis, but not by much. A widening of mortgage interest rate spreads over policy rates also occurred in the UK and in many euro area countries after the crisis, but spreads have begun to narrow in the UK and elsewhere. Until very recently bank competition has been too weak in Ireland to result in any substantial inroads on rates. What is the role of the Central Bank in the area of mortgage interest rates? From the prudential point of view, we could have a role in seeking to ensure that banks set rates on new business sufficiently high to cover the risks of future default. While the current spreads would not have been sufficient to compensate the banks for the risks they actually took in the boom, much of which still embedded in the existing stock of mortgages, I think it would be hard to argue that mortgage underwriting today was so bad as to require such a high margin on new business. Inevitably, though, constrained by their inability to restore spreads on trackers, the banks have sought all means to restore their profitability including the widening of standard variable rate spreads, which typically apply to old as well as new business. As in most advanced economies, in Ireland it has long been understood that tight administrative control over the rates charged by banks would be counterproductive in ensuring a sufficient flow of properly priced credit on a lasting basis. For one thing, such control would strongly discourage new entrants. Therefore, while interest rate spreads are now high, since national credit policy is crafted with the welfare of the people as a whole being the “constant and predominant aim”, I see no sufficient basis for altering this view. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  There has been much discussion of the Central Bank’s consultation paper on macro-prudential instruments, the limits being proposed on high loan-to-value and loan-to-income mortgages. The consultation period ends on December 8 and we hope to be able to announce a finalised set of regulations soon after that date, depending on the complexity of the responses received. It may be asked whether the Central Bank thinks that recent property market developments represent a bubble. That is not specifically the driver of these proposals. Instead, what we want to achieve by these measures is to have in place a standing regime which ensures that a credit-driven bubble does not take hold, and that a new generation does not become over indebted. Absent such a regime, sharp price rises in Dublin – and they jumped by 42 per cent in just 18 months – in a thin market, not yet eliciting a sufficient supply response, could sow the seeds of trouble for the future. Our approach seeks to draw on ongoing research being carried out at the Central Bank, on international experience, and of course on matters which may emerge in the consultation. We want to shorten the period of uncertainty as much as possible. Accordingly, after making any appropriate refinements (for example, in relation to first time buyers, and to the potential future use of private mortgage insurance as floated in the consultation paper), we will move quickly to confirm the parameters of the standing regime. Almost all of the discussions that I have participated in at this Committee over the past few years have naturally focused on the banks, but of course this is only one element of the Central Bank’s mandate and it is worth reminding that almost 9 out of 10 staff of the Central Bank are actually engaged in numerous tasks other than the prudential supervision of banks. (There are, of course, other aspects of banking oversight that staff deals with, such as the consumer protection and conduct of business aspects of bank regulation). Indeed, the micro-prudential banking supervisory decision making now largely passes under the control of the EU Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), which came into operation on November 4. The SSM does not, however, mean less work for us, but rather more work, inasmuch as the procedures of the SSM require a further expansion of our bank supervisory staff as well as a reorganisation of their function. Indeed, after three years during which staffing levels have not risen, the Central Bank now needs to increase staff numbers again, not just because of SSM, but also because of the additional complexity of new international regulations covering non-bank financial services (which form the heart of the IFSC), new rules on bank resolution and other new mandates. (Much of the costs here are recovered from the industry; indeed all regulatory costs could be so recovered, instead of having the effect of eating into the Central Bank’s surplus income to be transferred to the Exchequer; and the Central Bank has suggested this to successive Governments.) Having already absorbed a sizable increase in staffing during 2010–11, we are currently engaged in an extensive review of our internal organisation to ensure the conditions for steady improvements in the effectiveness of our work, which relates to essential matters which, especially when they work well, are not obviously visible to the general public. The review is examining a range of issues including internal structures, career paths and internal processes. I expect significant beneficial changes to both organisational structures and practices within the Central Bank as a result of the review. Our effectiveness will be enhanced by our carefully designed and efficient headquarters building at North Wall Quay, the main building contract for which is now out to tender. This will result in bringing together all our (non-currency) staff into a single location; there are strong financial and practical benefits to this move. Finally, I will not here add anything to the lengthy letter which I sent to the Committee in September providing commentary and responses to the Committee’s recent report on the mortgage arrears situation, a situation which has continued to evolve in line with the indications in that letter. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  The Committee’s invitation indicated a wide range of potential topics for discussion today. And there is indeed a wide range of issues which come under the remit of the Central Bank. I am happy to take any questions you might have.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Cecilia Skingsley: Changing payments market Speech by Ms Cecilia Skingsley, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, 24 November 2014. *      *      * I would like to express my warm thanks to Björn Segendorff for his help with this speech. The market for payments is changing rapidly. Sweden is in the forefront with regard to the development and use of electronic payments. Cash has therefore met with tough competition from new, innovative methods of payment. This development is positive in many ways, but changes also entail challenges. The Riksbank is taking an active part in the work on managing these challenges to make things easier for economic agents. Why is it important that our payments function? We rarely think about it when we are paying for a product or service. Often we pay in the same way as we have always done and we assume that this will work. It is rather like walking or cycling – we can think about something else while we are doing it. Nevertheless, all of the day-to-day payments are very important to us – they give us access to the goods and services we need in our daily lives. But all payments mean that we are using highly-specialised services. Behind every non-cash payment we make there are intermediaries mediating the payment from payer to payee. This is done within an infrastructure of various technical systems that are necessary to make the payment. The intermediaries and infrastructure that are required depend on which means of payment is chosen. It is therefore very relevant to talk about payments as a consumption of payment services. An efficiently-functioning market for payment services assumes that payment services meet certain important requirements. Three important requirements of retail payment services Firstly, the payment service must be safe, but this is not enough. It must also be perceived as safe. Both the payer and the payee must feel secure, otherwise the payment service will not be used. If banknotes are easy to counterfeit, shops will not want to accept them. If cards can be easily hijacked, consumers will not want to pay with them.1 When we pay by other means than cash, security also means that we rely on the mediator of payments that we have actually entrusted with our money. Secondly, the payment service must be useful. It must be simple and convenient. You may remember when a card payment was made using a paper slip, with carbon in between, where you filled in the amount and signed it and showed your ID. This was not as simple and easy as the chip and PIN code in today’s card terminals. Thirdly, payment services must be accessible to households and accepted by companies and public authorities. Accessibility means it is easy to get hold of cash when you need it, that it is not too expensive or complicated to acquire a card or online banking services or that the mobile network has good cover if I want to use mobile payment or banking services. The same reasoning also applies, of course, to the recipient of a payment. Willingness to accept various types of payment may be undermined by factors such as technical problems, high costs and difficulty in depositing daily takings. Accessibility is also closely linked to uniform payments standards. The methods of payment should be predictable and this is the case if                                                 1 By hijacking a card, we mean skimming and similar activities where the card data is secretly scanned and then used for fraudulent purposes.  
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  we all agree on how payments will be made. The more of us that are in agreement the better, as we can then make use of the network effects and economies of scale that are inherent in the mediation of payments. For instance, this type of unanimity means we can be fairly certain that it is possible to pay by card or in cash at the nearest shop. The reason for a positive attitude towards innovation and development is that they enable us to have safe, efficient and accessible payment services. I believe we can all agree that it is easier to use banknotes and coins today than it was a couple of hundred years ago, and that it is easier, quicker and safer to use chips and PIN codes than paper slips for card payments. Cards are in turn preferable to cheques. What about the Swedish payments market? Does it give us payment services that are uniform, safe, efficient and accessible? The transformation of the Swedish retail payments market As the market changes rapidly through technological advances and through the establishment of new operators, it is important that the Riksbank follows and analyses the Swedish retail payments market. The results I am about to describe come from a telephone interview survey about households’ payment behaviour that the Riksbank regularly carries out. High accessibility and high level of confidence If we look at the most common payment services we use when we pay at points of sale, 96% of the respondents said that they had access to cash, and almost 99% said they had access to a bank or credit card. No respondent said that they had access to neither cash nor cards. Accessibility for cards and cash is thus very high and so is the general public’s confidence in them and this is reflected in the fact that both are used to a considerable extent. However, cards are being used increasingly often as a means of payment at the cost of cash. The Riksbank also examines access to the payment services we use when we pay at a distance, for instance, our household bills.2 In Sweden we mainly use various credit transfer and direct debit products for paying bills. The survey showed that almost 90% had access to online banking services and 23% had access to credit transfer using paper forms. Only 3% said they did not have access to any of these services. If we add direct debit, only 1 per cent lacked access to a payment service for paying at a distance. These payment services were also used to a large degree. Broad access to innovative payment services Sweden is often said to be a technology-friendly country and this is reflected in the fact that so many have access to online banking. Now, online banking services have been available for nearly 20 years, while mobile payment services are much newer. It is therefore remarkable that almost one quarter of the respondents said they had access to some form of mobile payment service.3 If we broaden the perspective somewhat and include non-traditional payment services such as payments via a third-party provider and virtual currencies such as Bitcoin, then 40% have access to one of these services.4 A good 23% of respondents said they had paid with one of these alternative methods in the past month. Another example is that some banks reported as early as last summer that they had more log-ins via mobile banking services than via traditional online banking services. This, as I see                                                 2 Cards can be used when paying at a distance, too, for instance for online purchases. However, the Riksbank has no confirmed statistics on these payments.  3 Examples of mobile payment services include Swish, WyWallet and SEQR.  4 Examples of payments via intermediary include PayPal, Klarna (payment by invoice) and direct payments that link you up directly with your online bank.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  it, broad acceptance of new technology solutions is a very interesting observation to which I will return shortly. The fact that so many people are using cards and other electronic payments is a form of proof that these services are widely available, not just for households but also for retailers and companies. There are more than 20 million cards in Sweden and just over two hundred thousand card terminals. Recently mobile card terminals and opportunities to accept card payments by mobile phone have also arisen. This chart, which shows how often households say they have not been able to pay by card or cash, illustrates the high level of acceptance among payees. A large majority say that they are unable to pay by either card or cash less than once a month. Close to ATMs and good Internet connections Cash should not only be possible to use in shops. Households also need to be able to withdraw cash and the retailer has to be able to deposit his daily takings. This makes the physical distance to service points and ATMs important. The average distance for a shop-owner to the nearest service point to deposit his daily takings is 6 km for Sweden as a whole and more than 10 km for Jämtland county, which has the longest distances. The distances for cash withdrawals are less; around 4 km for the country as a whole and around 7 km in Norrbotten county. For electronic payments, access to the Internet is the equivalent of geographical proximity. It is also becoming increasingly important for both households and companies to have good Internet connections to be able to make and receive payments. In Sweden as a whole, around 500 households and companies are unable to have access to the Internet. Given that we are a sparsely-populated, but geographically large, country, this is nevertheless an impressively small figure. Of course, what I have just said does not mean that individual shops and households may have much longer distances, that the fees paid by a shop-owner for card payments or for handling daily takings can be perceived as high or that it is not a problem for those who are unable to have access to the Internet. I shall shortly return to the challenges we have identified on the market, but before I do so I would like to say a few words about current trends and developments. Trends and changes Sweden is in the forefront I said earlier that Sweden is in the forefront with regard to using other payment services than cash, and this is illustrated in this chart, which summarises the situation in a few selected countries.5 The picture that appears is that use of cash is much lower in Sweden than in most other countries and that the use of cards, primarily bank cards, is higher. The situation is roughly the same in our Nordic neighbour countries. I mentioned earlier that Sweden is a technology-friendly country. We have an extensive infrastructure for telecommunications and a high percentage of households have Internet in their homes, are familiar with technology and have smart phones and tablets. Moreover, there is a high degree of confidence and trust between households, companies, payment intermediaries and public authorities. This chart shows an aggregate of all of these factors. It is the World Economic Forum’s ranking of countries according to how well they are situated                                                 5 If we look at cards and cash, it is unfortunately difficult to find good and comparable statistics. The information on other countries than Sweden is often a few years old, and the exact percentages should be taken with a pinch of salt.  
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  with regard to utilising possibilities offered by information and communication technology. We can see that Sweden is highly placed and has been for a long time. Of course, this creates the right conditions for the payments market to develop. Changes also create difficulties It is positive that the market for payments is developing and can meet the new payment requirements that arise. Payments are increasingly based on technology and this trend will probably continue and expand. However, at the same time this development leads to new problems and tensions that need to be overcome. The problems we have identified include the following: Households and companies need even better access to different payment services. The capacity in the mobile network is not always adequate to manage temporary peaks and it may then be difficult, for instance, to make a card payment for a hot dog and soft drink at a sports event attended by several thousand people. Some groups in society, such as the visually impaired and very short people, can face problems as card terminals and ATMs are not always adapted to their specific needs. Other problems concern to a greater extent the tensions that may arise in relation to new payment services. Households may also have access to the technology needed to use a new payment service, but nevertheless prefer to use the old technology. As the latter technology becomes less accessible, tension may arise when the individual feels that his or her needs are not met. For instance, an elderly person may want to continue depositing and withdrawing cash over the counter in a bank or to pay payments there, but as fewer bank branches handle cash manually; this is becoming more difficult in practice. There is also a risk that the market will become fragmented and by this I mean that there may be a number of different payment solutions, but that none of them is generally accepted by the payment recipients. One example could be mobile payments. If the launch of new mobile payment services continues, perhaps I as consumer will need to have a couple of different payment applications in my mobile phone to be sure of being able to pay in different shops. Similarly, the retailer will then need to subscribe to several different payment services. Last year, an inquiry on the use of cash in Sweden was published, and earlier this autumn the commission of inquiry presented its report entitled Cash management in Sweden. This inquiry has resulted in a number of proposals and I will discuss two of them here. The first is that it is proposed that the Riksbank has overall responsibility for cash management in Sweden. The second is that the counting services of cash-in-transit companies should become subject to licence and come under financial supervision. It is recommended that the Riksbank become the supervisory authority for these operations. The Riksbank welcomes the work of the inquiry as we consider it important that cash management in Sweden functions smoothly. We have taken part in the work of the inquiry and will now analyse the proposals put forward and respond to the submission sent out for comments. Cash changeover positive but entails practical challenges It is not only the banks’ services that need to become more user-friendly, cost-effective and certain over time, our banknotes and coins also need to develop in the same way. When the new banknotes and coins are introduced, starting next year, the size and weight of the banknotes and some of the coins will decline and two new denominations will be introduced; the 2-krona coin and the 200-krona banknote. The banknotes and coins will thus become much more user-friendly and will be cheaper to handle. Safety is also increased through the new security features. I believe that we all agree these improvements are positive for all parties concerned. However, as with electronic payments, the introduction of the new banknotes and coins will give rise to some practical problems and friction during a transitional period. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Firstly, there is a huge amount of banknotes that are to be replaced; 300 million banknotes are to be withdrawn and around as many are to be put into circulation. For coins the figure is 500 million to be distributed in both directions. Secondly, Sweden has one of the world’s most automated cash systems. This means that all appropriate equipment in Sweden must be adapted to be able to handle the new banknotes and coins. Thirdly, much of the practical changeover work will occur in the retail trade and shops, partly because this is where we use cash and partly because the banks have cut down on their cash handling. However, conditions vary considerably in the retail trade with regard to, for instance, technical equipment and security. It is necessary to ensure the entire changeover functions in a way that is felt by the general public to be simple and secure. How should we deal with the challenges? To summarise, one can say that there are two groups of challenges on the Swedish payments market. One concerns the slightly longer-term challenges following on from developments on the payments market, and the other concerns more near-term challenges regarding the banknote and coin changeover. Let me begin with cash and the near-term challenges. The cash changeover 2015–2017 The Riksbank has over a long time, and since its planning began in 2008, had a dialogue with the various participants in the market regarding the banknote and coin changeover. This means that the banks, cash-in-transit companies and retail trade have been able to influence every part of the work, especially the timetable. This has been very important to the Riksbank, as we no longer play any role in the practical handling of cash. The timetable for the changeover has been divided into two stages and extends over a relatively long period, which means that all of those involved have had plenty of time to prepare. You saw from the slides I showed earlier that the general public on the whole has relatively good access to places where they can made cash withdrawals and the retail trade has good access to service points where they can leave their daily takings, but is it at the same time a well-known fact that several of the banks have cut back on their manual cash handling. The consequence is that a number of households, perhaps those in sparsely-populated areas in particular, have had a long way to travel to the nearest bank that handles cash. This is a problem that may increase with regard to the banknote and coin changeover. The Riksbank is therefore conducting a regular dialogue with the banks on how the changeover should be managed. The banks have said that they will help their customers to the extent that they need it and that they will contribute to a smooth changeover. We are assuming that the banks will take this responsibility, but we are at the same time monitoring developments, for instance, by making a survey of access to cash services in different parts of the country. The continued dialogue with the banks will show whether the Riksbank needs to take any further measures. Starting from 2015, we will carry out extensive information campaigns aimed at both market participants and the general public. The effects of more electronic payments The challenges regarding electronic payments are essentially very different. The challenges I have mentioned include shortfalls in capacity on the telecommunications network, accessibility and user problems for some vulnerable groups and possible fragmentation of some segments of the market. But there are other challenges, too. Common to these is that the Riksbank does not have any formal tools to manage the problems. Often the primary responsibility for these areas lies with another authority and often there are many different parties involved who need to cooperate to resolve the problems. For instance, the county administrative boards and the Swedish Post and Telecom Authority have the task of ensuring 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  that everyone has access to basic payment services. Finansinspektionen (the Swedish financial supervisory authority) has responsibility for financial supervision. The Swedish Competition Authority is responsible for ensuring there is suitable competition on the payments market, and so on. The banks, other providers of payment services and the retail trade are on different sides of the market, but their participation is often a decisive factor for bringing about a change. The Riksbank is inviting to a new retail payments council I believe that the Riksbank is well-positioned to take part in managing the challenges arising from a changing payments market. But as I mentioned earlier, successful management depends on the various market participants talking to one another and working together. At present, there is no suitable forum for these discussions. The Riksbank, which is a centrally-located and independent participant, can contribute by creating a forum where stakeholders can discuss and try to resolve problems on the market. This is why the Riksbank sent out an invitation to take part in a new retail payments council last week. The idea is to bring together public authorities and market participants from both the supply and demand sides of the market. The council will not make decisions, but will act as a discussion forum that will identify and analyse problems and shortcomings on the market and propose possible ways of counteracting and resolving them. The council can thus become a joint resource for all of the parties involved. Examples of questions that may be discussed include how to improve the situation for vulnerable groups, how to remove obstacles to competition or to improve statistics. The invitation was sent to central participants in the market and to public authorities. Preferably, the council members should represent groups of participants rather than an individual participant, that is, the banks should be represented by the Swedish Bankers’ Association rather than by an individual bank. We are aware that at present this excludes smaller participants who are competing with the banks and introducing innovative products on the market. But our aim is to broaden participation by having greater participation in the working groups that may operate under the council. Nor should the Riksbank’s proposals be regarded as set in stone; it must be possible for the retail payments council to develop to remain relevant and thus working methods and participation should be reviewed on a regular basis. The Riksbank intends to have a preliminary constituent meeting at the beginning of February. The way forward involves new and old technology To summarise: Sweden is in the forefront with regard to the development and use of cashless payment methods. This development is positive in many ways, but changes also entail challenges. The Riksbank is taking an active part in the work on managing these challenges to make things easier for the various participants in the economy. Given this, I am convinced that we have a good basis for resolving short-term and long-term problems and frictions. The way forward is to continue refining old technology in new versions and also to create entirely new solutions. There is good scope to ensure our payment services will be even safer, more efficient, easily accessible and cheaper in the future. Thank you!  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 4 December 2014. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to the first press conference in our new premises. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council, which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis. Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, and in line with our forward guidance, we decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. As regards our non-standard monetary policy measures, we have started purchasing covered bonds and asset-backed securities. These purchase programmes will last for at least two years. Next week, we will conduct the second targeted longer-term refinancing operation, to be followed by six further operations until June 2016. Taken together, our measures will have a sizeable impact on our balance sheet, which is intended to move towards the dimensions it had at the beginning of 2012. In the coming months, our measures will further ease the monetary policy stance more broadly, support our forward guidance on the key ECB interest rates and reinforce the fact that there are significant and increasing differences in the monetary policy cycle between major advanced economies. However, the latest euro area macroeconomic projections indicate lower inflation, accompanied by weaker real GDP growth and subdued monetary dynamics. In this context, early next year the Governing Council will reassess the monetary stimulus achieved, the expansion of the balance sheet and the outlook for price developments. We will also evaluate the broader impact of recent oil price developments on medium-term inflation trends in the euro area. Should it become necessary to further address risks of too prolonged a period of low inflation, the Governing Council remains unanimous in its commitment to using additional unconventional instruments within its mandate. This would imply altering early next year the size, pace and composition of our measures. In response to the request of the Governing Council, ECB staff and the relevant Eurosystem committees have stepped up the technical preparations for further measures, which could, if needed, be implemented in a timely manner. All of our monetary policy measures are geared towards underpinning the firm anchoring of medium to long-term inflation expectations, in line with our aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2%, and contribute to a return of inflation rates towards that level. Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Real GDP in the euro area rose by 0.2%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter of this year. This was in line with earlier indications of a weakening in the euro area’s growth momentum, leading to a downward revision of the outlook for euro area real GDP growth in the most recent forecasts. The latest data and survey evidence up to November confirm this picture of a weaker growth profile in the period ahead. At the same time, the outlook for a modest economic recovery remains in place. On the one hand, domestic demand should be supported by our monetary policy measures, the ongoing improvements in financial conditions, the progress made in fiscal consolidation and structural reforms, and significantly lower energy prices supporting real disposable income. Furthermore, demand for exports should benefit from the global recovery. On the other hand, the recovery is likely to continue to be dampened by high unemployment, sizeable unutilised capacity, and the necessary balance sheet adjustments in the public and private sectors. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  These elements are reflected in the December 2014 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP increasing by 0.8% in 2014, 1.0% in 2015 and 1.5% in 2016. Compared with the September 2014 ECB staff macroeconomic projections, the projections for real GDP growth have been revised substantially downwards. Downward revisions were made to the projections for both domestic demand and net exports. The risks surrounding the economic outlook for the euro area are on the downside. In particular, the weak euro area growth momentum, alongside high geopolitical risks, has the potential to dampen confidence and especially private investment. In addition, insufficient progress in structural reforms in euro area countries constitutes a key downward risk to the economic outlook. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 0.3% in November 2014, after 0.4% in October. Compared with the previous month, this mainly reflects a stronger fall in energy price inflation and a somewhat lower annual increase in services prices. Taking into account the current environment of very low rates of inflation, it will be important to assess the broader impact of recent oil price developments on medium-term inflation trends and to avoid spillovers to inflation expectations and wage formation. Against the background of recent oil price developments, it is crucial to recall that forecasts and projections are based on technical assumptions, especially for oil prices and exchange rates. On the basis of information available in mid-November, at the time the December 2014 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area were finalised, annual HICP inflation was foreseen to reach 0.5% in 2014, 0.7% in 2015 and 1.3% in 2016. In comparison with the September 2014 ECB staff macroeconomic projections, they have been revised significantly downwards. These revisions reflect mainly lower oil prices in euro terms and the impact of the downwardly revised outlook for growth, but they do not yet incorporate the fall in oil prices over the past few weeks following the cut-off date for the projections. Over the coming months, annual HICP inflation rates could experience renewed downward movements, given the recent further decline in oil prices. The Governing Council will continue to closely monitor the risks to the outlook for price developments over the medium term. In this context, we will focus in particular on the possible repercussions of dampened growth dynamics, geopolitical developments, exchange rate and energy price developments, and the pass-through of our monetary policy measures. We will be particularly vigilant as regards the broader impact of recent oil price developments on medium-term inflation trends in the euro area. Turning to the monetary analysis, data for October 2014 support the assessment of subdued underlying growth in broad money (M3), with the annual growth rate standing at 2.5% in October, unchanged from September. Annual growth in M3 continues to be supported by its most liquid components, with the narrow monetary aggregate M1 growing at an annual rate of 6.2% in October. The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) was –1.6% in October, after –1.8% in September, showing a gradual recovery from a trough of –3.2% in February. On average over recent months, net redemptions have moderated from the historically high levels recorded a year ago. Lending to non-financial corporations continues to reflect the lagged relationship with the business cycle, credit risk, credit supply factors and the ongoing adjustment of financial and non-financial sector balance sheets. The annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) was 0.6% in October, after 0.5% in September. The monetary policy measures in place and the completion of the ECB’s comprehensive assessment should support a further stabilisation of credit flows. To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming from the monetary analysis confirms the need to closely monitor the risks to the outlook for 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  price developments over the medium term and to be prepared to provide further monetary policy accommodation, if needed. Monetary policy is focused on maintaining price stability over the medium term and its accommodative stance contributes to supporting economic activity. However, in order to strengthen investment activity, boost job creation and raise productivity growth, other policy areas need to contribute decisively. In particular, the determined implementation of product and labour market reforms as well as actions to improve the business environment for firms need to gain momentum in several countries. It is crucial that structural reforms be implemented credibly and effectively as this will raise expectations of higher incomes and encourage firms to increase investment today and bring forward the economic recovery. Fiscal policies should support the economic recovery, while ensuring debt sustainability in compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact, which remains the anchor for confidence. All countries should use the available scope for a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies. The Investment Plan for Europe which the European Commission announced on 26 November 2014 will also support the recovery. We are now at your disposal for questions. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Charles I Plosser: Economic growth and monetary policy – is there a new normal? Speech by Mr Charles I Plosser, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at the George Washington University and Princeton University’s Griswold Center for Economic Policy Studies, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 13 November 2014. *      *      * The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. Highlights • President Charles Plosser gives his views on the debate about a new normal for economic growth in the U.S. economy. • While some economists believe we are in a secular stagnation with low growth and reduced productivity that may persist for some time, President Plosser sides with those who think it is impossible to predict the state of future technology. • President Plosser notes, though, that monetary policy is not a tool that can fix such a secular stagnation in any case. Introduction I would like to thank George Washington University and Princeton University’s Griswold Center for Economic Policy Studies for organizing this event. I also am delighted to be here with my fellow panelists, Frank Schorfheide of the University of Pennsylvania, who is a regular visiting scholar at the Philadelphia Fed, Neal Soss of Credit Suisse, and, of course, our moderator, Binyamin Appelbaum of the New York Times. As usual, I should remind everyone that my remarks today are my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The question of whether we are facing the prospect of some sort of new economic normal or steady state growth path is a challenging one. Some have pondered whether the severity of the financial crisis and recession, or perhaps even the policy responses to these events, have ushered in a period of low growth and reduced productivity that may persist for some time. Others have suggested the seeds of a secular decline in growth predate the recession. This view stresses an evolving secular decline arising from a weakening in the rate of innovation and the productivity gains that such innovation often fosters. This view also points to demographic factors, such as an aging population, that will strain government programs that transfer resources from workers to the elderly. The evolution of longer-run growth also has implications for the longer-term real interest rate, which is largely determined by the growth in per capita consumption and the growth rate in population. In turn, the growth in per capita consumption depends on productivity gains and the share of the population engaged in production. The implications of these factors on the real interest rate is, of course, relevant for central bankers as they seek to set a policy rate to stabilize prices and promote sustainable growth. Yet, it is important to note that monetary policy is not capable of reversing or mitigating such secular slowdowns. Consequently, it is at best tangential to the efforts of a nation seeking to address secular declines in growth. In my brief time, I will highlight some of the issues underlying the views of a secular slowdown. That said, however, I want to emphasize that it is very hard to determine with any precision the longer-term growth rate of the economy. It often takes many years of data to 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  establish any degree of confidence in asserting a change in a trend. As a result, it should come as no surprise that I do not have an answer for the question whether we are facing a new normal. Instead, I will offer observations on what I believe are some of the key issues that make such assessments so challenging. Long-run trends Let me start with the question of future productivity growth, since it is the most fundamental determinant of economic prosperity. Recently, Robert Gordon has advanced the notion that we are in for a bout of long-term secular stagnation.1 His writings reflect the idea, also proposed by Tyler Cowen, that all the low-hanging fruit has been picked and that technological advances will become increasingly more difficult.2 On the other hand, scholars such as Joel Mokyr, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Andrew McAfee do not see any reason to anticipate a long-lasting decline in human ingenuity. Gordon has produced some provocative research concerning the demise of economic growth in this country. He describes a number of headwinds, four of which are relevant for my discussion: slowing innovation, reduced growth in human capital due to a dysfunctional education system, slower population growth, and the associated changing age distribution. These four components are important because economic growth and the natural level of the real interest are directly affected by growth in total factor productivity. Further, slower growth in population or declines in participation rates due to aging, other things being equal, can reduce the natural or long-run real rate of interest and lower per-capita economic growth. Gordon’s view of stagnation is based on his evaluation of data over a long sweep of economic history. He has noted a decrease in total factor productivity, a decline in the growth rate of human capital, reduced hours per worker, and a decline in labor force participation rates. He dates the beginning of stagnation in these factors to 1972. For the 80 years before then, Gordon asserts that economic growth was sparked by three great inventions: the electric light bulb, the internal combustion engine, and wireless signals. He noted that these three inventions eventually led to rounds of spinoffs that transformed society. Gordon sees no such round of spinoffs from the IT revolution, biotech, or such advances as 3-D printing.3  Economic historians such as Joel Mokyr are a bit more cautious, believing much as I do that it is nearly impossible to predict the state of future technology.4 He notes that the 20th century experienced considerable technological advancement, even in the face of considerable headwinds, including two world wars, a cold war, and the Great Depression. Some might argue, however, that the world wars were not a headwind but a boost to technological advancement. It also may be that some impediments to innovation are not endemic to the nature or science of technological progress, but instead they are created by governments and thus can be reversed. For example, does increased regulation make the development of new drugs more costly and risky? Could the significant increase in financial regulation after the financial crisis reduce the productivity of intermediation and thus impede investment and possibly the rate of                                                 1 See Gordon, “Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds” and “The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, and Reflections.” 2 See Cowen, The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All the Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern History, Got Sick, and Will (Eventually) Feel Better. 3 Gordon believes that future developments from existing or even yet-to-be-invented technologies are reasonably predictable, for instance, citing Jules Verne as one such visionary. I don’t see why he then chooses to ignore the imagination of Gene Roddenberry: Think iPhones, needleless injections, and touch-screen computers, to name a few. 4 See Mokyr, “The Next Age of Invention.” 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  growth? Or have increased taxes on the returns to saving and investment to support transfer programs potentially reduced productivity growth? Regulatory and tax burdens can often act to reduce entrepreneurial activity and innovation and thus retard productivity growth. Such costs must be weighed against any perceived benefits of such burdens. Brynjolfsson and McAfee are very optimistic about the future. They believe that we are at an inflection point and that a substantial period of more robust economic growth awaits us in the not-too-distant future.5 They point out that many revolutionary discoveries, such as DNA sequencing, occurred by creatively stringing together prior scientific procedures. They point out that the improvements in computational speeds and algorithmic developments are making computers capable of stringing together ideas, which could result in significant improvements in productivity. I believe technological advancement and the increased productivity it can foster is the overwhelming driving force behind economic growth. Demographic factors that may drive hours per worker and labor force participation are relatively insignificant when compared with innovation’s effects on productivity. After all, the remarkable growth of the 20th century occurred with a significant decline in the workweek from 60 hours to less than 40, as well as a significant increase in vacation or leisure time. It is hard to envision a decline of similar magnitude going forward. Thus, I continue to have faith in the promise of human ingenuity and do not envision the dire outcomes envisioned by Gordon.6 That does not mean that we won’t experience spurts of unusually high- and low-productivity growth, but those periods are likely to be identified and understood only well after the fact. The arguments presented by both sides of the secular stagnation debate highlight that the future could unfold in very different ways. I think there is no doubt that longer-term growth rates can and do vary, and thus, longer-term real interest rates also vary. Yet, such movements tend to occur gradually and are very difficult to assess with any precision in real time. As my discussion suggests, we should focus on policies designed to enhance innovation and productivity if we are to continue to improve per capita consumption and general economic welfare. Monetary policy How do variations in the longer-term growth rate of the economy, and thus the longer-term real rate of interest, affect monetary policy? First, I want to reiterate that long-term growth is primarily determined by productivity growth. Monetary policy is not an appropriate tool for addressing perceived declines in productivity. However, assessments of long-run potential growth can influence the setting of monetary policy because they influence the steady-state or long-run real interest rate. If steady-state real rates are lower, then the so-called “neutral setting of monetary policy” would also be lower. That is, the neutral funds rate would be lower. The debate about a secular decline in growth today thus translates into a discussion of where, or how high, the neutral policy rate should be. So, the higher it is relative to the current funds rate, the more aggressive policy might have to be and vice versa. But there are other factors that could complicate the policy path. If potential output is lower in the future than previously thought, then there is likely to be less “slack” in the current economy than one might think. So, “output gaps” are likely to be smaller, which in many policy rules would suggest higher interest rates, other things being equal. While a lower steady-state real rate                                                 5 See Brynjolfsson and McAfee, The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies. 6 Summers in “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound” offers different concerns. He argues that the real rate of interest may have declined to very low, or even negative, levels leading to the possibility of an inefficient equilibrium and a form of secular stagnation. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  may act to shift down the neutral rate, the effects on the dynamic path of policy as it returns to the neutral are somewhat more complex. While the expected neutral funds rate is something that may be relevant, estimating and communicating a value with any confidence would be challenging. Measuring longer-run trends is a difficult and delicate issue. Because expectations about monetary policy are important, particularly in financial markets, it may be useful for the FOMC to indicate what ranges are likely for the neutral federal funds rate. But given the uncertainties, this may be difficult and conveying a false sense of precision may prove to be counterproductive. So, I believe, adjustments to the perceived neutral funds rate should be done with great care and discipline. They should not be done in response to the typical cyclical fluctuations in real rates. Our ability to truly assess a significant shift in the longer-term real rate is quite limited, and, in the presence of such uncertainty and measurement error, one should be careful not to confuse the public. Conclusions In summary, there is a lively debate about the future of innovation and other factors that shape our prospects for growth. My own view is that human ingenuity and innovation will continue to be a source of productivity growth. But that does not mean we should be complacent about our future. Productivity is the ultimate means to economic prosperity, and we should undertake policies that promote innovation and technological progress and eliminate practices that discourage such progress. Monetary policy has a limited role to play in this endeavor except as it can promote a stable environment to allow these long-run forces to succeed. Yet, the appropriate setting of monetary policy can be affected by the longer-term trends. Failure to adjust to such trends can lead to deviations from a central bank’s inflation target. Yet, distinguishing short-run or transitory fluctuations from more permanent or persistent movements in growth and real interest rates is a tricky and difficult task. It is near impossible in real time. These considerations lead me to believe that monetary policymakers should take great care in making significant adjustments in their view of the neutral policy rate. We live in a constantly changing world and one that will hopefully be full of surprising new developments that enhance economic welfare. References Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Andrew McAfee. The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies. New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company, 2014. Cowen, Tyler. The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All the Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern History, Got Sick, and Will (Eventually) Feel Better. New York, NY: Dutton Adult, 2011. Gordon, Robert J. “Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds,” NBER Working Paper 18315, (August 2012). Gordon, Robert J. “The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, and Reflections,” NBER Working Paper 19895, (February 2014). Mokyr, Joel. “The Next Age of Invention,” City Journal, (Winter 2014); www.city-journal.org/2014/24_1_invention.html.  Summers, Lawrence H. “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,” Business Economics, Vol. 49:2 (April 2014), pp. 65–73. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Lael Brainard: Opening remarks Speech by Ms Lael Brainard, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act Outreach Meeting, Los Angeles, California, 2 December 2014. *      *      * On behalf of the Federal Reserve System, I am pleased to be here at the first in a series of outreach meetings designed to hear your feedback and concerns about regulatory burden. I want to thank you all for taking the time to participate in this important dialogue and also extend my thanks to the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco for providing space for today’s meeting at the Los Angeles Branch. The Federal Reserve takes its mandate under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA) seriously. The EGRPRA review provides an opportunity for the agencies to consider whether current regulations are well-balanced and effective or whether any are outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome. Public input is critical to this process and will help us identify potential solutions to alleviate undue burden. Well-conceived regulations help to ensure the safety and soundness of our banking system, as well as the fair treatment of consumers. But unnecessary regulations drain bank resources and reduce the important services that depository institutions provide to households and businesses. Creating balanced regulations that are effective and thoughtfully calibrated to avoid undue burden requires input from stakeholders. In-person meetings, like the one we are holding today, help us gather information that is critical to our understanding of how regulations affect not only the banking industry but also the consumers and communities they serve. They also enable stakeholders to learn from one another and provide us with multiple perspectives on the complex issues that our regulations address. Outside of these meetings, we also look forward to receiving written comments in which you can elaborate on how to improve our regulations in more detail than we can cover in the time we have today. We recognize that depository institutions come in many sizes, have different business models, and manage different risks. As a result, it is often necessary to tailor regulations to the institution. Applying a one-size-fits-all approach to regulations may produce a small benefit at a disproportionately large compliance cost to smaller institutions. Of particular concern in this regard is the need to ensure our regulations are appropriately calibrated for smaller institutions. For example, because the largest banks present the greatest risk to the stability of our financial system, many of the regulations passed under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act) are specifically targeted at these firms. It would be counterproductive to apply those same expectations to small banks. Accordingly, we think it is important to tailor rules whenever possible to clearly differentiate expectations for different portfolios of banks and reduce undue burden on community banks. Tailoring regulations may be more challenging in some areas, such as rules that provide transparency and fairness in consumer transactions. Those are standards that apply throughout the financial system. I should note that the Dodd-Frank Act transferred rule-writing authority for many of the consumer laws and regulations to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, or CFPB. The review of those regulations must be undertaken by the CFPB under procedures incorporated in the Dodd-Frank Act rather than EGRPRA. However, the Federal Reserve Board, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation retained rule-writing authority for the Community Reinvestment Act, and we are interested in your comments regarding ways we can improve the regulation. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  In addition to changes in the regulatory and supervisory landscape, the banking industry itself has also undergone major changes. Advances in technology and shifts in industry composition between depository institutions and nondepository companies have changed the types of financial services and products that are offered, as well as how those services and products are accessed. We will be very interested in your feedback regarding how these types of industry changes have impacted the effectiveness of our regulations. Let me conclude by saying that we will consider your comments carefully as the agencies coordinate to discuss and consider the appropriate action that is likely to best serve our financial system and the interests of institutions and consumers. The result will be contained in the agencies’ report to the Congress summarizing the issues raised and the agencies’ conclusions about the need for regulatory or legislative changes. Thank you for joining us today.  
