   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik: Recent developments in central bank governance, accountability and transparency as core drivers for effective financial supervision and the importance of board effectiveness for banks and central banks Speaking note by Ms Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik, Vice-Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, at the Conference “Central Bank and Supervisory Governance”, organized by the Netherlands Bank, Amsterdam, 12 February 2016. *      *      * At the beginning of 2016, the global economy looks set to enter another challenging year ahead. The risks for policymakers remain multifaceted as global transitions continue with adjustments happening on multiple fronts. First source of vulnerability is China as it transits from earlier main engine of global economic growth to a new phase of growth rebalancing, that is almost certain to result in a major slowdown internally and adverse spillovers externally through the trade linkages and prices of commodities. As second, is the protracted period of low commodities prices straining growth prospects for commodities exporters, including some major emerging markets like Brazil, Russia and South Africa. Third front is Europe that along with the debt crisis, now faces another challenging struggle to effectively manage the migrant crisis that has brought to a test the EU’s absorption capacity and the political system. Fourth, the US FED has launched the normalization of monetary policy leading to a policy divergence in advanced economies and building fears of potentially tighter financing conditions and declining  capital flows that may adversely affect emerging market economies. The international community response to the crisis in the Middle East and the risks of potential Brexit are additional factors that add to the geopolitical risks. Global growth prospects remain cloudy again, with IMF now (WEO, January 2016) expecting more gradual pick up in global growth from the estimated 3.1% in 2015 to 3.4% in 2016 and 3.6% in 2017 (as compared to 3.6% for 2016 and 3.8% for 2017 in October 2015, WEO). Risks continue to weigh on the downside and are particularly prominent for the emerging and developing economies given their higher vulnerability to sudden switches in global confidence, reversals in capital flows and financial markets volatility.  The challenging world translates into challenging environment for monetary policy making. Continuous vigilance on multiple fronts, while successfully juggling between difficult trade-offs in decision making is what has become the new art of central banking nowadays. The main challenge for monetary authorities, not only today, but for years back, is how to deliver the most appropriate policy mix that will support demand and activity, while safeguarding against macro-financial risks. Recent crisis has brought financial stability to the fore acknowledging the importance of central banks in financial stability, a task which they have historically performed, though to a varying degrees. According to a BIS study (2009) central banks’ arrangements for financial stability as they stood before the crisis have differed widely across countries, both for normal and crisis times. Banking supervision was not always tasked to the central bank, with many central banks lacking a clear mandate for macro prudential policies. As it comes to advanced economies, the common practice before the crisis was generally characterized by separation in responsibilities with respect to monetary policy and banking supervision, delegating each function to a different regulator. Looking at EU, the integrated model of supervision was predominating across the member states, capturing the form of unified financial and banking oversight under one single national authority, but generally, not the central bank. The situation was quite different in emerging countries where central banks tended to be the main micro prudential supervisor for banks. In response to the crisis, there was a visible convergence in both, advanced and emerging economies, towards integrated supervision under the common roof of the central bank, usually by using the “new” formula of 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  macro-supervision. The role of sound supervision was endorsed as absolutely vital for promotion and maintenance of healthy financial system, while central banks got recognized as leading protagonists in the area of prevention, management and resolution of financial crises.  Thus, in 2010, the US has passed the Dodd-Frank Act redesigning the role of FED in financial supervision, while in EU there is an ongoing process towards a banking union assigning banking supervision to the ECB together with the national supervisory authorities of the participating member states. The benefits of integrated supervision rest on the synergies between banking supervision and monetary policy given that banks play the crucial role in monetary policy transmission mechanism. In such a context, the supervisory information regarding the individual banks’ health can be highly beneficial to central banks in enhancing monetary policy effectiveness. On the other hand, expanding the central bank’s mandate with additional tasks may pose challenges with respect to central bank governance. As noted by Georgsson et al. (2015) the broader the mandate a central bank has, the more often it will be forced to find a balance between different objectives, tasks and tools. Studying the implications of financial stability tasks on central bank governance, BIS (2009) underlines the need for effective governance arrangements that should be designed to deliver sustainable conduct of monetary policy functions in combination with the additional mandate to contribute to financial stability. Further, the Report stresses the importance of clarity with respect to financial stability responsibilities, policy transparency as to promote accountability, full autonomy to safeguard against political pressures and undue influence from business and industry and close collaboration with other regulators in the country. Another important aspect is the central bank balance sheet which should be sound enough with strengthened risk-bearing capacity to enable successful implementation of monetary policy and support financial stability in case of emergency.  Going back to banking supervision, besides the institutional setup, another important question raised by the crisis relates to the role of transparency and accountability in promoting more effective banking supervision. According to the literature, for supervision to be considered effective it should be able to effectively develop, implement, monitor and enforce supervisory policies under normal and stressed economic conditions. BIS (2012) defines several preconditions for effective supervision in practice: 1) sound and sustainable macroeconomic policies as a core precondition for stable financial system; 2) a well established framework for financial stability policy formulation i.e. clear framework for macro prudential surveillance and financial stability policy formulation; 3) proper regulatory environment; 4) a clear framework for crisis management, recovery and resolution; 5) an appropriate level of systemic protection (or public safety net) such is a system of deposit insurance which contributes to public confidence in the system and thus limit contagion from banks in distress and 6) effective market discipline. Transparency is another factor that gains growing importance in recent years. Thus, in order to restore confidence and rebuild financial stability there was a strong push towards supervisors to increase their transparency to the markets and the public. One supporting argument for these trends is the role of transparency as prerequisite for accountability. Higher transparency enhances the legitimacy of the supervisor, also safeguarding his independence. When transparent, the supervisory actions become more predictable thus helping to shape expectations and foster linkages across institutions and markets. Finally, transparency sets the ground for careful and consistent decision-making, reducing the scope for arbitrary decisions. Empirical research (Arnone et al., 2007), finds a positive correlation between the transparency of the supervisor and the effectiveness of banking supervision. They also report higher transparency of banking supervision (based on adherence to the IMF code) in industrial countries than in emerging economies. Another, more recent research (Liendrop at al., 2011) suggests that the overall level of transparency of supervisors in industrial countries is very similar to transparency of supervisors in emerging economies indicating to positive movements in emerging markets in the area in recent years. Indeed, supervisors seem to endorse transparency. In 2006 the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, in the Basel Core Principles for effective banking supervision, first mentioned that supervisors should follow transparent processes. This means that supervisors should disclose their objectives and 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  framework and be held accountable for performing their duties in line with those objectives and framework. The Capital Requirements Directive IV (CRD IV) stipulates that supervisors need to publish relevant information on the laws, regulations, administrative rules and guidance, information on options and discretions, the general criteria and methodologies used in the supervisory review and evaluation process, and aggregate statistical data on the implementation of the prudential framework, including the number and nature of supervisory measures taken and administrative penalties imposed.The European Banking Authority (EBA) acknowledges the need for supervisory transparency and has set up guidelines for supervisory transparency (CEBS, 2010) intended to increase the transparency of supervisory practices and to enhance the comparability of national practices. Furthermore, EBA publishes relevant information of all EU countries on supervisory laws and regulations and statistical data on national banking sectors, risk indicators and supervisory actions.  While the benefits of greater transparency in supervision are broadly recognized, the level of disclosure remains a challenging issue. This relates to the specifics of the supervision as it obtains sensitive information with respect to the state of individual banks that if publicly disclosed may affect its competitive position. Given this, what one could expect is for supervisors to continue to increase transparency when it comes to the authority itself disclosing more information on the supervisory model and the methodology used to evaluate the risk profile of individual banks, while retaining their “secrecy” when it comes to sensitive information concerning individual banks. This should enable markets to better understand the supervisory actions, enhance accountability of the supervisors in front of the general public while protecting market-sensitive information.  Tackling the issue of board effectiveness, there is a growing consensus nowadays that well-designed committee makes important prerequisite for qualitative decision-making in central banks. The role of the committee for sound policy making is probably best noted by Warsh (2015) in his observation that “monetary policy is made neither by rule nor by discretion. It is made by committee”. The literature shows that the institutional setup of the board indeed matters for monetary policy (Morgan, 2005; Maier, 2010; Sibert, 2006) suggesting guidelines for optimal committee design. Thus, according to Maier (2010) the optimal committee should have clear objective and independence; should not be too large in size (up to five members) and have measures to avoid free-riding and discourage polarization and group think. When it comes to practice, the number of decision-makers, decision-making protocol, and principals in attendance diverge markedly among the leading central banks, suggesting for committee dynamics to be appropriately adjusted conditional on the institutional set-up and specifics of the central bank. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Hiroshi Nakaso: Challenges toward financial stability and the policy frontier – unconventional monetary policy, macroprudence, and financial institutions’ low profitability Speech by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the IVA (The Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences) – JSPS (The Japan Society for the Promotion of Science) Seminar, Stockholm, 21 March 2016. *      *      * Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. Introduction Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. It is a great honor and pleasure for me to be able to speak to you at this esteemed institution today. Before I get into the substance of this speech, let me first thank the person who made this event possible: Mr. Robert Stenram. Mr. Stenram was the Tokyo representative of Swedbank in the 1990s, during the acute financial crisis in Japan. While he was posted in Tokyo, he was instrumental in liaising very closely with the Japanese banking industry. I benefitted from his deep insights and thoughtful advice based on his experiences as a professional banker. It was indeed the most turbulent of times, but we also became friends, and I have long enjoyed his friendship since then. I deeply regret that he no longer is with us, and wish to pay my tribute to the great work he has accomplished in linking Sweden and Japan in the world of finance. Robert, I will not forget how much we owe to you. May his soul, now joined by his beloved wife Siv, rest in peace. Over the years, both Sweden and Japan have confronted a few very difficult issues in terms of monetary policy and financial stability. In the late 1980s, we saw financial bubbles develop and burst. From 2008 to 2009, we tackled the most recent global financial crisis together, and today the two countries are fighting deflationary headwinds. As you know, the Riksbank and the Bank of Japan have adopted negative interest rate policies so as to achieve their respective price stability targets. In order to discharge our responsibilities for maintaining price and financial stability, central banks must be prepared to meet new challenges as they appear. Reflecting on my experiences, I have been on the front lines as a central banker during Japan’s financial crisis in the 1990s and 2000s, and during our Bank’s long battle with deflation for nearly two decades. Not once during all those years could I forget the importance of financial stability. With this background, I will describe today the importance of financial stability and the policy implications of newly emerging challenges from three perspectives: unconventional monetary policy, macroprudence, and low profitability of financial institutions. Financial crisis and growth inflection To begin with, let me go back to the 1990s and explain my experiences during the bursting of the bubble economy in Japan. As I touched on at the beginning, both Sweden and Japan experienced financial bubbles. Nevertheless, the subsequent paths of the two countries were quite different (Chart 1). In Sweden after the crisis in the early 1990s, capital was quickly injected into the banking system and the stability of the financial system was restored. In addition, the Swedish krona was floated, and the Riksbank was able to ease monetary policy. With the tailwind of the depreciating krona contributing, the Swedish economy began to recover as early as 1993. Furthermore, following Sweden’s accession to the European Union in 1995, factors such as the growth of the IT industry benefitting from the increases in inbound investment contributed 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  to productivity growth. In fact, Sweden’s potential growth actually increased after the bursting of the bubble. In contrast, Japan only managed to inject capital into financial institutions on a meaningful scale after the “Dark November” in 1997, when it experienced a series of failures of large financial institutions.1 That was nearly eight years after the bubble had burst. During those years, financial institutions’ behavior, such as evergreening their loans to practically failed businesses by extending additional loans, resulted in a further buildup of impaired assets, which made it all the more difficult to cleanse financial institutions’ balance sheets of problem loans, and which distorted the allocation of resources. The layering of these multiple factors pushed the Japanese economy into deflation, and concurrently, productivity growth declined.2 Furthermore, this period overlapped with rapid changes in demography, resulting from a declining working-age population against the backdrop of a low birth rate and aging. The confluence of the two currents – financial sector problems and demographic changes – significantly pulled down Japan’s potential growth rate (Chart 2). That in turn exacerbated over-leveraging in the corporate sector and discouraged corporate investment. From a macroeconomic perspective, lower investment depressed productivity growth, which again negatively impacted potential growth. There was a vicious cycle: over-leveraging in the corporate sector led to the decline in the potential growth rate, which in turn exacerbated the difficulty of resolving non-performing loans in the banking sector and over-leveraging in the corporate sector. Admitting one can be wise only after the event, in retrospect, the forbearance policy at an early stage after the bursting of the asset bubble and the underestimation of the systemic nature of what was going on in the financial sector allowed the problem in the banking sector to develop into a full-blown financial crisis.3 This is the shorthand account of the extended stagnation and deflation following the bursting of the bubble: the so-called “lost two decades” in Japan. From this painful episode, we have learned two things. One is that financial stability is the foundation of sustained growth of the economy, and another is that changes in potential growth amplify the financial cycle and consequently impact financial stability. The widespread recognition in the international policy fora of the need to take account of the macroprudential perspective may be a consequence of the recent global financial crisis, but Japan’s predicament that preceded it seems to amply underscore the importance of such a perspective. To me, this was a formative experience as a central banker. I have attached importance to macroprudence ever since. Stability consequences of QQE with a negative interest rate Next on my agenda today is the implementation of monetary policy by the Bank of Japan and its relationship with macroprudential policy. After the bursting of the bubble, the lowering of potential growth brought about a large decline in the natural rate of interest, which is the guidepost for monetary policy formulation (Chart 3). As you know, monetary easing is used to bring down real interest rates below the natural rate of interest. Mindful of the prevailing views then that there was a zero lower bound for nominal interest rates, quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) introduced by the Bank of Japan in April 2013 was a breakthrough in the following sense: the Bank made a strong commitment to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, which encouraged expected                                                 1  During this month, as many as four financial institutions, including internationally active ones, failed in succession: Sanyo Securities, Hokkaido Takushoku Bank, Yamaichi Securities, and Tokuyo City Bank. 2  Caballero, Ricardo J., Takeo Hoshi, and Anil K. Kashyap. 2008. “Zombie Lending and Depressed Restructuring in Japan.” American Economic Review, 98(5): 1943–77. 3  Nakaso, Hiroshi. “The financial crisis in Japan during the 1990s: how the Bank of Japan responded and the lessons learnt,” BIS Papers No 6, October 2001. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  inflation to rise. Concurrently, the Bank, recognizing that there was only limited room for short-term interest rates to decline, exerted downward pressure on nominal interest rates across the entire yield curve by purchasing a large amount of long-term government bonds, so that together with higher inflation expectations, real interest rates would be brought down. The QQE with a negative interest rate framework that was introduced by the Bank of Japan this January aims at reinforcing the existing QQE and supports the activities of firms and households, thereby ensuring the earliest attainment of the 2 percent inflation target. The policy will work through the same channels, by bringing down real interest rates. As I just noted, the conventional wisdom was that there was a zero lower bound for nominal interest rates, but the demonstration by a few European central banks, including the Riksbank, that such limitation could be overcome to some degree led the Bank of Japan to adopt the new policy framework. In fact, after the introduction of the negative policy rate, the financial environment has further relaxed, with the yield curve shifting significantly lower and financial institutions lowering their lending rates (Chart 4). In addition, rebalancing of the portfolios of financial institutions is also starting to take place, with increased interest in investing in foreign currency denominated bonds, although this trend is somewhat masked by the effects of recent market turmoil. Against the backdrop of these positive developments in financial intermediation, from the macroprudential perspective, their effects on financial stability must be carefully monitored. I believe that we need to be mindful of two angles. One is the “overheating” risk, where the extremely relaxed financial environment could destabilize the financial system through excessive risk taking. The other is the “contraction” risk, where low revenue streams resulting from low interest rates could erode the risk appetite and/or undermine the soundness of financial institutions. For the time being, we believe that there is generally no need to be overly concerned as regards the overheating risk. There is evidence of increasing real estate transactions, with prices of apartments in the Tokyo area topping their previous peak during the bubble years, but leverage in the real estate sector is still not excessive. Our general view is that the financial sector has a robust capital base relative to risks taken and its resilience in the face of stress is sufficient, and thus it could undertake positive risk taking and portfolio rebalancing under QQE with a negative interest rate framework. At the same time, we believe that the contraction risk at present is also small. The extended period of monetary easing has tended to pressure the interest rate margins of financial institutions, negatively impacting their revenue streams (Chart 5). This is not something that is unique to a setting of unconventional monetary policy, but in an economic environment where such exceptional policy needs to be adopted, there tends to be less room for deposit rates to fall – in other words, the interest rate margins are tighter than ever – and additional easing of policy could result in a non-linear compression of margins.4 Having said that, Japanese financial institutions have been able to remain sound because the reduction in margins thus far has been more than offset by revenue improvements against the backdrop of improving economic conditions under monetary easing, such as increases in lending volume, lower credit costs, and higher investment incomes. The policy framework of QQE with a negative interest rate maintains monetary easing in terms of quantity and quality and boosts it strongly with a negative policy rate. As such, it will strongly influence the financial system. Accordingly, the Bank of Japan must thoroughly monitor and analyze the state of the financial system from a macroprudential perspective. To this end, the Bank of Japan is publishing its Financial System Report twice a year. In this report, it assesses the stability of Japan’s financial system from various angles, including the                                                 4  Borio, Claudio, Leonardo Gambacorta, and Boris Hofmann. 2015. “The Influence of Monetary Policy on Bank Profitability.” BIS Working Papers No.514. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  balance between the amount of risks borne by financial institutions and their financial bases, macro stress testing, and macro risk indicators (i.e., the “heat map”). I believe that independent examination of developments from a financial perspective will enhance the credibility of QQE with a negative interest rate. Macroprudential policy and monetary policy Even if the risks are contained at this juncture, what should we do if, in the future, the overheating risk becomes more apparent? There are two contrasting views on the relationship between monetary and macroprudential policies: the separation principle and leaning against the wind. The former says to render unto monetary policy things that concern price stability, and render unto macroprudential policy things that concern financial stability. On the other hand, the latter holds that, if the amplification of financial imbalances is expected to threaten price stability in the long run, the central bank should resort to monetary policy in order to dampen the financial cycle, notwithstanding a temporary deviation of inflation from the target. Let me offer you my views, which are influenced by the experiences of the Japanese bubble. Up until the 1980s, the Bank of Japan was requiring banks to comply with guidance that set their loan growth at levels individually assigned by the Bank. This arrangement, called “window guidance” was then regarded as a tool for monetary policy, but under the current taxonomy, it would be regarded as a time-varying macroprudential policy tool, akin to regulation of loan-to-value (LTV) or debt-to-income (DTI). There were two schools of thought regarding the effectiveness of the tool: the “independent tool theory,” which held that window guidance was effective by itself, and the “complementary tool theory,” which held that window guidance had to be used alongside the mainstream monetary policy of official discount rate adjustments to be effective. The subject was actively discussed in academia, and those supporting the independent tool theory argued that a tightening of window guidance could dampen the financial cycle, even if the official discount rate was held steady.5 The Bank of Japan, in the meantime, basically adopted the complementary tool theory and explained window guidance as a tool to support general policy instruments, such as changes to the official discount rate, rather than an independent policy instrument. Notwithstanding such an official position, in the last half of the 1980s, as the call for international policy coordination necessitated the maintenance of a low interest rate environment with a view to expanding domestic demand, the Bank of Japan attempted to respond to signs of financial excesses through the tightening of window guidance. As a result, the growth of bank lending slowed gradually, but large corporates were still able to raise funds from outside the banking sector through the issuance of bonds (Chart 6). The period coincided with the gradual relaxation of underwriting guidelines for corporate bonds, and the buoyant stock market, which was partly a reflection of monetary easing, that reduced the costs of equity financing, such as convertible bonds and bonds with embedded warrants. The resulting increases in capital market financing sustained the relaxed financial environment, and corporate balance sheets kept on expanding. The Bank of Japan could not effectively deal with the signs of overheating. Another notable feature of the Japanese bubble in the late 1980s was that potential growth and the natural rate of interest were both fairly high at the time (Charts 2 and 3). The degree of monetary easing at one particular level of the policy rate depends on whether the natural rate of interest is high or low. When the natural rate of interest and expected growth were high, there were likely to be strong incentives for both financial institutions and corporates to circumvent the restriction imposed by window guidance.                                                 5  Fukumoto, Tomoyuki, Masato Higashi, Yasunari Inamura, and Takeshi Kimura. “Effectiveness of Window Guidance and Financial Environment,” Bank of Japan Review Series, 10-E-4, August 2010. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  In light of the Japanese experiences, while I fully subscribe to the view that narrowly confined imbalances should be countered by macroprudential policy as the first line of defense, the effectiveness of such policy by itself is very uncertain, considering the changes in financial market structure due to deregulation and the level of the natural rate of interest. Accordingly, I cannot fully uphold the separation principle, which reflects the view that time-varying macroprudential policy measures are by themselves effective. I believe we should leave open the possibility of responding to widening financial imbalances with fiscal policy, including tax policy, and monetary policy. Such thinking is reflected in how the Bank of Japan conducts monetary policy, where the Bank examines economic and monetary conditions in a two-pillar approach: the deliberation of the most likely outcomes for the first pillar, and the deliberation of other risk factors relevant for the conduct of monetary policy, financial imbalances in particular, for the second pillar. Low profitability of financial institutions Let me now turn to the other risk: the contraction risk. What should we do if this risk becomes apparent? More specifically, what should we make of the low profitability of financial institutions from a macroprudential perspective? This question seems to be attracting more and more attention in Europe as well. In order to properly think about this issue, it is important to distinguish between low profitability due to acute problems and that due to chronic issues. When profits of financial institutions severely decline because of acute stresses, it is necessary to have sufficient capital in order to maintain financial stability. Looking at current developments, the international banking system has significantly raised the capital ratio, reflecting the strengthening of the capital rules following the recent financial crisis. Such capital strength is also important for the effective transmission of monetary policy. Given that monetary easing pressures interest margins at financial institutions in the short run, weakly capitalized institutions will not be able to increase lending, undercutting the positive effects of easing. As I noted earlier, the fact that Japanese financial institutions were able to increase lending as the Bank of Japan implemented unconventional monetary policies and margins were compressed demonstrates how well capitalized the institutions are. In short, even if the economy suffers an acute stress and profits of financial institutions are negatively impacted, as the cushion provided by sufficient capital prevents the instability of the financial system, stimulus from monetary easing should provide the shot in the arm that would turn around the economy and thence the profits of financial institutions. Such an outcome, however, is not assured when the financial system is confronted with more chronic stresses, even if current levels of capital are adequate. This is because the persistence of an environment in which financial institutions cannot get sufficient net returns on capital would eventually erode the capital of financial institutions. One example of such chronic stress is foot-dragging by financial institutions in their recognition of non-performing loans and its flip side: the over-leveraging of corporates. Another is the inflection of the potential growth rate, which would lower firms’ expectations for growth and depress investment. In fact, in many developed economies, excess savings are observed in the corporate sector (Chart 7). With the stagnation of investment comes the decline in productivity growth, which would again negatively impact the potential growth rate. As the process unfolds, financial institutions would face downward pressure on their lending rates. Financial institutions facing the resulting compression of interest rate margins would then pursue volume to increase their revenue flows. Such increases in competitive pressure would further depress lending rates and revenues as well. Excessive competition by financial institutions in lending would thus make it easier for low-productivity firms to survive, hindering the efficient allocation of resources in the economy and the so-called “creative destruction,” and consequently would prevent the lifting of the potential growth rate. If the low levels of profits at financial institutions and the depressed potential growth rate are tied together by excessive lending competition by financial institutions, the risk that profits become “too low to 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  recover” could gradually increase, unless financial institutions succeed in changing their business models. The quest for innovations in financial intermediation Joseph Alois Schumpeter, in his seminal The Theory of Economic Development, stresses the important role played by the “banker,” as well as that of the “entrepreneur”6 The banker profits from her ability to identify those entrepreneurs who develop truly innovative undertakings that are high-quality startups, and from generating information that leads to improved corporate performance. Schumpeter expects that such profit motives of the banker backed up by her exceptional ability to pick winners would bring about a more efficient reallocation of risks in the macroeconomy and lead to an endogenous rise in the economic growth rate.7 This role of the banker – promoting the creative destruction through financial intermediation – has not changed since the time of Schumpeter. However, as economies mature, the nature of investment that supports innovations by entrepreneurs changes gradually from investments in tangible assets to those in intangible assets, such as research and development, information technology, and human and organizational capital. Accordingly, investment in intangible assets is now identified as an important element of new sources of growth in the developed economies.8 If I may point out the findings of one recent research study, investments in intangible assets are more sensitive to the availability of internal funds (or cashflow) compared with investments in tangible assets.9 If financial markets were perfect markets, the sources of funds – that is, internal financing or external financing including bank financing – would be completely substitutable, and corporate investment would not be affected by the availability of internal funds. Nevertheless, the fact that investments in intangibles are more sensitive to the availability of internal funds suggests that firms could be facing financial constraints due to information asymmetries. One could say that such asymmetries result from the difficulty of assessing the collateral value of intangible assets compared with tangible assets. Consequently, there are opportunities for the banker to profit from overcoming information asymmetries. In Japan, the ratio of investments in intangible assets to nominal GDP is lower than that in the United States and other major peers (Chart 8). If financial institutions are able to tease out the corporate demand for investments in intangible assets, that not only would enhance the productivity of the whole economy but also would contribute to solving the structural problem of low profitability of financial institutions. The future path of the Japanese economy would be influenced by the behavior of financial institutions whether financial institutions would continue their war of attrition under their existing business models or would expand their business frontiers by unearthing new financing needs. Just as in human beings, for whom chronic syndromes demand fundamental changes in lifestyles, financial institutions must be prepared to fundamentally change their business models in order to extricate themselves from a structural lack of profitability.                                                 6  Schumpeter, Joseph Alois. 1926. Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung: Eine Untersuchung über Unternehmergewinn, Kapital, Kredit, Zins und den Konjunkturzyklus, 2nd revised ed. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. (The Theory of Economic Development, Translated by Redvers Opie, Transaction Publishers: New Brunswick, New Jersey, 1983.) 7  Laeven, Luc & Levine, Ross & Michalopoulos, Stelios. 2015. “Financial innovation and endogenous growth,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, Elsevier, vol. 24(1), pages 1–24. 8  OECD. 2011. “New Sources of Growth: Intangible Assets.” 9  Morikawa, Masayuki. 2015. “Financial Constraints on Intangible Investments: Evidence from Japanese Firms,” in Ahmed Bounfour and Tsutomu Miyagawa eds. Intangibles, Market Failure and Innovation Performance, Springer, Ch.6, pp.139–155. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  The Bank of Japan has implemented a few measures that would encourage financial institutions to implement their essential reforms. One is to adjust the way in which the Bank injects liquidity into the financial system – for example, the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth, and purchases of ETFs composed of stocks issued by firms that are proactively investing in physical and human capital. These measures are expected to play catalytic roles in enhancing the financial intermediation functions of financial institutions and capital markets, which would foster productivity increases and ultimately lead to improvements in the potential rate of growth. Another set of measures is designed to enhance the function of financial institutions to efficiently allocate resources. The Bank of Japan is actively providing financial institutions with information and know-how through seminars, etc., so that they can enhance the value of their financial intermediation through, for example, support for startup businesses, business matching, rejuvenating businesses, and utilizing information technology. These undertakings by the Bank of Japan are somewhat different from those found in the conventional macroprudential toolkit, but I believe that they perform important functions in promoting financial stability. Unconventional policy and beyond Before concluding my remarks today, I would like to emphasize that, if changes in the potential growth rate would influence the effectiveness of monetary and macroprudential policies, and ultimately affect price and financial stability, that would naturally affect central banks’ thinking on policy formulation. As a matter of fact, in the area of monetary policy, the effectiveness of policy had been constrained in Japan by the concurrent decline in expected inflation under persistent deflation and in the potential growth rate. In this regard, the current pursuit by the Bank of Japan of the 2 percent inflation target through QQE with a negative interest rate will contribute to lifting potential growth through purging the deflationary mindset and encouraging capital formation. At the same time, in the area of macroprudential policy, the current focus on strengthening regulation does not solve the structural problem of low profitability at financial institutions. With regard to this problem, in the global policy fora, the jury is still out, so to speak, as regards how to expand the policy frontier. Central banks perhaps need to be a little more flexible in the designing of macroprudential policies to serve this end. Of course, structural problems cannot solely be solved by central bank actions. Economic policies of the government and undertakings by firms and financial institutions aimed at encouraging innovation are also essential. The Bank of Japan is working with these actors in order to tackle the new challenges in terms of financial stability. Thank you for your attention. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9    
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Yves Mersch: Shaping the future of Europe’s financial market infrastructure Opening remarks by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the Information session on the consultative report on RTGS services, Frankfurt am Main, 22 March 2016. *      *      * Introduction In my opening remarks I want to address three issues. First, I will set out the main drivers of change that have been shaping Europe’s financial market infrastructure in general and the RTGS system in particular. Second, I will address the consequences of these drivers for change that the Eurosystem will have to tackle in its roles as operator, overseer and catalyst. And third, I will present the Eurosystem’s concept for evolving its market infrastructure beyond 2020. 1. Key drivers of change in Europe’s financial market infrastructure Change in Europe’s financial market infrastructure landscape has been driven by two big objectives: integration and increasing efficiency. With the advent of the euro as a common currency, integration was at the heart of the Eurosystem’s strategy for building its RTGS system and the Correspondent Central Banking Model (CCBM) in the 1990s. The elimination of differences between national and cross-border retail payments in euro was a key ambition behind the creation of the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). Last but not least, T2S, the single pan-European platform for securities settlement in central bank money, has consolidated the most fundamental part of the securities value chain: settlement. We are now seeing market consolidation in trading and clearing as well. In parallel to the efforts to move towards an integrated market infrastructure, the Eurosystem has taken steps to increase the efficiency of its market infrastructure. This has been facilitated by technological progress and innovation. At the same time, we have to take into account that digitalisation and the social diffusion of real-time information and communication has fundamentally changed end user expectations. Access to and use of financial services anytime, anywhere, via multiple devices/access channels is taken for granted now. This not only has consequences for the service layer, but also for the underlying clearing and settlement layers. A further impact on certain functionalities within the market infrastructure may be expected from distributed ledger technologies (DLTs). We are committed to analysing whether these technologies could lead to lower costs and a more resilient market infrastructure. But we also have to consider how they may affect financial intermediation in general, the role of banks and other market participants, as well as our rules and procedures as regulators. 2. Consequences for the central bank in its three roles as operator, overseer and catalyst The Eurosystem fulfils its statutory task of promoting the smooth operation of payment and settlement systems in three distinct roles: as operator, overseer and catalyst. These three roles are not going to change. What does change is what we need to do in each role. As an operator, the Eurosystem is committed to assessing the opportunities presented by new technologies to enhance the different services it provides to the financial services community. The current exercise of consolidating the two infrastructures operated by us is an excellent starting point for this. With this exercise, we aim to bring benefits to TARGET2 end users by offering them the state-of-the-art features available in T2S. We are convinced that 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  increasing the efficiency of our market infrastructure will ultimately support the efficiency of the financial services community. As an overseer, the Eurosystem needs to arrive at a common understanding of which developments could potentially affect the overseen entities. The digitalisation of the financial industry means that the security requirements for the overseen instruments and infrastructures need to be adapted and enhanced accordingly. Furthermore, the emergence of new service providers requires reflection on issues such as how to ensure a level playing field for newcomers and long-established players, as well as an appropriate level of protection for the users. Service providers from outside Europe offering global solutions present a further challenge that has to be tackled. Last but not least, the effects of digitalisation and new technologies also need to be studied in the context of cyber resilience, in both our operator and overseer functions. The objective continues to be to have resilient infrastructures and smoothly functioning payment systems which guarantee the proper transmission of monetary policy. As a catalyst, the overarching goal is still to fulfil our tasks as laid down in the Treaty and to support the creation of truly single European market for payments and securities. We strongly believe that the Single Market brings improvements in efficiency and contributes to economic growth. Hence, our main focus here is to ensure that technological innovation does not lead to disruption or re-fragmentation in the market. 3. The Eurosystem’s vision for evolving its financial market infrastructure services To address the need for Europe’s financial market infrastructure to continuously evolve and keep pace with market developments and technological progress, the Eurosystem has developed three key action points it will work on in the run up to 2020 and beyond. The first, which we are here to discuss today, is to explore synergies between TARGET2 and T2S, with the goal of achieving a consolidated market infrastructure for large-value payments and securities settlement. The second action point is to prepare for the enhancement of TARGET2 services with instant retail payments, at least in the settlement layer. Currently, business requirements for the settlement of instant payments and credit risk management across payment systems are being gathered from market participants. We also need to assess whether interoperability arrangements between automated clearing houses can ensure full pan-European reachability for instant payment scheme participants in the EU and if and to what extent risk mitigation measures have to be harmonised across automated clearing houses to facilitate interoperability. Third, there are plans to review the harmonisation of Eurosystem arrangements and procedures for collateralisation. Further progress is needed in this area before the business case for a common Eurosystem collateral management system can be reconsidered. Conclusion Europe’s financial market infrastructure has been built on the basis of a collective approach, driven jointly by the public and the private sector. In all three action points for the market infrastructure beyond 2020, the Eurosystem will continue to work closely with the market in order to benefit from its knowledge and experience as well as to ensure that Europe’s future financial market infrastructure fully meets the needs of its users. Please have your say – whether today in this information session, in the existing users’ fora or by written procedure. Your input is needed. Let us jointly write the script for the future of the Euroystem’s RTGS services. With this, I hand over to the Chair of the meeting.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mugur Isărescu: Recent developments in central bank governance Panel presentation by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the "Central Bank and Supervisory Governance" conference, organized by the National Bank of the Netherlands, Amsterdam, 12 February 2016. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, It is a great honour to address the audience during this high-level conference on a subject of special interest to all of us, the recent developments in central bank governance leading to heated debates every time they are brought to the fore. Mr. He has done a wonderful job in structuring the challenges of nowadays’ central banking and in outlining the importance of effective governance arrangements in order to meet these challenges – his presentation is a testimony to IMF’s unique ability to draw upon a vast set of worldwide institutional experiences. I, in turn, will draw mainly upon a narrower, but hopefully no less relevant, set of institutional experiences, gathered during my tenure as Governor of the National Bank of Romania. In my address today I intend to deal with the issue of recent developments in central bank governance by looking at: 1. The central bank objectives as the starting point in designing its governance framework; 2. How the NBR dealt with the financial stability as an objective, from an institutional point of view; integrating or separating monetary policy and supervision; 3. A short history of institutional developments within the NBR for ensuring financial stability; 4. The internal control layers in the NBR; 5. Pros and cons of different institutional alternatives: banking supervision and macroprudential authority – inside or outside the central bank; 6. A historical perspective on the experience of becoming a modern central bank, a process undergone not only by the NBR. 1. Defining the objectives – the starting point in designing central bank governance It goes without saying that ground zero in building the central bank governance framework is clarifying the objectives it has to pursue. For quite a long time, at least in Europe, “price stability” enjoyed the position of overriding objective, but since the outbreak of the crisis it became obvious that the “inflation first” approach may turn counterproductive in an environment of financial instability. Therefore, financial stability concerns made their way up on central bankers’ agenda. Is that really a novelty? As the representative of an emerging economy central bank that never had the luxury of being concerned exclusively with price stability, I dare say it is not. Actually, central banking has always been about the preservation of, to quote Charles Goodhart, “the three aspects of stability”, namely price stability, (external) currency stability and financial stability. Moreover, the fact that these aspects of stability do condition each other was not discovered in the aftermath of the crisis – central bankers, maybe even more so emerging-market central bankers, have long been keenly aware that failure to ensure one kind of stability is bound to jeopardise the achievement of the others. What the crisis has indeed challenged is the widespread conviction that meeting one particular stability criterion, while necessary in order to achieve the others, is also a sufficient condition 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  to do so – after all, maintaining price stability, while valuable in itself, has proved insufficient to ward off major financial or macroeconomic instability. As a matter of fact, Andrew Crocket claimed ever since 2003 that the “peace dividend” yielded by the successful war against inflation had not lived up to expectations and therefore the battlefront against financial instability should not be overlooked. Regardless of how this battlefront is approached, it is of the essence to make sure that the tasks entrusted to the central bank are feasible. Otherwise, if the monetary authorities are overburdened with possibly conflicting goals, the major risk is to render them inefficient and unable to deliver a single one of their objectives. This is the very reason why the issue of central bank governance is so intricate and delicate: one needs to reconcile objectives that, under certain circumstances, might even prove incompatible. 2. Integrating or separating price and financial guardianship Given that the conference focuses on central bank and supervisory governance, allow me to touch on the issue of integrating price guardianship and financial guardianship within the central bank. As you probably remember, the idea that the two tasks should be completely separated has gained ground in the 1990s. The rationale behind this view was to free the monetary policy conduct from conflicting objectives and thus render policymakers’ mission and life easier. It was advocated that banking sector supervision should no longer be assigned to the central bank, but rather to an independent agency (which might also ensure the consolidated supervision of all financial markets). I, myself, found the idea rather interesting at the end of the 1990s, when the collapse of several Romanian banks influenced the decision-making process at the National Bank of Romania. I realised at the moment how costly it was in terms of reputation for a central bank to be in charge of supervision and prudential regulation – not to mention that the separation appeared quite fashionable after the newly-established Financial Services Authority had become operational in the United Kingdom. At the same time, I vividly remember the conflict between price stability and financial stability, when I had to mediate the divergent positions taken during Board meetings by the deputy governors coordinating the two functions, not by virtue of personal affiliations, but due to the very nature of the specific tasks they had been entrusted with. I was wondering, in light of these Board disputes, whether separating the monetary policy and the supervision functions was preferable. At hindsight, I believe that Romania has made the right choice preserving banking supervision as a prerogative of the central bank, sorting out such disputes under the same roof. Coming to the current NBR governance framework, I would like to start by pointing out that it ensures a complete separation as regards the coordination of the relevant departments: while the Governor is in charge of the monetary policy area, the First Deputy Governor coordinates the Supervision Department; one Deputy Governor takes care of financial stability and the other, of bank resolution. The nine-strong Board of Directors runs the central bank, but the process of preparing its decisions in the areas of monetary policy and prudential supervision takes place in two distinct structures: the Monetary Policy Committee and the Supervisory Committee, respectively, which comprise members of the executive management and experts in the relevant areas. As separation is not the same thing as complete isolation, I have to add that both committees are chaired by the Governor... Pursuant to the NBR Statute, the Board is tasked to act as a first appellate forum for sanctions on credit institutions. In order to avoid conflicts of interest that may appear, the following institutional arrangements are in place: separate Board meetings, a certain degree of autonomy of the Supervision Department and recusal from the proceedings of the First Deputy Governor, in his capacity as coordinator of the Supervision Department. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  I would like to add a special remark regarding the new role of the NBR as the resolution authority, arising from the provisions of the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive. We have configured the activities and reporting lines in order to ensure full operational independence and to avoid conflicts of interest between the supervision and resolution functions. Of course, this takes place without prejudice to the exchange of information and cooperation obligations. To be more specific, supervisory decisions do not pose constrains to resolution-related ones. Moreover, the staff involved in performing the resolution function is structurally separated from the other NBR functions. 3. Romania: a short history of institutional changes for ensuring financial stability The global crisis has made obvious for all of us that price stability and financial stability are much more intertwined than we used to think. I believe this development has farther-reaching consequences when it comes to the future of central banking. As I pointed out in November last year at the World Policy Conference organised in Montreux, I cannot imagine a future where the explicit concern for financial stability and the macroprudential policy are not central banking fixtures. In Romania, the concern for ensuring and strengthening financial stability was visible in several significant changes of the institutional framework, operated already before the outbreak of the global economic and financial crisis. Specifically, the NBR’s Financial Stability Department was created as early as 2004, with the first edition of the annual Financial Stability Report – a report that will be published on a half-yearly basis starting this year – being released in 2006. Of course, no matter how much or how responsibly the central bank would get involved in safeguarding financial stability, this public good can only be delivered through cooperation and coordination with the other institutions tasked with financial market supervision and regulation. Relevant in this respect is that in Romania a National Committee for Financial Stability was established as early as 2007. The Governor of the National Bank of Romania, the Minister of Public Finance, the President of the Financial Supervisory Authority and the Chairman of the Bank Deposit Guarantee Fund are members of this committee, whose key objective is to ensure the exchange of relevant information, as well as to prevent, appraise and manage any issues with a potentially systemic impact. Efforts are currently underway to turn this entity set up based on an agreement among member institutions into a National Committee for Macroprudential Oversight, whose composition, tasks and areas of competence shall be set forth by law. This inter-institutional structure will act as a macroprudential authority, within the meaning of ESRB Recommendation 2011/3. 4. NBR: the internal control layers I imagine we all agree that improving the governance structure is essential for a central bank and I strongly believe the sharing of views and experience made possible by reunions such as the one we are attending is extremely beneficial for the process. As far as the NBR is concerned, enhancing the governance has been a steady concern over the course of time, the ultimate goal being the alignment with the best practices, often with IMF support. Let me just point out that the NBR shifted from an internal auditors’ Commission to the auditing of financial statements by external auditors as early as 2001, while the following year saw the establishment of the Audit Committee as a substructure of the NBR Board (at a time when not even the ECB had such a committee in place!). In addition to the Audit Committee, the NBR’s internal control system includes several control layers. In fact, there are three lines of defence against any factors that might jeopardise the fulfilment of the NBR objectives. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  First of all, the National Bank of Romania takes a functional approach to risk management, meaning that each organisational unit has primary responsibility for identifying, assessing and managing the risks associated with its own activities and operations. The risk management process is an integral part of the NBR’s internal control system and represents the bank’s first line of defence. Each organisational unit implements operational control procedures within its area of responsibility, in accordance with the levels of risk tolerance set in advance by the executive management. Furthermore, the NBR applies the approach known as the “Chinese wall”, which separates the departments in charge of monetary policy formulation and implementation, on one hand, from the departments entrusted with other statutory tasks, on the other. The second line of defence is functional on certain business segments with high-risk financial exposure, e.g. international reserve management. This line of defence monitors compliance with the risk limits approved by the bank’s executive management and reports any breach. A major role in this line of defence is played by the decision-making/advisory committees within the central bank. Apart from the two committees dedicated to monetary policy and supervision that I have already mentioned, particularly significant is the Foreign Reserve Management Committee. In addition to the risk monitoring by the operational structures, the NBR’s Internal Audit Department – which functions as the third line of defence – examines the overall controls in place and determines whether they are properly designed and functional, so as to ensure the reliability and integrity of financial and operational information, the effectiveness of the activities carried out, asset protection, as well as compliance with applicable legal and contractual provisions. 5. Different institutional arrangements for banking supervision and financial stability As we all know, the responsibility for banking supervision rests in some countries with the central bank, whereas in others it lies with a distinct authority. Both options are valid and a one-size-fits-all solution will probably not be reached, given the country-specific financial conditions and institutional arrangements. However, this does not necessarily exclude looking into the arguments for or against either alternative. As I already said, I believe that it is better to have supervision integrated in the central bank. First of all, the ongoing complex challenges to financial and economic stability call for identifying, using and corroborating tons of information in order to articulate the adequate policies. The central bank relies on its database and expertise, which are prerequisites for managing such a challenging environment. Beyond this major advantage, there are also other benefits of such an institutional arrangement. Independence from political influence is essential for effective supervision. And central banks are institutions enjoying a high level of independence that a newly-established government agency would not be able to gain, at least in the short run. Besides, clearly acknowledging the links between price stability and financial stability means that they need to be taken into account when formulating the monetary policy. Moreover, as Benoît Cœuré pointed out, data collected and analyses conducted as part of banking supervision provide valuable information about the financial sector and may feed into the assessment of the state of the economy, being useful for the monetary policy decision-making process. Of course, literature identifies some disadvantages of integrating supervision in the central bank. The risk of this arrangement resulting in a too loose monetary policy, due to the conflicting objectives, which I have already referred to, is an important drawback. However, as Beck and Gros stressed in an article from 2012, with the rise of macro-prudential regulation as an additional tool, it is not clear whether price and financial stability still conflict with each other. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Another disadvantage is that the reputation and/or the independence of the central bank might be undermined: if its decisions and actions in the area of supervision and resolution are perceived as wrong or suboptimal, this may negatively affect the credibility of the monetary policy, as it is conducted by the same institution. Moreover, the temptation of politicians to capture the central bank may rise, as it has much more power than in the case when its only mission is to deliver price stability. The various arrangements on assigning banking supervision also have a bearing on the design of the national macroprudential authority. Depending mainly on who conducts the supervision of banks, different institutional solutions are adequate for this authority: it may be represented by a committee or board comprising representatives of the relevant institutions, by the central bank or by another authority tasked with financial market supervision. Boards are in place or envisaged in 13 EU countries, the central bank is – or is projected to be – the national macroprudential authority in 13 other EU countries, whereas two opted for – or are considering – entrusting this role to the national supervisory authority. Opting for the central bank as a national macroprudential authority can be warranted by the experience accumulated in the field, especially in the case of a dominant position of the banking sector, and by the possibility of a quick implementation of adopted measures (since the institution is responsible for identifying systemic risks and, at the same time, has available the macroprudential tools to put into practice the measures considered adequate). Some disadvantages of having supervision integrated in the central bank are manifest in this case as well, such as the backfiring of potential errors in the area (be they real or merely perceived as such by the public) on monetary policy credibility or a keener interest in politically capturing the institution as a result of the substantial rise in central bank powers. As Klaas Knot has showed more than once, the key argument in favour of creating a board is that it enables the pooling of the expertise of all financial market supervisors and of the government; the drawbacks would be more diffused accountability and the risk of delayed implementation of recommendations, given the involvement of several institutions. A prominent role of the central bank in the board (either by chairing it or through the number of members assigned) might mitigate the risk of inaction. In the case of Romania, where the supervision of banks and non-bank financial institutions is the task of the NBR, while the Financial Supervisory Authority (FSA) oversees the other financial markets, the solution that emerges as adequate is the one identified in the draft law promoted by the Government: a National Committee for Macroprudential Oversight. The decision-making body of this committee is to be made up of nine members: the Governor, the First-Deputy Governor, the two Deputy Governors and the Chief Economist of the National Bank of Romania; the President and the First-Vice President of the Financial Supervisory Authority, as well as two Government representatives appointed by the Prime Minister. Addressees of National Committee recommendations – the NBR and the FSA, as sectoral financial supervisory authorities, and the Government – should act on them unless inaction can be adequately justified (“act or explain” mechanism). 6. Reforming central bank governance after the fall of communism I have always been of the opinion that one cannot truly understand the present or have a glimpse into the future without knowing the past and learning its lessons. These lessons begin with the transition from a monetary authority in a command economy to a modern central bank operating in a market economy, an experience that is, for sure, familiar to many of us present here – I believe half of the central banks in this constituency, including Romania’s, are “new kids on the block”. Of course, there are different stages of development in terms of institutional framework. Some central banks are presently undergoing the process of shaping and consolidating their 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  governance, an endeavor intended to transform them into modern monetary authorities. And, believe me, I know from experience how complicated such a process can be! In the early nineties, when I took over as Governor of the National Bank of Romania, a tremendous effort was needed to put into practice the transition from a monobank-type system to a two-tier system. It was by no means a simple task to reform an institution that had operated in the context of centralised planning of the entire economic activity and to separate commercial banking operations from central bank operations, which remained the responsibility of the NBR. The new NBR only counted less than 5 percent of the former central bank employees, most of them in the cash management and accounting units! Therefore, we had to build from scratch several departments that are key to the functioning of a modern central bank, such as monetary policy, economic research, banking supervision and regulation... Fortunately, the NBR was given a helping hand in improving its governance structure when it needed it the most. Just to give two examples, banking supervision was set up at the NBR with the extremely useful support of De Nederlandsche Bank and the forex market was put in place with the assistance from the central bank of Belgium. We are extremely grateful to both institutions for their generous support. Like they say, what goes around, comes around – it is now our turn to share our experience. I am glad to say that the NBR – in a consortium with De Nederlandsche Bank – has been involved since June 2015 in a Twinning project dedicated to the National Bank of Moldova, the NBR providing expertise in the areas of regulation and authorisation, supervision, financial stability and human resources. While speaking about my own experience in reforming the NBR in the early 1990s, after the fall of communism, the words of Walter Bagehot have come to my mind. Referring to the needed changes in the governance framework of the Bank of England, he wrote in his book “Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market”, published as early as 1873, that “putting new wine into old bottles is safe only when you watch the condition of the bottle, and adapt its structure most carefully”. I find this metaphor particularly adequate for guiding us in the demanding task of tailoring the structure of central banks to the challenges of today and tomorrow. Let me add only that – as I once put it – good wine is as difficult to make as good monetary policy. And proper dosage is of the essence in both cases. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Glenn Stevens: “How do we withstand shocks?” Remarks by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to ASIC (Australian Securities and Investments Commission) Annual Forum 2016, Sydney, 22 March 2016. *      *      * I thank Emily Perry for assistance in compiling these remarks. I'm pleased to be here to take part in ASIC's annual forum. The listed topic for this session was ‘can we withstand a major global shock?’ I'm going to take a few liberties with that title and re-frame it as ‘how do we withstand shocks?’ For it is inevitable that ‘shocks’ will come along 1 One way or another the human condition is characterised by things happening that were not well predicted and for which we are sometimes less prepared than we might, in hindsight, have wished to be. So the question is not if such events will occur, but when. There is a business cycle, and there always will be. There is a cycle of fear and greed in financial markets; it was ever thus. Things rarely move in straight lines and even when they do, as we start to assume that will continue, we set up the very dynamics that ensure it won't. Unfortunately, we will not be very good at forecasting these events. In fact forecasts, almost by definition, assume ‘shocks’ will not occur. About the best that forecasts can do is to sketch out the likely effects of shocks that are known already to have occurred. What that means is that we need resilient systems – systems that are robust to some things going wrong. We need flexible, adaptable economies. We need financial markets that price risk sensibly as opposed to habitually ‘pricing for perfection’. We need providers of finance, be they banks, so-called ‘shadow banks’ or capital markets, that have ample capacity to bear losses when things go wrong – because sooner or later some things will. With that framing, two questions to ask are: • What shocks are we grappling with at present? • How do we assess our capacity to cope with those, or worse? Recent Developments There have been a few developments that have attracted attention for their potential implications for the global and local economies. First, commodity prices have fallen considerably. In Australia, of course, this is part of the everyday narrative. Our terms of trade peaked about four and a half years ago and have fallen by about 35 per cent since then. This has a number of important effects and has caused considerable adjustment in the economy.                                                 1  To be clear about what we mean by the term, a shock is an event or development, typically un-forecasted (and sometimes only dimly perceived even as it occurs) that has significance for the economy or financial system and requires adjustments of various kinds over a period of time. They can be adverse – consider the sudden reduction in risk appetite and drying up of liquidity in international financial markets in 2008. Shocks can also be positive – consider the way the entry of China into the global economy and the development of the efficient east-Asian manufacturing production chain in the 1990s lowered costs of consumer goods for the world. Or of the way Australia's terms of trade have, for the past decade, been way above their historical average. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The effect of the terms of trade fall on which our public discussion typically focuses is the impact on the Federal government's fiscal position. Since the outlook for nominal GDP is critical to projections of tax revenues, the linkage of commodity prices to revenue forecasts has become a key part of the economic story. That is reasonable so far as it goes, though the sequence of downward revisions to terms of trade assumptions, while important, has really served to expose the deeper, and more profound, fact that the budget is structurally in deficit, for reasons largely unrelated to the commodity price decline. That is still something that, over time, we need to address. But the effect of the terms of trade fall is more than just the effect on the budget. It is a large change in relative prices and real incomes. It results in different paces of economic performance by industry and region. Other things adjust, including the exchange rate and allocation of labour and capital resources. It's complex but overall, in my judgement, the Australian economy is adjusting quite well in the circumstances – certainly far better than in other episodes of commodity price fluctuations we have seen in history. That said, the adjustment is still a work in progress. Out in the broader world, the price that has captured attention is that for crude oil, which has fallen by about two-thirds over the past two years. This was a genuine shock: it was not well predicted. But what sort of a shock is it? It matters a great deal whether the price is falling because demand for oil has slumped – say due to a major slowdown in global economic growth – or whether it reflects a large increase in the supply of oil. The evidence thus far is that demand has slowed a little, but supply has increased rapidly in recent years and is expected to remain at a high level this year. This matters because, usually, more supply of something and a cheaper price is good news, not bad. To be sure, lower oil prices require adjustment on the part of producers – corporate and sovereign. But this has always been so and an increase in the availability of energy and cheaper prices has generally, in the past, been seen as a plus for overall global growth – a positive ‘shock’. This was because the response of consumers of oil to a decline in its price was to consume more – not just more oil but other goods and services as well, using the higher real income afforded by lower oil prices. It was thought that this outweighed the negative effects of spending cutbacks in oil-producing countries. It seems people are less confident this time of a fall in oil prices being expansionary. Why so? The fact that the United States has become a larger oil producer (and a significant producer of the short-run ‘marginal barrel’) is clearly relevant. So is the possibility that consumers both there and in Europe may, for particular reasons, be more inclined to save any windfall from lower oil prices than they used to be. These factors may, for a time, work against the traditional positive effect. In addition, the price for oil was high enough, for long enough, that many investment and spending decisions were taken around the world that look, perhaps, not quite so sound in hindsight. Hence, producer countries have budget strains; some sovereign wealth funds are liquidating financial assets; spreads on debt instruments issued by energy companies have widened sharply; exploration and new investment is being curtailed rapidly. It seems as though the sheer strength and longevity of the preceding period of very high oil prices prompted behaviour that made some players more vulnerable to a price decline. That, of course, is not unknown in the history of commodity markets. Having said all that, people might be being a little too pessimistic about the effects of the fall in oil prices. It is still equivalent to a reduction in taxes for a very large number of consumers around the world who now have more disposable income to spend or to repay debt. The shareholders and state owners of the producing assets, who gained from the higher prices, are wearing most of the costs of the lower price, along with those who provided capital market debt funding. At this stage, though, it does not appear that the effects of lower oil prices are 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  being greatly magnified through significant adverse effects on the banking system – though of course this has to remain under careful watch. The second development is that the outlook for global growth is assessed as having weakened, with forecasters expecting less growth in the global economy this year and next year than they did six months ago. The point here is not so much that growth is that weak: it is forecast to be higher than it was in the relatively mild global slowdown in the early 2000s, for example, and nothing like as weak as 2009. It is more that there have been a number of years now of below-average performance and the effects of that are cumulating. Many countries are finding the ‘strong, sustainable and balanced growth’ talked about in the G20 process to be rather elusive. The emerging world, which led growth after the crisis of 2008-09, accounts for much of the slower performance of late, and there has been a focus on China in particular.2 There is no doubt that China's growth trajectory today, and in the foreseeable future, is a slower one than that which we saw up to about 2011. The Chinese authorities have been telling us for some years that this had to occur. The real question is how successful they will be in landing a transition to a sustainable but still strong growth model, one that is less reliant on investment, more driven by domestic consumption and associated with less build up in leverage. They also have to manage the debt legacy of the previous period of expansion. The truth is that we can't know how all this will turn out. No one has done such a transition on this scale before. A third feature is that observers and investors have to grapple with a more complex policy environment. The Federal Reserve's interest rate decision in December was very well telegraphed and understood. So it, per se, doesn't really count as a ‘shock’. It resulted in the expected sorts of effects – like a turnaround in earlier international capital flows to emerging markets. Some of these actually began ahead of the event itself. At the same time, though, the very low rates of inflation and still very gradual pace of economic growth have led other central banks to seek further easing of monetary policy. Balance sheet measures have been stepped up and several European jurisdictions have applied negative interest rates to parts of banks' reserve holdings at the central bank. The same is happening in Japan. At this point, people are still trying to assess the implications of these changes. Meanwhile, for various reasons there has been renewed focus on asset quality in parts of the European banking system and Europe's resolution arrangements. Changes to China's exchange rate mechanism have attracted much attention. So, in summary, there has in recent months been somewhat more policy uncertainty. This, in turn, reflects the difficulties that policymakers are having in securing growth. Perhaps it's not altogether surprising, then, that we have seen some periods of elevated volatility in financial markets over recent months. Financing conditions for some emerging markets were becoming more difficult a year or more ago; that has generally continued. Major advanced economy sovereign bond yields, on the other hand, have remained very low or even fallen. The Bank for International Settlements has calculated that about US$6½ trillion in sovereign bonds, or about one-quarter of the JPMorgan government bond index according to one report, are now trading at negative yields in global capital markets. The Japanese government – by far the most indebted government in the developed world – can borrow for 10 years at a negative interest rate. But spreads for lesser rated sovereign and private debt have widened, in some cases quite significantly. Equity prices have been choppy and generally weaker. Exchange rates have become more volatile and have been particularly sensitive to shifts in perceptions about central bank actions.                                                 2  Incidentally, I have not seen evidence that weaker Chinese demand for oil has been a big factor for oil prices. If anything, what slowing in demand there is for oil seems to be occurring elsewhere in the world. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Uncertainty about the future direction of the renminbi has been a factor in exchange markets, but the same must be said about the yen and the euro. How should we evaluate this period of volatility and reduction in risk appetite? Is it just reflecting the same information that is embodied in the softer global growth forecasts? Or is it telling us there has been a significant shock we don't see in other data? If it persists, could it be a shock that leads to a worse global outcome – by leading to a tightening of credit conditions, loss of wealth and confidence and therefore crimping demand? Alternatively, might the trend of the past couple of weeks, when markets seem to have been regaining a degree of composure, continue? If it does, might we look back on this recent period of turbulence as just a bout of market nervousness that that carries little lasting importance? These are the questions policymakers have to grapple with and as yet we do not know the answers. Resilience But if there were a material change to the global outlook happening – and, let me be clear, I am not saying there is, but if there were – how resilient are we? And how can we be more resilient? There are a couple of things to say at a global level. The first is that the global banking system is better capitalised and more liquid, and hence more resilient, today than it was eight years ago. This part of the financial sector is a good deal less likely to be an amplifier of other shocks than it was then. Of course this strengthening needs to continue; there is a way to go yet for full implementation of the various reforms. But progress is being made. It is noteworthy that much of the increase in financing in recent years has flowed through capital markets. It has to be acknowledged that bond markets are less liquid than they used to be. This is partly because the major international banks now do not commit the same size of balance sheet to market-making activities – and that stems, in part, from regulation. This, no doubt, is part of the story as to why markets have been more volatile recently, though it is probably not the whole story. Large investors are coping with this by accepting that it takes longer to move a parcel of securities. But some worry that liquidity may be much more significantly reduced in moments of stress, meaning that it may require much bigger price changes for markets to clear. As it is, some of the world's deepest and most important markets have, on a few occasions over the past year, seen very large price movements – thankfully for only fairly short periods. More generally, the search for yield has seen investors, including sovereign funds, insurers, and mutual funds held by retail investors, move into assets that are inherently less liquid. This leaves us, unavoidably, with a degree of uncertainty about how markets might cope with larger shocks, and how larger price changes for assets priced in those markets may feed back to the economy. Not surprisingly, liquidity management for asset managers and the question of liquidity conditions in markets in general are key themes for the Financial Stability Board at present. But for all that, it seems to me generally a good thing that (1) more of the credit risk is borne by entities or forms of financing generally less characterised by leverage; and (2) those entities that do have leverage (i.e. banks in the main) have less leverage than they used to. Such developments lessen the system's tendency towards crisis; resilience is greater. That said, all of this is still a work in progress and more progress is required. On the domestic front, the information we have received recently suggests that the Australian economy was growing at a respectable pace in the second half of last year. The national accounts data released this month showed that the economy expanded by 3 per cent over 2015, a bit better than we estimated at the time of our most recent Statement on Monetary Policy in February. This outcome seems to fit together with other pieces of information such 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  as business surveys and labour market data, which improved noticeably over the course of 2015. So at the turn of the year the Australian economy seemed to have been picking up. That's a good starting point. In the case of business surveys, better conditions seem generally to have continued in the early part of 2016, though labour market data have been more ambiguous. The fact that Australia has a sound and credible macroeconomic policy framework, which could, if needed, respond as appropriate to significant negative events is also a good starting point. Even with interest rates at already low levels, and public debt higher than it was, there would, in the event of a serious economic downturn, be more room to ease both monetary and fiscal policy than in many, indeed most, other countries. Leaving aside the potential for macroeconomic policy responses, the economy's inherent ability to adjust has been on display through both phases of the mining boom. Of course we should always be looking for ways to improve that flexibility, but I think it should be said that businesses and their workforces have been much more flexible than once used to be the case. Turning to financial resilience, Australian banks' asset quality has generally been improving over the past couple of years. Like their counterparts abroad, in the post-crisis period the banks have lifted capital resources, strengthened liquidity and reduced use of short-term wholesale funding. So their ability to handle either a funding market shock or an economic downturn has improved compared with the situation in 2008. At this stage we do not see a material problem in Australian financial or non-financial entities accessing capital markets. If anything, net bond issuance by Australian banks has been strong over recent months, and to the extent that banks are able to take advantage of this availability to extend the term of their wholesale liabilities, that will further improve their resilience to any funding disturbances that may eventuate. Wholesale funding is a little more expensive than it was, though marginal funding costs are still no higher than the average cost of the funding being replaced. On the topic of loan quality, the strengthening of lending standards for housing that has resulted from the actions of both APRA and ASIC was timely. So often over the years, tighter standards tended to come too late and reinforced a downturn after it had begun. These measures have occurred ahead, so far as one can tell, of the point in the cycle when measures of asset quality start to deteriorate. Some moderation in house prices in some of the locations where they had been rising most rapidly, while not the direct objective of the supervisory measures, is also, in my judgement, helpful. In the business space, the banking system has fairly modest direct exposure to the falls in oil and other commodity prices, with lending to businesses involved in mining and energy accounting for only around 2 per cent of banks' total lending. More generally, competition to lend to business has increased over the past couple of years and business credit growth has picked up appreciably. Overall, this is to be expected and is a welcome development at a time when a missing element of the economic growth story is capital spending outside the mining sector, which appears to remain very weak. One notable trend is the aggressive expansion of some of the foreign banks active in the Australian market. Here there is a note of caution. If these are taking opportunities left on the table where local players (or earlier foreign players) were simply too conservative, all well and good. But one is duty-bound to observe that there is a history of foreign players expanding aggressively in the upswing only to have to retreat quickly when more difficult times come. It is worth remembering that cycle. Conclusion It seems to be part of the economic zeitgeist that people are continually looking for the ‘downside’ risks. It hasn't always been so - I recall lengthy periods when the mindset was always to see inflation pressures around every corner. That people seem to find it easier to 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  imagine the downside today is a mark of the length of the shadow cast by the financial crisis, seven years on. For financial regulators and policymakers, it is, of course, our duty to look out for possible problems. At present, we can think of several, not all of which, by the way, are on the downside. Some of those may come to pass; some probably won't. But it is virtually impossible to say which ones are which. So, to repeat, the key thing is to try to build resilience in economies and financial structures so that, when shocks do occur, the damage can be contained rather than amplified. In that respect it is good that banks in most places in the world are stronger, though that process needs to be completed. The bigger role in financing being played by capital markets is also, on balance, probably a good thing, even though we are yet to be able to assess how such markets will perform under more stressed conditions. The local economy has been improving and the financial system overall gaining in resilience, albeit with a few pockets to watch. Given that and a reasonable track record of adapting to shocks, we have some grounds for confidence in our capacity to negotiate whatever lies ahead. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Vítor Constâncio: Capital Markets Union and the European monetary and financial framework Keynote speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at Chatham House, London, 21 March 2016. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen,  A well-functioning, diversified and deeply integrated capital market is of key relevance for the European Central Bank. This explains why we have supported the European Commission’s initiative to establish a capital markets union (CMU) from the very beginning.  In my remarks, I will focus on the ways CMU could contribute to the achievement of the most important tasks of the Eurosystem and to enhance the economic and welfare effects of the euro area:  First, financial integration and capital markets’ development can facilitate the transmission of monetary policy in the euro area.  Second, a more diversified financial system with capital markets complementing bank-based financing can increase the shock absorbing capacity of the European economy, thereby contributing to macroeconomic and financial stability.  Third, integration of capital markets increases the private risk-sharing across countries, which improves the response to asymmetric shocks by allowing income and consumption smoothing through cross-border holdings of equity and debt instruments.  1.  Capital markets and the transmission of monetary policy  Achieving the CMU requires both enhancing financial integration, and developing and deepening financial markets. These developments affect the transmission of both standard and non-standard monetary policies. In many theories of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, information asymmetries and other credit market inefficiencies play a central role in amplifying and propagating the effects of changes in interest rates on real activity, namely via their impact on lending rates.1 This mechanism, which is often referred to as the credit view of monetary policy, could be interpreted as suggesting that reducing those inefficiencies would undermine the credit channel and decrease the impact of monetary policy on the real economy. Such theories, however, typically abstract from the effect of improved market efficiency on savers’ willingness to lend. If information disclosure is inadequate – to the extent that investors refrain from lending to borrowers – expansionary monetary policies can exert only a limited impact on the real economy through a compression of borrowing costs. Structural measures that increase the information flow and support the allocation of credit to productive activities can therefore contribute to accelerating the transmission of monetary policy to the real economy.  Recent evidence lends support to the idea of a positive relationship between the effectiveness of monetary policy and the efficiency of financial markets. For instance, a cross-country comparison of the effects of the expansionary balance sheet policies implemented in the euro                                                 1  Bernanke, B.S. and Gertler, M. (1995), “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy Transmission”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 9 (4), pp. 27–48; Peersman, G. and Smets, F. (2005), “The Industry Effects of Monetary Policy in the Euro Area”, The Economic Journal, Vol. 115 (503), April, pp. 319–42. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  area between 2009 and 2012 shows that the impact on output was strongest in the countries with the most well-capitalised domestic banking systems.2 A second set of measures which could be undertaken in the context of the CMU agenda relates to the harmonisation of legal systems. Evidence for the euro area suggests a strong link between the legal structure of a country and its financial architecture,3 and shows that cross-country differences in those systems are a source of asymmetry vis-à-vis the monetary transmission mechanism.4 The CMU debate has brought to light the importance of going beyond the harmonisation of financial legislation, and of tackling barriers resulting from taxation or corporate and insolvency laws.  According to a recent study by the Association of Financial Markets in Europe (AFME), the current patchwork of insolvency frameworks is estimated to increase the cost of corporate debt by between 18 and 37 basis points. On the other hand, if all Member States were to reach a recovery rate of at least 85%, this could translate into an aggregate GDP gain of between 0.3 and 0.55%.5 By deepening capital markets, CMU implies a move towards a more market-based financial system that can facilitate the conduct of monetary policy through its effects on the transmission mechanism. It is a well-documented empirical regularity that yields and asset prices respond faster to changes in monetary policy decisions than bank lending rates.6 The slow adjustment of bank rates is thus a contributing factor behind the delayed impact of monetary policy on the real economy. Consequently, by improving access to market-based finance, the development of the CMU can help increase the speed at which monetary policy is transmitted to the real economy. 2.  CMU, financial stability and the scope of unconventional monetary policy  The development of the CMU can also increase the economy’s resilience to large adverse shocks and limit the need for policy intervention in times of crisis.7  Measures that promote more diversification of financing instruments revive the securitisation market and encourage a resilient form of financial integration, are particularly important in this respect. Fostering the development of more diverse financial instruments for borrowers, as well as facilitating their substitutability, contributes to partially shielding the economy from disturbances that may hit the banking sector, thereby enhancing financial stability and reducing the need for non-standard monetary policy measures aimed at restoring the flow of credit to                                                 2  Boeckx, J., Dossche, M. and Peersman, G. (2014), “Effectiveness and transmission of the ECB’s balance sheet policies”, Working Paper Research Series, No 275, National Bank of Belgium, December. 3  La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R.W. (1998), “Law and Finance”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 106 (6), pp. 1113–55. 4  Cecchetti, S.G. (1999), “Legal structure, Financial Structure, and the Monetary Policy Transmission Mechanism”, FRBNY Economic Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, July, pp. 9–28; Danthine, J-P., Giavazzi, F. and von Thadden, E-L. (2000), “European Financial Markets After EMU: A First Assessment”, CEPR Discussion Papers, No 2413. 5  Association for Financial Markets in Europe (2016), Potential economic gains from reforming insolvency law in Europe, February. 6  De Bondt, G., Mojon, B. and Valla, N. (2005), “Term structure and the sluggishness of retail bank interest rates in euro area countries”, Working Paper Series, No 518, ECB, September. 7  De Fiore, F. and Uhlig, H. (2015), “Corporate Debt Structure and the Financial Crisis”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 47 (8), pp. 1571–98. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  households and non-financial corporations. This does not imply that CMU would change the structure of the European financial system to make it similar to the American one where market-based financing dominates. History and theory do not demonstrate that a system overwhelmingly dominated by financial markets is more efficient to promote long-term growth than a more bank-based structure. Developments since 1945 prove this assertion: Europe’s growth led to a substantial catching up with the US, keeping its different financial system. In spite of the role of capital markets in the US, SMEs continue to be financed mostly by banks with the significant help of guarantees provided by the US Small Business Association to the tune of USD 30 billion per year. Deeper equity markets however, constitute an unquestionable advantage to the US, notably in relation to the role of venture capital in promoting innovation. For the expansion of such an activity it is important to dispose of a deep equity market that can provide significant returns in successful IPOs (Initial Public Offers) that can offset losses incurred by failing risky projects. Overall, it is true that at this stage, Europe will benefit from a more balanced structure between market-based and bank-based financial system which CMU will help to develop.  Looking forward, an important step in the establishment of the CMU is the revitalization of the securitisation market. Early measures proposed in the CMU Action Plan8 can be conducive to capital relief for originators, thus contributing to freeing up banks’ balance sheet and increasing lending to the real economy. These actions help monetary policy to provide the necessary accommodative stance in crisis times, particularly when interest rates are close to the zero lower bound. In addition, improved functioning of the securitisation market increases the supply of high-quality collatera9 and expands the pool of eligible assets in the context of the ECB’s asset purchase programmes.  CMU initiatives that promote a resilient form of financial integration by restricting fragile cross-border debt exposures can reduce the emergence of financial fragmentation in periods of crisis, which in turn will contribute to a well-functioning single monetary policy.  3.  CMU fosters private risk-sharing and a more resilient financial integration CMU can lead to a more resilient EMU through promoting private risk-sharing mechanisms that allow income and consumption smoothing across countries, also known as risk-sharing. Risk-sharing can increase welfare by reducing sensitivity of income growth to output growth in a country. In a monetary union, risk-sharing is particularly important because monetary policy is unable to address asymmetric, country-specific shocks, whereby some countries are in a recession while others may be booming. The effective risk-sharing in the United States is essential in making the US a successful monetary union. There are three main mechanisms that risk-sharing can take between member states in a political and economic area. First, countries can share risk via cross-ownership of productive assets, a mechanism facilitated by developed capital markets. Second, a system of taxes and transfers can serve as a vehicle for further income smoothing. Third, member states can smooth consumption by adjusting their asset portfolios, by lending and borrowing in international credit markets, for example.                                                 8  European Commission (2015), “Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions – Action plan on building a Capital Markets Union”, COM (2015) 468 final, September. 9  Bank of England and ECB (2014), The case for a better functioning securitisation market in the European Union – A Discussion Paper, May. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The introduction of the euro has fostered risk-sharing – available estimates suggest that 57% of shocks to country GDP per capita were smoothed in 2008–2009.10 However, smoothing resulting from international cross-ownership of assets remained at low levels. By way of comparison, the United States has traditionally been characterised by a very high degree of income and consumption smoothing across states. Available evidence suggests that about 75% of income shocks in individual states are smoothed, with 62% of state-specific shocks being smoothed through market transactions. These can take the form of cross regional holdings of financial assets or direct investments, as well as borrowing and lending credit operations.11  This underlines the advantage of, in the context of CMU, being particularly focused on stimulating equity financing. Indeed, our upcoming report on financial integration12 finds that debt finance can magnify the adverse impact of negative shocks on economic growth. In contrast, equity and foreign direct investment (FDI), and longer-maturity debt in general, are leading to a more resilient form of financial integration. One way to stimulate equity financing via the CMU agenda would be to reduce the existing bias towards debt in national taxation.  It should be underlined that a substantial effect of risk sharing via cross border holdings of financial assets is predicated on attaining a fully fledged CMU. A genuine CMU would mean achieving a high level of financial integration in order to complete the Single Market in this area. Full integration is reached if market participants with the same relevant characteristics: (i) face a single set of rules for financial instruments and/or services; (ii) have equal access to a set of financial instruments and/or services; and (iii) are equally treated when they are active in the market. This level-playing field would contribute to stimulate cross-border risk-taking between EU Member States. In the last two decades, European financial markets have increased their role in financing the economy and became more integrated in terms of cross-border holdings of financial instruments. However, the crisis impacted this tendency. In fact, the crisis revealed that part of this integration was driven by debt-based wholesale banking flows which were prone to sudden reversals in the face of shocks. In fact, a high degree of ambition and decisive legislative action is required to create the conditions for capital markets to develop and integrate. These actions are often in politically controversial fields such as in the areas of corporate law, financial product taxation and insolvency law. Altogether, the CMU has the potential to enhance private (as opposed to public), and cross-border (as opposed to domestic) risk-sharing, which could increase the shock absorbing capacity of the European economy as a whole, and thereby help to safeguard financial stability and the resilience of our monetary union.  Challenges: New risks to financial stability Aside from these opportunities, financial integration and the further development of non-bank financing may also create new financial stability risks.  At a general level, greater integration can exacerbate the size and speed of cross-border contagion. International risk-sharing and cross-border contagion can be two sides of the same                                                 10  Balli, F. and Sørensen, B.E. (2007), “Risk sharing among OECD and EU countries: The Role of Capital Gains, Capital Income, Transfers, and Saving”, MPRA Paper, No 10223. 11  Sørensen, B.E. and Yosha, O. (1998), “International risk sharing and European monetary unification”, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 45, pp. 211–38; Afonso, A. and Furceri, D. (2008), “EMU enlargement, stabilization costs and insurance mechanisms”, Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 27 (2), pp. 169–87. 12  ECB (to be published in April 2016), “Special Feature A – Financial integration and risk-sharing in a monetary union”, Financial Integration in Europe. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  “financial integration coin”. This explains why taking a macroprudential perspective on the financial system, is extremely important for addressing potential new sources of systemic risks.  In the first place, the role of the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) in coordinating with national authorities the effective harmonised implementation of all legislation relevant for CMU has to be strengthened. We need a single rule book for capital markets the same way it is being established for the banking sector.  At the same time, the further development of capital markets increases competition for the banking sector and incentivises banks to take on more risk to sustain profitability.13, 14 To ensure that there are no unintended financial stability risks, we need to strengthen the European macroprudential regulatory toolkit for banks under the CRDIV/CRR.15  Moreover, the growth of market-based financing is accompanied by the strong growth of non-bank financing that creates new risks. Over the past few years, growth in total euro area financial assets has been primarily driven by non-bank financial entities, investment funds in particular. The low interest rate environment has also played a role in this growth, with increasing amounts of capital being allocated to investment funds in the search for yield. Between end-2009 and the first quarter of 2015, assets managed by investment funds other than money market funds almost doubled from EUR 5.4 trillion to EUR 10.5 trillion.16  Importantly, this rapid growth comes along with increased risk-taking.17 In addition, the interconnectedness of the fund sector with the wider financial system, more widespread use of synthetic leverage and the increasing prevalence of demandable equity imply that potential for a systemic impact is increasing, should the investment fund industry come under stress. In short, financial stability risks increasingly extend beyond traditional entities such as banks and insurers. This underlines the necessity of developing the macroprudential framework beyond banking.  Developing the macroprudential framework beyond banking  Let me elaborate on three important aspects of this task. First, we need to develop a framework to better control the leverage of alternative investment funds in the European Union. Given that the use of leverage by investment funds could create and amplify systemic risk, it is important that we ensure that leverage remains within acceptable limits.  Second, we need to develop tools targeting liquidity in non-bank financial institutions. With regard to investment funds, “liquidity spirals” remain always a risk. Such spirals could be triggered if funds were to be confronted with high redemptions or increased margin requirements, as these could result in forced selling on markets with low liquidity. To address                                                 13  Keeley, M.C. (1990), “Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market Power in Banking”, The American Economic Review, Vol. 80 (5), pp. 1183–1200. 14  Kosuke, A. and Nikolov, K. (2015), “Financial Disintermediation and Financial Fragility”, CARF Working Paper, No CARF-F-374, November. 15  This requires (i) ensuring that the instruments currently available are more targeted and that overlaps are eliminated, (ii) broadening the toolkit with additional instruments (such as the net stable funding ratio, leverage ratio, loan-to-value/loan-to-income ratio, debt service-to-income ratio, sectoral risk weights, etc.), (iii) streamlining the process for notification or information procedures (both in the EU and within ECB Banking Supervision), and (iv) strengthening the macroprudential function of the ECB. 16  ECB (2015), Report on financial structures, October. 17  Funds have shifted their asset allocation from higher to lower-rated debt securities, increased the average residual maturities of debt securities holdings and continued to expand their exposure to emerging markets. See the November 2015 edition of the ECB’s Financial Stability Review. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  such risks, additional liquidity requirements, guided stress tests, minimum and time-varying load, and redemptions fees should be part of the macroprudential toolbox. Third, macroprudential authorities should be given the power to change margins and haircuts on derivatives and securities financing transactions (SFTs) at the transaction level in a time-varying manner. The current margining and haircut setting practices by market participants stimulate the build-up of leverage in good times, and amplify de-leveraging in bad times. While a number of policy measures aimed at limiting the pro-cyclical effects of margin and haircut setting have been adopted or are underway, none of these steps envisage time-varying implementation of margin requirements and haircut floors by macroprudential authorities. Conclusion Let me conclude. I have explained how CMU has the potential to facilitate central banking tasks and thus to benefit our Monetary and Economic Union. The Commission initiated the legislative work on CMU by making proposals including creating a framework for simple, transparent and standardised (STS) securitisation. We support this work, and call on the co-legislators to make swift progress in the adoption of these proposals.  To achieve CMU and reap the potential benefits that I have just highlighted, we will need to promote further harmonisation in areas that have so far been considered as long-term issues. We need to be ambitious in the pursuit of our objective. In fact, CMU should be seen as a “structural reform” by which the legislators and policy makers at the EU and national level, but also market participants themselves, dismantle existing barriers to the cross-border functioning of the single market in capital. In this regard, tackling differences in insolvency law, taxation and company law will be highly relevant. As long as these obstacles remain, there will be no cross-border capital markets union.  Lastly, if CMU is successful in deepening and integrating capital markets, this development will need to be accompanied by macroprudential supervision to ensure that the potential new risks are limited. Thank you for your attention.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  François Villeroy de Galhau: What can monetary policy do? Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the House of Finance Days of Paris-Dauphine University, Paris, 14 March 2016. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, It is a great pleasure for me to participate in this first edition of the House of Finance Days of Paris-Dauphine University. In order to “[imagine] the finance of tomorrow” – to quote the theme of this event – it is essential to understand all facets, and in particular to be able to decipher the prevailing environment. Through its three main tasks, the Banque de France plays a key role as, firstly, it implements monetary strategy, as a member of the Eurosystem alongside the European Central Bank in Frankfurt; secondly, it ensures financial stability, by supervising the banks, insurance firms and, more generally, the financial system; and, lastly, it provides an economic service to households and SMEs/VSEs.  Today I will focus on the monetary policy that we conduct in the framework of the Eurosystem. Monetary policy has long been considered a technical or even an austere subject. But, since 2008, it has been far more widely discussed: central banks in different countries have played a major role, and a role largely hailed as positive, in exiting the crisis. Today, however, their actions to address the persistence of very low inflation are subject to debate. I would first like to talk about our objective, then our instruments and their effectiveness. First, the question of the objectives. This question, which really covers two questions, has generated much thought and debate. Indeed, central banks examine their actions, with a lot more modesty than is often credited: 1. What is the objective, the “mandate”, of the central bank? 2. What are, with regard to this objective, the current challenges? 1) Let us start by the mandate. a)  In the United States, the Federal Reserve has a dual mandate of price stability and full employment. In the euro area, under the Maastricht Treaty – approved democratically in each country, and in France by referendum in September 1992– the objectives are clearly set out in a hierarchical order: the Eurosystem is dedicated to price stability, which is its primary objective; ensuring a high level of employment and sustainable growth is secondary to its price stability objective. This difference has often been discussed; with hindsight, it does not seem that important. When the ECB fights too low inflation, this also contributes to supporting activity. And among the indicators that we monitor, the output gap- the difference between the actual output of an economy and its potential output, still negative in France and the euro area – is a key element. b) In concrete terms, our primary objective – maintaining price stability – means achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Most central banks in advanced economies share this medium-term 2% objective, including the United States and Japan. This has been the ECB’s objective since 2003, when it was proposed by the German former chief  economist,  Otmar Issing. It may appear paradoxical that price stability is not zero, but there are good reasons for this. First, the “Boskin effect”, named after the US commission that showed in 1996 that the price indices used to measure inflation 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  tended to overstate inflation, by underestimating the substitution towards products whose prices increase less quickly, and product innovation. Therefore, the inflation objective can never be too strictly observed since it is necessary to keep enough leeway to ensure that the economy doesn’t sink into deflation in the event of negative shocks. Also, low inflation facilitates structural adjustments in an economy where there are downward nominal rigidities of certain prices, in particular wages. c) In the euro area, however, like in most advanced economies, inflation remains too low, despite the historically low interest rates: the harmonised index of consumer  prices  (HICP)  indeed  returned  to  negative  territory,  standing at -0.2% in February 2016, and underlying inflation, i.e. excluding energy and food, is only 0.7%. Does this mean the Eurosystem can no longer achieve its price stability mandate, or will have to change its objective? I don’t think so. Current challenges do not call into question our mandate, but they change the way in which we fulfil it. For the credibility of monetary policy, this objective must be maintained: this 2% target is a medium-term “anchor”, at a time when there is so much volatility and short-termism affecting the economy. 2) What are, with regard to this objective, the challenges central banks are facing? Today, the Eurosystem is faced with two main challenges: deflationary pressures on the one hand, and the risk of an unanchoring of expectations, on the other.  a) First, a certain number of factors are currently contributing to low inflation. Primarily, the euro area is faced with deflationary pressures associated with a series of economic shocks: firstly, the fall in oil prices, from over EUR 80 per barrel in mid-2014 to EUR 34 in early March 2016, or more than 2.5 times lower, as well as the decline in commodity prices; secondly, the slowdown in growth in emerging economies and chiefly China; and, lastly, inadequate growth in the euro area with persistently high unemployment, which curbs wage rises and weakens demand and price growth. Moreover, structural factors, such as the ageing population, are likely to exert downward pressure on the “natural” interest rate, a term coined by the Swedish economist Knut Wicksell over a century ago. This rate can be defined as the interest rate consistent with the full employment of the factors of production. In this case, in order to achieve the right balance between savings and investment, markets rates must come down too. In normal times, central banks cut their key rates, and this passes through to the yield curve. However, in order to deal with the financial crisis, the ECB like other central banks have brought their key interest rates to very low levels, around zero. This means that our traditional monetary policy tools had to  be supplemented by other instruments, known as non-standard instruments, in order to reach our prices stability objective. I will return to this point later. b) The second challenge, which stems from the first, is the risk of an unanchoring of expectations, which would make it harder for us to achieve our 2% target again. Indeed, if inflation stayed too low for too long, economic agents may revise downwards their inflation expectations, which would create second round effects. Lower inflation expectations influence economic agents’ price- and wage-setting behaviour, which in turn keeps inflation low. It can even raise the risk of deflation, defined as a cumulative process of falling prices, including those of assets, or even wages and production, as the world economy experienced in the 1930s or Japan partially underwent in the 1990s. Such deflationary dynamics are not at play today; but that is why our inflation target is symmetrical. We consider too low inflation to be just as costly as too high inflation. And, therefore, it is more risky for central banks to act too late than too early. Since the start of the year, we have observed that market-based measures of inflation expectations have fallen. Nevertheless, the latest forecasts provided by the ECB last Thursday continue to point to a gradual rise in inflation over the coming years: 0.1% in 2016, 1.3% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  II. This brings me to my second point: how effective are our non-standard measures? 1) Since the summer of 2014, we have implemented a series of monetary policy measures, dubbed “non-standard”, to complement cuts to key interest rates, which now stand at 0.00% for main refinancing operations and-0.40% for the deposit facility. These measures include:  2) Targeted longer-term refinancing operations, conditional on the provision of bank lending to the real economy. The new series of TLTROs that we decided to launch on 10 March - TLTRO 2 - will allow banks to borrow at highly favourable rates, depending on the amount of new credit they provide;  3) Purchases of private and public sector securities, to further ease monetary and financial conditions in the euro area. The Eurosystem buys asset-backed securities, covered bonds and investment grade bonds issued by euro area sovereigns, agencies and institutions. On 10 March we decided to expand this programme further by including corporate bonds among eligible assets, and increasing   the   amount   of   monthly   purchases   to   EUR 80   billion   from EUR 60 billion previously; 4)  Indications on the future path of key interest rates – or “forward guidance” – in order to influence agents’ expectations. On 10 March, we gave the following indications: “key ECB interest rates [will] remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases”, which means extending well beyond March 2017. Turning now to the comprehensive package that has just been introduced, it sends out two clear messages: a) Our decisions are guided by our mandate which is to bring inflation back towards our target of 2% over the medium term. We are firmly set on this objective, and have a broad range of instruments with which to achieve it. In addition to negative interest rates, which naturally have their limits, we are also acting both on bank lending – via credit  easing with the new TLTRO – and on market financing - via the extended QE asset purchase programme – and are guaranteeing that we shall continue to do so for as long as necessary - via forward guidance. b) Our priority is to promote the financing of the real economy. The goal of TLTRO 2 is not, as some have claimed, to offset the impact of negative rates on banks. It is to encourage banks to lend to corporations, SMEs and households alike; similarly, extending the asset purchase programme to corporate bonds will be of particular benefit to large French corporations. In other words, we are securing the provision of credit to businesses and households, and protecting it from tensions linked to market volatility. 2) These non-standard measures have been effective.  They have translated into a substantial easing in borrowing conditions for euro area companies. Since June 2014, the cost of borrowing for businesses has fallen by 80 basis points. Without non-standard measures, we estimate that we would have had to lower key rates by around 100 basis points in June 2014 to achieve a similar effect on bank interest rates. This has also helped to stimulate lending to the real economy: in the euro area, outstanding loans to businesses have gone from a contraction of -2.5% in June 2014 to growth of 0.6% in January 2016. The impact is even more marked in France, where outstanding business lending grew by 4.8% year-on-year in the first month of 2016 - the highest pace of growth in the euro area and, what’s more, with the lowest rates of interest. Convergent estimates from the ECB and the Eurosystem indicate that, all other things being equal, the measures introduced since June 2014 should add 1 percentage point to inflation over the period 2015-2017, with a similar impact on growth. In France, they helped to boost 2015 growth by 0.3 percentage point, and estimates from INSEE even put the 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  impact slightly higher at +0.4 pp. That represents about 80,000 additional jobs for the economy - although only structural reforms can generate lasting gains for a country’s growth and employment. To conclude on this estimate of effectiveness, the IMF – regarded as an objective judge of the relevance of economic policies – was unequivocal in its assessment at the last G20 meeting  in  Shanghai  at the  end of  February, saying,  “The  ECB’s asset purchase programme has supported the recovery by improving confidence and financial conditions [and] monetary policy should remain accommodative”.  3) What about the risks?  I talked earlier about the risks of doing nothing: we need to take action in order to bring inflation back up towards 2%. That said, we also need to keep a close eye out for any possible negative side-effects of our monetary policy, notably for financial stability. We are actively monitoring the financial cycle, including in France where the task falls to the Haut Conseil de Stabilité Financière (High Council for Financial Stability), set up in 2013: I will be taking part in its 8th meeting at the Finance Ministry tomorrow. For the time being, there are no signs of any bubbles forming in the main financing markets: on the whole, developments in the equity markets appear in line with corporate profit forecasts, while evolutions in bond yields also seem consistent with the outlook for inflation and growth. Nor are there any signs of excessive credit growth in the financial system. Nevertheless, we remain vigilant over all aspects of the current macroeconomic and financial environment. In the last HCSF communiqué in December 2015, for example, we indicated, on the subject of the property market, that “the price adjustment in the residential market since 2012 appears appropriate, whereas commercial real estate prices remain high”. We are ready, when needed, to take action with macroprudential measures, to prevent and mitigate any systemic risks that might arise. Monetary policy is thus doing a great deal to counter weak inflation and support economic activity – it is our duty and we will continue to do so with steadfast resolve: we are consistent in our objective, ready to act with the right instruments, and alert to any possible risks. However, I would also like to stress that “monetary policy cannot be the only game in town”. Other economic policies also have a role to play. This is precisely what the members of the G20 reiterated in Shanghai on 27 February: “Monetary policies will continue to support economic activity and ensure price stability, consistent with central banks’ mandates, but monetary policy alone cannot lead to balanced growth”. Where there is sufficient margin to do so, fiscal policy must support demand – this is not currently the case in France, but it is in other countries in Europe. Moreover, structural reforms remain absolutely vital in France, to encourage creations of jobs and of businesses and thus bring the economy back to full potential. Our country can’t wait any longer; its unemployed, its young people – such as yourselves – can’t wait  any  longer.  At  European  level,  we  need  to  move  finally  towards  a  true economic union, in addition to the monetary union embodied in the Eurosystem. Only by optimising the governance of the euro area can we optimise growth. The current extremely accommodative monetary policy stance creates the ideal conditions for carrying out much-needed reforms. It should not be used instead as an excuse for putting them off: Europe and France urgently need to make the most of this opportunity, right now. Thank you for your attention.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Alberto G Musalem: International spillovers and policies Remarks by Mr Alberto G Musalem, Executive Vice President of the Integrated Policy Analysis Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the People’s Bank of China-Federal Reserve Bank of New York Joint Symposium, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China, 15 Mach 2016. *      *      * Good morning. Thank you for the opportunity to speak here in Hangzhou about the important theme of international spillovers. By exchanging perspectives and experiences we can forge relationships and a shared understanding that can lead to better economic outcomes. I will focus mostly on the interaction of international spillovers with policy frameworks within and across countries. I will do this from the vantage point of a domestic economy experiencing foreign spillovers. I will then briefly turn to considerations from a U.S. perspective. As always, my remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), or the Federal Reserve System.1  International spillovers encompass a broad topic with respect to their sources and channels. Before narrowly focusing on monetary sources and associated channels, it seems appropriate to first take a broader view of the various sources. Foreign spillovers can emanate from monetary, fiscal, regulatory, currency or trade policies. Spillovers can also arise from endogenous productivity changes, from financial stability developments, and from a global financial cycle.2  The Mundell-Fleming logic remains relevant for thinking about policy options of open economies. It provides lessons on channels of transmission, basic tradeoffs across objectives, and the effectiveness of policy responses.3 The channels of macroeconomic and financial transmission among open and interdependent economies occur through the current account of the balance of payments, the capital account, or both. From the vantage point of the domestic economy, there are three main channels of transmission: the exchange rate; the external demand; and the interest rate or risk-premia channel. The last can be more broadly defined as the financial conditions channel. The intensity of transmission of spillovers will depend on the monetary policy, currency policy and the real and financial openness of the economy being affected by external developments. Other relevant characteristics include the flexibility of labor and product markets; the depth, safety and soundness of the financial system; and the economy’s position as an international creditor or debtor. The Mundell-Fleming framework suggests that a country with a high degree of capital mobility and a flexible currency will be in a favorable position to use monetary policy to attain its internal growth and inflation objectives. When foreign interest rates increase and financial conditions tighten, changes in relative prices brought about by currency fluctuations can help to absorb the external shocks. The positive expenditure switching effect from currency depreciation improves the trade balance and supports demand. It is sufficiently larger than the negative investment demand effect from higher interest rates, such that internal balance is attained and monetary policy is able to pursue domestic inflation and growth objectives.4                                                 1  Linda Goldberg, Paolo Pesenti, Joseph Tracy and Matthew Higgins contributed to these remarks. 2  A global financial cycle refers to the global co-movement of credit by banks and capital markets, asset prices, term premia, and risk premia. 3  Fleming (1962) and Mundell (1963). 4  Krugman (1999). The balance sheet effects imparted from a large international debtor position may work against achievement of an improved external balance and attainment of internal balance. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Different policy options are available to a country with a high degree of capital mobility and a preference for currency stability. A country may prefer currency stability as an effective nominal anchor, or because of concerns about the broader uncertainties associated with currency volatility. Regardless of the reason and because the exchange rate is not available to absorb external shocks, this country will be in an unfavorable position to achieve domestic macroeconomic objectives by using monetary policy. Instead, monetary policy is aimed at external adjustment. Tighter foreign monetary policy and financial conditions need to be validated by tighter domestic monetary policy to maintain currency stability. With domestic monetary conditions effectively imported from abroad, they may sometimes conflict with domestic growth and inflation objectives. Simply put, currency stability is prioritized. These policy considerations are summarized in the well-known international policy trilemma. It says that a country cannot simultaneously maintain independent monetary policy focused on domestic objectives, a high degree of capital mobility, and currency stability. Any two of these regime characteristics can be chosen, but not all three. While the trilemma suggests sharp tradeoffs, additional policy tools can soften the tradeoffs. Fiscal policy is one tool that serves this purpose. When foreign credit conditions tighten, expansionary fiscal policy can allow a country with a high degree of capital mobility, and a policy preference for currency stability, to effectively manage towards domestic macroeconomic objectives and internal balance. In fact, fiscal policy can also be used to rebalance the composition of demand towards the desired mix of investment and consumption. Softer tradeoffs than implied by the trilemma are suggested by some of the empirical evidence on interest rate co-movements. For example, there is ample evidence that domestic short-term interest rates become progressively less correlated with short-term interest rates in large foreign countries, and that monetary policy is more autonomous, as countries move from high capital mobility to low capital mobility, and from rigid currencies to flexible currencies.5  Using foreign exchange reserves to support currency stability is unlikely to be as effective in enabling the country to attain domestic growth and inflation objectives. If losses of foreign reserves are not sterilized, the effect will be similar to that of domestic monetary tightening, and as already discussed, might work against domestic growth and inflation objectives. If reserve losses are sterilized and the underlying cause of capital outflows is not addressed, reserves losses can be persistent. Macroprudential policy provides an additional tool that can add degrees of freedom and help soften the tradeoffs of the trilemma. Macroprudential policy can potentially temper spillovers by modulating the type of buildup of financial imbalances that contributed to the Asian crisis of 1997, countless other emerging market crisis, the global financial crisis of 2008 and the subsequent euro area crisis of 2011. Progress continues to be made in designing macroprudential policy frameworks, in definition of objectives, and in developing appropriate instruments, calibration and communication. Capital flow management can be viewed as the part of the macroprudential toolkit that operates across borders. Over the last five years, capital flow management has received increased attention, first in managing inflows and, more recently, in managing outflows.6 A consensus has emerged that capital flow management can be useful as part of a broader set of policy tools. In fact, the effectiveness of capital flow management may be limited if not appropriately supported by monetary, fiscal, exchange rate and prudential policies, or the                                                 5  Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2005), Goldberg (2013), Klein and Shambaugh (2015) and Obstfeld (2015). 6  G20 (2010), IMF (2012), Farhi and Werning (2014) and IMF (2015). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  warranted macroeconomic adjustment. Also, capital flow management practices that are transparent, temporary, and targeted seem to work best. Spillovers from foreign countries are not confined only to conventional monetary policies, nor is the U.S. the sole source of transmission. There also is evidence that the unconventional monetary policies of the ECB and the BOJ have spilled over onto the U.S. yield curve and broader financial conditions.7 This is interesting because all three monetary areas share the characteristics of flexible currencies and capital mobility. I will now conclude with a few related comments from the U.S. perspective. The Fed’s statutory mandate, like that of other central banks, is domestic. The Federal Reserve Act states that the Fed should “promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates”. Within this mandate, there are good reasons to consider the international effects of monetary and regulatory policies. The U.S. economy and the economies of the rest of the world have important feedback effects on each other, and adverse international spillovers can harm U.S. prosperity. Like other central banks, the Federal Reserve can help promote global prosperity and stability, by promoting growth and stability at home. The FOMC has taken a number of steps in recent years to increase transparency and improve communications, to effectively convey policy intentions to market participants and policymakers. The Fed has also made considerable progress in strengthening the safety and soundness of the U.S. financial system, through improved regulation and supervision of banks and a broader group of systemically important institutions. A stronger U.S. banking system better protects against future shocks, provides a more solid foundation for domestic growth, and therefore also enhances prospects for growth and financial stability abroad. I look forward to a discussion with fellow panelists and also to engaging with conference participants over the next two days. Thank you for your attention. References Ehrmann, M. & M. Fratzscher (2005). Equal Size, Equal Role? Interest Rate Interdependence Between the Euro Area and the United States, Royal Economic Society, vol. 115 (506), pages 928–948, October. Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2014). Dilemma not Trilemma? Capital Controls and Exchange Rates with Volatile Capital Flows, IMF Economic Review, pp. 62: 569–605. Federal Open Market Committee (2016), Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, Adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 26, 2016. Federal Open Market Committee (2016), Policy Statement, January 27, 2016. Fleming, M. (1962). Domestic Financial Policies under Fixed and under Floating Exchange Rates, IMF staff papers, 9 (3), pp. 369–380. G20 (2010), Summit Leaders’ Declaration, Seoul, Korea, November 11 – 12, 2010. Goldberg, L. (2013). Banking Globalization, Transmission, and Monetary Policy Autonomy, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review (Special Issue), pp. 161–193.                                                 7  http://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/section2a.htm. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  IMF (2105), The IMF’s Approach to Capital Account Liberalization Revisiting the 2005 IEO Evaluation, Independent Evaluation Office, Washington, D.C. IMF (2015), 2015 Spillover Report, Washington, D.C. IMF (2012), The Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows: an Institutional View, Washington, D.C. Klein, M. and Shambaugh, J. (2015). “Rounding the Corners of the Policy Trilemma: Sources of Monetary Policy Autonomy”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2015, 7 (4): 33–66, http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/mac.20130237. Krugman, P. (1999). Balance Sheets, the Transfer Problem, and Financial Crises, in International Finance and Financial Crises: Essays in Honor of Robert Flood, edited by Peter Isard, Assaf Razin and Andrew Rose (Springer Netherlands) pp. 31–55. Mundell, R. (1963). Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates, Canadian Journal of Economic and Political Science, 29 (4), pp.475–485. Obstfeld, M. (2015). Trilemmas and tradeoffs: living with financial globalization, BIS Working Papers No 480. Obstfeld, M., Shambaugh, J., and Taylor, A. (2005). The Trilemma in History: Tradeoffs among Exchange Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility, Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 87 (3). Rey, H. (2014). International Channels of Transmission of Monetary Policy and the Mundellian Trilemma, London Business School, Paper presented at the 15th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference Hosted by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C., November 13–14. United States Congress (1913), Federal Reserve Act, Amended 1977, Section 2A. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jorgovanka Tabaković: Continuous improvement of the business environment Speech by Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the meeting with the representatives of the French-Serbian Chamber of Commerce, Belgrade, 15 March 2016. *      *      * Your Excellency Ms. Moro, Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a pleasure to speak here today. First of all, I wish to thank you for organizing this event. As the Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, I am here with my associates to share with you the experience of our past cooperation with entities founded by investors from the French Republic, and to ensure this cooperation grows further in the period ahead. As the central bank of this country, we have had the opportunity to influence not only financial and banking cooperation, but also, indirectly, economic cooperation with the French Republic, and we will be glad to do so in the future as well. France has traditionally been a friend of Serbia, and that is something our people, with a history riddled with tremendous challenges, will never forget. Not far away from here stands the impressive monument of our gratitude to France. Our future cooperation, in the spirit of modern times, will definitely focus on the economy, especially as France is a respectable member of the European Union, to which we also aspire. For that reason in particular, we are happy to see every French investment in Serbia and each type of economic association, such as this joint chamber of commerce. Data collected and published by the French-Serbian Chamber of Commerce reveal a very positive trend in the field of economic cooperation, especially during the last couple of years. There is, however, room for further growth, and that is, among other things, why we are here today. As you well know, the National Bank of Serbia is an institution with broad powers, each of which we seek to exercise with a maximum degree of professionalism and coordination, in order to achieve the best results. Speaking of French investment in the services sector, I must definitely single out financial services which are the subject of direct supervision of the National Bank of Serbia and include, in particular, commercial banking, insurance, financial leasing, and voluntary pension funds. I am happy to say that Serbia saw direct investments in each of the above areas through the establishment of companies with majority French capital. French investors were among the first to enter Serbia’s commercial banking sector and have so far achieved stable performances and an excellent reputation. With us here today are the representatives of “Credit Agricole”, “Societe Generale Srbija” and “Findomestic BNP Paribas” and I would like to use this opportunity to greet them. French entities are relatively new to the Serbian insurance sector. We expect much of them, especially as the local insurance market has great potential and needs drivers to kick off development. To bring this industry closer to contemporary international standards, the National Bank of Serbia has drafted and adopted new, modern regulations. I would also like to welcome the representatives of “Societe Generale Osiguranje” and “AXA Osiguranje”, while recalling that the first greenfield license issued by the National Bank of Serbia in the insurance sector was granted to a French investor – “Credit Agricole”. Today, French capital is present in the agent and broker network of the insurance industry as well, through “Gras Savoye”. In the field of financial leasing, we have “Sogelease” and “CA Leasing”. As a result of market consolidation in our voluntary pension funds sector, “Societe Generale” is no longer engaged directly in the provision of these services, but remains present in this segment, providing custody services to all voluntary pension fund management companies through its commercial bank. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  I believe that each of the above names is in itself a guarantee that the National Bank of Serbia has created a good investment environment in all financial services coming under its remit, by generating legal certainty for setting up and doing business and by contributing, through its supervisory activities, to the strengthening of the market and ensuring better protection of all participants, consumers and investors alike. As most of the representatives of these financial institutions are also active in the Foreign Investors Council, they can confirm that we were most cooperative in drafting current regulations to our mutual satisfaction. This is the standard of work I set out to achieve when I became Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, and it is the standard to which I will adhere in the future. I believe the best results can only be achieved through coordinated efforts, which will be continuously adjusted and enriched by our mutual practical experience. On the other hand, I feel quite certain that, when in the role of consumers of banking, insurance, leasing or voluntary pension funds services, members of the French-Serbian Chamber of Commerce who are active in the area of industry and agriculture fully appreciate the work and the results of the National Bank of Serbia with regard to regulating and ensuring the stability of that part of our financial system. In addition, the National Bank of Serbia keeps making efforts to influence the business and investment environment in Serbia in order for it to remain stimulative for maintaining current and attracting new foreign investment. According to the law that regulates the activities of the National Bank of Serbia, it is responsible for achieving and maintaining price stability, contributes to maintaining and strengthening the stability of the financial system and supports the pursuance of economic policy of the Serbian Government. The National Bank of Serbia has achieved the objective of price stability. Inflation averaged at 1.9% in 2015 and we expect it to stay low in 2016. Low and stable inflation, enjoyed by Serbia today and for close to three years already, is imperative for preserving the real value of wages and pensions but also for creating a predictable business environment. Because Serbia is a small, open end euroised economy, the exchange rate represents an important factor of financial stability and certainty of doing business. Larger oscillations of the exchange rate substantially hinder the maintenance of price and financial stability. All of us living and working in Serbia, corporates and households with loans to repay, are well aware of this fact. Hence, maintaining relative stability of the exchange rate is one of the important factors for strengthening the business and investment environment, contributing to higher investment and lower country risk premium. We have no dilemma over this and remain unwavering in our commitment to achieving stability in all respects – price stability, financial stability, and relative stability of the exchange rate. With regard to the exchange rate, we achieve stability by preventing excessive short-term oscillations in the foreign exchange market. Foreign investors in particular have been highly appreciative of our results in this respect, pointing out that this parameter is of great significance for their business. And that is why I am proudly emphasizing this particular aspect today. Also, by continuously trimming the key policy rate from May 2013 onwards, we have created room for a recovery in lending and further economic growth. The fall in interest rates was indeed one of the factors behind acceleration of economic growth. Today, interest rates on dinar loans of corporates, households and the government are at their all-time lows since the adoption of the inflation targeting regime. Interest rates declined by as much as up to 5 percentage points in 2015 relative to the previous year. The numbers speak for themselves – we have achieved a huge reduction in costs for corporates, households and the government. Economic growth in Serbia is also supported by net foreign direct investments which came at EUR 1.8 billion, rising by 45.6% from a year earlier. The fact that, today, investments in Serbia are channeled into a large number of projects, and that they originate from a larger number of countries, indicates that companies which decided to invest in Serbia are sure that they have made a good business move. And here, we must not forget to mention domestic investors which we consider equally important and valuable. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  By achieving successful coordination of monetary and fiscal policies, while ensuring a clear division of powers among different institutions, we have strengthened our credibility with all relevant entities considering the prospect of investing in Serbia. If I were to summarize the results achieved by our institution with regard to the overall investment climate in just one sentence, I would point out: low inflation rate, record low interest rates, anchored inflation expectations, relatively stable exchange rate, stable and resilient financial system, higher investment loans, increased confidence in the dinar coupled with higher household borrowing and savings in the local currency. That we are not the only ones who say this is confirmed by data and the assessment of credit agencies and relevant international institutions. We have also enjoyed excellent cooperation with the International Monetary Fund, providing maximum contribution to positive signals coming from that important institution, the arrangements with which lend major support to our economic stability. In particular, the National Bank of Serbia strongly supports the commitment of the Serbian Government to European integrations and has taken direct part in this process, not only through negotiations, but also through a series of other activities aimed at harmonizing regulations and creating a better and safer investment environment, following the lead of countries such as France. We are proud to say that all of the above has been achieved by relying on our own resources, bravely facing all challenges coming from the international environment and global financial flows. I therefore hope we will continue to enjoy your understanding and support, and will fully reciprocate it, to our mutual satisfaction. Finally, allow me to add a few facts regarding French-Serbian economic and cultural cooperation. The National Bank of Serbia has had intense cooperation with the Bank of France, but also with the French agency for prudential supervision of financial institutions. The Bank of France took part in the technical assistance project for strengthening the institutional capacities of the National Bank of Serbia, thereby continuing, in the best possible way, the cooperation begun in late 19th and early 20th century when the French central bank was printing Serbian banknotes. In honour of this fact, an exhibition dedicated to the cooperation of the two central banks was organized in the Banque de France a few years ago, while the International Day of Francophonie is celebrated in the National Bank of Serbia each year. With regard to financial indicators, the Republic of Serbia regularly services its debt obligations to the French Republic, while the French Republic has donated over EUR 16 million to the public sector of the Republic of Serbia over the past eight years. The value of French direct investment in Serbia has so far exceeded EUR 800 million. This is an honour for us, but also an obligation, and the National Bank of Serbia will continue to be one of the pillars of French-Serbian cooperation. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Guy Debelle: The global code of conduct for the foreign exchange market Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the FX Week Australia conference, Sydney, 17 March 2016. *      *      * Today, I will talk about the Global Code of Conduct for the Foreign exchange market. I will reiterate the motivation for the work we are doing, then update you on where we are at with the process and outline the way forward.  Why is the work going on? As I have stated on previous occasions, the foreign exchange (FX) industry is suffering from a lack of trust in its functioning. This lack of trust is evident both between participants in the market, but at least as importantly, between the public and the market. The market needs to move toward a more favourable and desirable location, and allow participants to have much greater confidence that the market is functioning appropriately.  A well-functioning foreign exchange market is very much in the interest of all market participants. This clearly includes central banks, both in their own role as market participants but also as the exchange rate is an important channel of monetary policy transmission. In a globalised world, the foreign exchange market is one of the most vital parts of the financial plumbing.  The Global Code is aiming to set out global principles of good practice in the foreign exchange market to provide a common set of guidance to the market, including in areas where there is a degree of uncertainty about what sort of practices are acceptable, and what are not. This should help to address the lack of trust as well as promote the effective functioning of the wholesale FX market.  To that end, one of the guiding principles underpinning our work is that the Code should promote a robust, fair, liquid, open, and transparent market. A diverse set of buyers and sellers, supported by resilient infrastructure, should be able to confidently and effectively transact at competitive prices that reflect available market information and in a manner that conforms to acceptable standards of behaviour.  The work to develop the Global Code commenced in May last year, when the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) Governors commissioned a working group of the Markets Committee of the BIS to facilitate the establishment of a single global code of conduct for the wholesale FX market and to come up with mechanisms to promote greater adherence to the code.1  There are two important points worth highlighting: first, it's a single code for the whole industry and second, it's a global code. It's intended to cover all of the wholesale FX industry. This is not a code of conduct for just the sell side. It is there for the sell side, the buy side, non-bank participants and the platforms; its breadth is both across the globe and across the whole structure of the industry. The Code is intended to apply to all aspects of the wholesale foreign exchange market. In the Code itself, we spell out what we actually mean by the wholesale FX market. The one noteworthy part of the FX industry to which the Code generally doesn't apply is the retail market, as that is generally governed by retail-specific regulation in the relevant jurisdiction.  I am chairing this work, with Simon Potter of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York leading the work on developing the code and Chris Salmon of the Bank of England leading the adherence work. Our Working Group comprises representatives of the central banks of all the                                                 1  http://www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  major FX centres, drawing on the membership of the Markets Committee which is comprised of heads of the market operations areas of the 15 major currency areas.2 Given our roles, we are all very much interested in the effective functioning of the FX market. Again, it is very much a global effort reflecting the global nature of the foreign exchange market.  This work is also very much a public sector-private sector partnership. In that regard, we are being ably and vigorously supported in this work by a group of market participants, chaired by David Puth, CEO of CLS. The group contains people from all around the world, including Australia, on both the buy side, including corporates and asset managers, and the sell side, along with trading platforms, ECNs and non-bank participants, drawing from the various Foreign Exchange Committees (FXCs) and beyond. Hence all parts of the market are being involved in the drafting of the code to make sure all perspectives are heard and appropriately reflected.  At the outset we decided to split the topics we intend to cover in the Code into two parts. The first phase is the material we intend to put out in two months' time in May. It covers areas such as ethics, information sharing, execution (including mark-up) and confirmation and settlement. The second phase will cover topics such as governance, risk management and compliance, as well as further aspects of execution including e-trading and platforms (including last look), prime brokerage, and the unique features of FX swap, forward, and option transactions.  One factor influencing our choice of which topics to cover in the first phase was our assessment of what issues the market was looking for clarity on sooner rather than later.  One example of this is around information sharing, where many market participants have highlighted that they are unsure what information can be conveyed to counterparties and other market participants. While it is clear (or at least should be) that disclosing the details of a client's order book to a counterparty is not acceptable, market participants have noted that there is much less clarity around what level of aggregation, say, is necessary in order to convey market colour appropriately.  As a result, it appears some market participants are being very conservative in sharing information, which can have implications for the effective functioning of the market. This is notwithstanding the guidance provided in this area in the Global Preamble put out by the global Foreign Exchange Committees, including the Australian Foreign Exchange Committee (AFXC), in March last year.3 The Global Code takes the material in the Global Preamble and fleshes it out a bit more, including with some examples of what is, and isn't appropriate communication, and why.  Similarly, there have been diverse opinions around what is appropriate behaviour in terms of order handling. While there have been some very public instances of inappropriate behaviour around order handling which have come to light in recent years, in other areas, the market is seeking greater guidance as to what principles should be followed, including the different standards that may apply depending on whether an intermediary is functioning as principal or agent.4  This is one area that was not adequately covered in the pre-existing codes of conduct that the various FXCs had endorsed for the FX market. It is an area where we are aiming to provide the sought-after guidance. But we are not writing a procedures manual for order-handling. Rather we are articulating principles that need to be taken into account. Individual firms may then take these principles and reflect them in their own procedures manual. Our aim in                                                 2  http://www.bis.org/about/factmktc/fxwg.htm. 3  Available at http://www.rba.gov.au/afxc/about-us/pdf/global-preamble.pdf. 4  I am not using these terms in the legal sense that is sometimes the case in particular jurisdictions, but rather in terms of common market parlance. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  articulating these principles is to provide market participants with the framework in which to think about how they handle stop-loss orders. The emphasis here is very much on the word ‘think’. The Global Code will not provide the answers to all your questions, but it should help you ask the right questions.  In a similar vein, I will repeat a point that I have made a number of times in the past. One of our most central aims in drafting the Code is for it to be principles-based rather than rules-based. There are a number of reasons why this is so, but for me, an important reason is that the more prescriptive the Code is, the easier it is to get around. Rules are easier to arbitrage than principles. If it's not expressly prohibited or explicitly discouraged, then it must be okay seems to be the historical experience. Moreover, the more prescriptive and the more precise the code is, the less people will think about what they are doing. If it's principles-based and less prescriptive then, as I just said, market participants will have to think about whether their actions are consistent with the principles of the Code.  So where we are up to in the process? Last week we circulated for comment the second draft of phase one of the Code via the various FXCs including the Australian FXC (and central banks in those countries on the Working Group without an FXC). This second draft incorporates comments on the first draft of the Code that we had circulated at the beginning of February. The first draft attracted over 1,400 comments. The comments were almost universally constructive and very supportive of the whole endeavour. I would like to thank those who took the time to provide them.  In writing this second draft, we and the market participants group took full account of all of these comments. Those who provided them can rest assured we have taken heed of them. But in saying that, you may not see your comment directly embodied in the redrafting. This in part, reflects the diversity of views on some issues in the Code. That said, we have sought to incorporate the overall feedback in a manner that best reflects the objectives for the Code that I set out above, namely that the Code should promote a robust, fair, liquid, open, and transparent market.  The comments on the second draft will be gathered over the next week or so. We will then take account of them and produce a revised draft early in April. There will be one final round for ‘fatal flaw’ comments after that before seeking endorsement by the various FXCs of a document we can take to the Global Foreign Exchange Committee meeting in New York on 25 May. For example, in Australia, we will be looking for the AFXC endorsement of the Code at our next meeting in early May. Following the meeting of the Global Foreign Exchange Committee, the first phase of the Global Code will be publically released.  We have already started on the work of drafting the material in phase two of the Code. We will continue with that over the next year, again having a number of rounds of comment from market participants through the FXC process.  Our intention is that the complete Code will be released following the Global Foreign Exchange Committee meeting in London in May 2017. At the end of that process, for the code to be effective and for it to achieve what we want it to achieve, it will need to be accepted and endorsed by the FXCs and market participants more generally.  That said, the process does not really end, because as the foreign exchange market continues to evolve, the Code will need to evolve with it. I will have more to say about how this ongoing evolution of the Code might occur in due course.  Adherence to the code At the same time as we have been drafting the Code, we have also been devoting considerable time and effort to develop adherence mechanisms which promote and incentivise widespread adoption of the Global Code by market participants. Clearly, that has been an issue with the 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  various existing industry codes that have been in place in a number of markets over many years. It is very evident that they were often ignored, wilfully or otherwise. For an industry code to have value in affirming appropriate norms of behaviour, it has to become effectively adopted in the marketplace.  While adherence to a single, consistent code of good practice is widely regarded to be in the interests of the market, the Global Code will be voluntary. As I said earlier, we are working with the industry to produce a voluntary, principles-based code of conduct rather than a set of prescriptive regulatory standards. It will not impose legal or regulatory obligations on market participants, nor will it supplant existing regulatory standards or expectations.  There is already a substantial body of law and regulation that applies to the FX activities of many market participants, and this varies significantly across jurisdictions. This variation, coupled with the diverse nature of FX markets globally, means that a ‘one size fits all’ approach to adherence would not be appropriate. The final framework for adherence will need to strike the right balance between respecting the existing diversity across different markets, and maintaining consistency with regard to what is a global initiative.  In that regard, we have articulated three principles which underpin our overall approach to adherence.  • Universal: The Global Code should apply to all wholesale FX market participants, based on the activities they undertake and subject to compliance with any applicable regulations. We have been working hard to incorporate the perspective of all types of wholesale FX market participants into the draft Code, and we want it to be widely applicable across the market.  • Proportionate: How wholesale FX market participants adhere, and demonstrate their adherence, to the Global Code should be proportionate and appropriate to the type of participant and the context of the local financial markets.  • Transparent: the mode of adherence should be transparent, to enable monitoring and market discipline.  It is worth stressing that the “proportionate” principle is not designed to lower the bar – it is designed to reflect the differences in the type and volume of market activities of certain market participants and the variation in FX markets worldwide.  The concrete details of the adherence mechanisms remain a work in process. We will have more to say on this in New York in May. At this stage, our thinking is that there is unlikely to be a single adherence mechanism but rather a suite of mechanisms.  Conclusion That, I trust, gives you a reasonable overview of the state of play on the Global Code.  A lot of work has been done to get us to this point. There is still a lot of work to be done.  The work to date has reflected a very constructive and cooperative effort between the central banks and market participants. All of us recognise the need to restore the public's faith in the foreign exchange market and the value of the Global Code in assisting that process and also in helping improve market functioning and confidence in how the market functions. I expect that cooperative relationship will continue as we see this process through to its conclusion in May next year.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Joshua Rosenberg: Operational risk management at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Remarks by Mr Joshua Rosenberg , Executive Vice President and Chief Risk Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the 18th Annual OpRisk North America 2016 conference, New York City, 15 March 2016. *      *      * Good morning. I would like to thank the organizers for inviting me to speak at this year’s OpRisk North America conference. Today, I will share my perspectives on operational risk based on my experiences at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York including those in my current role as the Bank’s Chief Risk Officer. Before I begin, I wanted to state that the views I will be expressing are mine and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. As you know, operational risk is defined as the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems, or external events. The New York Fed faces operational risks because, like other public and private institutions, it relies on people, processes, and systems to execute its objectives, and, in the same way, the Bank is subject to external events that can impact the effectiveness of our people, processes, and systems. To give you a better sense of the New York Fed as an operational entity, I wanted to touch briefly on the broad range of the Bank’s operations. Most familiar are likely to be the Bank’s execution of market operations to implement monetary policy directives of the Federal Open Market Committee and financial supervisory activities. As significant in the Bank’s operational profile are the financial services that the Bank provides to the U.S. government, financial institutions and businesses, and to foreign central banks and international institutions. Notably, the Bank operates the Fedwire® electronic payments and securities transfer service, which is a critical part of the nation’s payment system infrastructure. The Bank performs fiscal agency functions for the U.S. government including the auction of Treasury securities, and it provides correspondent banking and custody services to foreign central banks and international institutions.1  The Bank’s risk framework Operations imply operational risk, so how does the Bank approach operational risk management? Let me back up for a moment, since a useful starting point to answer this question is to begin by describing the Bank’s overall approach to managing risk within the Bank’s risk framework. In particular, the risk framework is designed to enable the Bank to understand and communicate its risk profile to key stakeholders, assess how risks may change in response to planned activities or changes in the environment, take action to ensure risks remain at acceptable levels, recover quickly and effectively from risk events, and continuously improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the risk management. As part of the risk framework, the Bank defines risk management roles and responsibilities using the three lines of defense model.2 The three lines of defense model creates a set of layered defenses that align responsibility for risk taking with accountability for risk control and provide effective, independent risk oversight and escalation. In the three lines model, the assignment of risk management roles is clear and comprehensive in order to prevent gaps,                                                 1 https://www.newyorkfed.org/aboutthefed/fedpoints.html. 2 IIA Position Paper: The Three Lines of Defense in Effective Risk Management and Control, January 2013. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  ambiguities, or overlaps in responsibility. More specifically, the business areas are the first line of defense, independent risk management units are the second line of defense, and internal audit is the third line of defense. In the Bank, the first line of defense is comprised of the business areas that execute and support the execution of the Bank’s mission. These first line units are responsible for both the operational activities that result in risk as well as control of the resulting risks. The first line “owns” its risk in the sense that it is accountable for both positive and negative outcomes and is empowered to manage the distribution of outcomes. At its core, the three lines model recognizes the strong incentives for effective risk management created by aligning accountability and responsibility. In other words, from the perspective of the first line, there is “skin in the game,” and risk management is not viewed as someone else’s problem. In addition, putting the first line in charge of risk management has efficiency and effectiveness benefits, since the first line can adapt risk solutions to its specific needs and nimbly respond when the risk environment changes. The Bank’s second line of defense – independent risk management areas including my Group, the Risk Group – provides independent assessment and oversight of the risks taken by the first line as well as frameworks that provide a common structure for risk management processes and practices. The second line also provides an integrated view of risk to senior stakeholders through consolidated analysis of the Bank’s risks. A second key insight of the three lines model is that a layered defense increases safety and reliability by providing an independent check that reduces the chance of error. The second line is the second layer, and provides a view of risk that is independent of the business area’s assessment. What is the value-add from having this type of second opinion? To start, while the business has the deepest understanding of its environment, operations, and objectives, the second line offers a perspective based on expertise in risk identification, analysis, and mitigation that is informed by its institution-wide view of operations and risks. This allows the second line to provide unique insights by aggregating risks across business lines, identifying interactions across risk types, and spotting anomalies in risk exposures or risk practices that deserve additional attention. There also may be externalities to actions taken in one business line that have implications for the risk of the institution as a whole; it is the second line’s responsibility to articulate that perspective to senior management. The second line’s responsibility for establishing a common framework for risk management creates benefits in terms of both efficiency and effectiveness. The second line is an institution’s center of excellence in risk management and is in an ideal position to identify and promulgate best practices and standards. In terms of efficiency, the second line is well-positioned to collect and analyze risk information coming from all of the business lines, to provide common risk management tools, and to provide guidance to business areas to improve their risk management capabilities. The Bank’s third line of defense, Internal Audit, provides assurance to senior management and the Board of Directors that first and second line risk management and control activities are effective. Although I did not say it before, the second line is not fully independent of management. This is because second line risk management (in our case, the Risk Group) is involved in a broad range of management decisions related to the Bank’s risk controls, and, in terms of reporting lines, I am part of the Bank’s Management Committee and report to the Bank’s president. Our Audit Group, however, provides a fully independent, final layer of defense. Internal Audit does not participate in management decisions, and our General Auditor reports to the Chair of the Audit and Risk Subcommittee of the Bank’s Board of Directors. In addition to defining clear and comprehensive risk management roles and responsibilities using the three lines of defense model, the Bank’s risk framework establishes governance, escalation, and reporting processes around risk exposures, risk decisions, and risk events. A 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  strong governance regime provides assurance to stakeholders (Management Committee, the President, and the Board) who delegate risk-taking authority to the business lines. From first-line businesses and support functions, risk information flows to the second line, and then to the Risk Subcommittee of our Bank’s Management Committee. The Risk Subcommittee discusses significant emerging and existing risks, provides perspectives on managing and mitigating risks, and supports Management Committee review and decision making. The Audit and Risk Subcommittee of the Bank’s Board of Directors and the Board of Directors itself are at the top of the governance chain, although there are limitations on their roles with respect to supervisory and monetary policy issues.3  Operational risk management The Bank’s operational risk approach sits within, and is shaped by the Bank’s overall risk framework. Roles and responsibilities as well as escalation and reporting follow the general structure I previously described. At this point, though, I can drill down into operational risk specifics. In the first line of defense, operational risk management is conducted by staff in the front line units with support from first-line’s centralized risk management resources (usually as part of a business’ shared services function). The first line is responsible and accountable for the identification, analysis, management, and monitoring of the operational risks that arise as a result of its activities. Second line operational risk management is led by the Central Operational Risk Function in the Risk Group. Central Operational Risk provides independent assessment and oversight of first-line operational risks and risk management practices and is responsible for maintaining and enhancing the Bank’s operational risk framework. Our third line, Internal Audit, assesses the design and implementation of the operational risk framework and provides feedback on risk issues as an observer on governance committees. The foundations of the Bank’s operational risk program are the risk event reporting process and the risk and control self-assessment process. These processes are central to risk identification, analysis, and response. The risk event reporting process involves real-time collection, classification, analysis, and escalation of operational risk events including establishment of root causes and determination of remediation plans. You are all likely familiar with reporting risk events that have impacted your institution and categorizing them as low, moderate or significant. We do this as well. In addition, we require reporting of near miss events, which is when a control failure has occurred but we’ve been fortunate that there was no impact to the Bank. These near miss events are a window into vulnerabilities that could cause an adverse impact in the future. The risk and control self-assessment process establishes a methodology for business areas to periodically assess their operational risks and ensure that appropriate mitigation is in place for key business processes. Importantly, the Central Operational Risk area is responsible for synthesizing the outputs of these two processes, along with follow-up discussions with business areas, to identify significant Bank-wide residual operational risks. We have found it useful to view operational risk through the lens of processes, risks, and controls. We have defined a comprehensive set of processes to characterize the Bank’s primary services and transactions. Along with that, we have articulated a standardized set of risk drivers, risk events, risk event impacts, and, finally, controls that prevent, detect, or mitigate the consequences of a risk event. We are using this risk taxonomy on a forward-                                                3 https://www.newyorkfed.org/aboutthefed/audit.html. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  looking basis to assess the risks of Bank processes and as an analysis tool to investigate risk events after the fact. Using standardized process, risk, and control types allows us to aggregate as well as slice and dice our risks around dimensions of interest. For example, we identify processes associated with the highest levels of residual risk and the largest number of risk events as areas for additional attention. It may be the case that additional mitigation is required or there are weaknesses in controls. We identify common control profiles for process types and assess their effectiveness based on risk ratings and past risk events. That informs the second line’s recommendations to business areas on control protocols. We also use the common control profiles to assess where we are over-controlled and have the opportunity to shift resources to other priorities. The risk information collected and the risk analysis performed by the second line is the basis for operational risk reporting in the Bank’s risk profile report that is presented to the Risk Subcommittee, the Management Committee, and the Audit and Risk Subcommittee. The risk profile report shows the Bank’s most significant risks (including operational risks) along with a risk rating and the status of mitigating actions and mitigation plans. In addition, the report highlights significant and notable risk events along with the event’s impact, root causes, and remediation activities. We have found that the risk profile report provides the necessary flow of information to create meaningful committee dialogue around risk issues, feedback to business areas, coordination across Groups and lines of defense, and when necessary, additional escalation. Past, present, and future As the theory and practice of operational risk management and the complexity of our operations have evolved, so has our approach. In the mid-2000’s, the Bank formalized its operational risk program. That included starting a Bank-wide Operational Risk Committee (a predecessor to the Risk Subcommittee) led by the First Vice President, establishing the risk event reporting and risk control self-assessment processes, and creating the Centralized Operational Risk Function (then located in the Bank’s Corporate Group). Later developments included instituting new Bank-wide control policies reflecting a deeper understanding of sources of operational risk. For example, the Bank established policies to govern end-user developed automation tools and the management of contingent workers. The past several years have been characterized by a focus on integration of the Bank’s risk management program. As part of a review of the Bank’s governance, the Risk Subcommittee of the Management Committee was established with a broad risk management mandate spanning financial, operational, and compliance risk. The Bank also enhanced the coordination of risk management, resource allocation, and strategic planning through linkages between the Risk Subcommittee and our planning and resources committee. Most indicative of this trend was the establishment in 2015 of the Risk Group’s Enterprise Risk Management Function which is responsible for providing an integrated view across all of the Bank’s risks. In thinking about areas for future improvement, I ask myself: How can we accelerate organizational learning from our mistakes? Does our analysis of risks and risk events sufficiently reveal organizational and structural issues that contribute to the risk? How can I further create a positive risk culture that encourages reporting and escalating of risk issues? Are we finding the right balance in our controls between specificity of rules and the adaptability of principles? These and other questions will continue to focus us on improving and enhancing our policies and practices with the goal of supporting the Bank’s ability to manage risk within its risk tolerance. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mario Draghi: Interview in The Guardian Interview with Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, in The Guardian, conducted by Mr Shiv Malik on 18 February 2016 and published on 11 March 2016. *      *      * What does the ECB’s own research on incomes and younger generations say? During the great recession, the young (16 to 34) lost about 5 percent of household income in real terms. That was of course substantial and had a big impact on the personal plans of many young people. But the magnitude was not so different from the losses suffered by other generations, although of course the young do not have the same assets and savings to fall back on in tough economic times. Even more worrying was the sharp increase in youth unemployment in Europe. Are you worried about the position of young adults in Europe and is this an increasingly urgent issue? Youth unemployment is a tragedy and prevents people from playing a full and meaningful part in society. If every second young person is out of work – as is still the case in some countries in Europe – it seriously harms the economy, because people willing to work cannot work and skills are not developed. And it threatens social harmony. Unemployment can lead in the long run to increased social problems and ill-health. Are you worried about future consumption levels of young adults, as this group – who have been especially “scarred” by the global recession – move into middle life? Consumption within a society is determined partly by wealth distribution, but even more important is that the young generation can participate in the labour market in a fair way. In many countries the labour market is set up to protect older “insiders” – people with permanent, high paid contracts and shielded by strong labour laws. The side effect is that young people are stuck with lower-paid, temporary contracts and get fired first in crisis times. That also means that employers are reluctant to invest in young people, so the incomes of this generation stay lower over their lifetime. What might be the forces at work here – demographics / changing workplaces / fiscal-monetary policy – that mean that young adults appear to be receiving little of the rewards of two and half decades of average economic growth? Nobody stays young forever. The crucial question is whether a person can participate fully in the economy over his or her life-time – get a good education, find a job, buy a home for the family. Income and wealth follow. What makes me worry is that increasing inequality might prevent people from doing that. This is an issue all our societies need to look at carefully. The ECB’s role in that is to maintain price stability, which prevents unfair redistribution. For example, our research shows that in the euro area too low inflation results in redistribution from younger, more indebted households to older households that are typically net creditors. Current retirees are wealthier than ever. What opportunities does this bring to Europe? In an ageing society, the fact that retirees are getting wealthier isn’t necessarily abnormal – older people need to accumulate more wealth to finance living longer. As they spend their wealth during retirement, it passes back to the younger generations. So wealth creation isn’t a zero sum game. What matters is that young people, as they move through life, have the opportunities to build up wealth, too. Do you think younger adults today will have as good a standard of living as pensioners today when they come to retire? 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  That’s our common choice. Our standard of living depends on the strength of our economy. We need a more open, flexible, innovative and business-friendly society. Much focus is put on the central bank to raise growth, and it can contribute through price stability and a stable financial system. But in the long run real growth is driven by what the economy can produce. That is much more about ideas, technology, flexibility, motivation, skills. It is up to elected governments to set a growth-friendly environment. You often talk about the need for “structural reform” in employment. What do you mean by this? There are lots of forms this can take. Just to give one example, the Kurzarbeit scheme in Germany allowed employers to adjust working time during the crisis without firing people. But there’s no one-size-fits-all model. Every society has its challenges and preferences. The idea generally is to create a fair and flexible labour market where companies do not fear taking on staff when they need them and specific groups of people are not structurally disadvantaged at times when employers need to cut wage bills. What can central banks/governments do to ease/resolve these issues? Everyone has a vital interest in a prospering economy. So bringing down high levels of youth unemployment is a priority for everyone. As I said, the best contribution central banks can make here is to live up to their mandates. We can only encourage elected governments to take the necessary steps to create jobs and make their societies fairer. Over the longer-term, by far the most important thing for young people is investing in education and skills. Skills are a person’s passport through life, and in a fast-changing digital economy, the premium paid for skills is only likely to rise. Equipping people for tomorrow’s world is the best way to raise incomes and reduce inequality. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Andrew Bailey: Bank capital – debating again Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive Officer of the Prudential Regulation Authority at the Bank of England, at Barclays’ 2016 Financial Conference, London, 9 March 2016. *      *      * Bank capital has been in the news again recently, or at least parts of the news – there are some other things going on. There are probably two reasons for this “news”: first, because we have entered another phase of highly uncertain conditions in financial markets, which has had a strong impact on the market value of banks; and second, as authorities we are pushing on with implementing the post-crisis reforms to capital standards, and in doing so we have reached a point where some of the important building blocks are now being put into place. Today, I am going to reflect on and draw some conclusions for what I would call the bigger picture, namely what sort of banking system are we seeking to create, what are we not doing, and why not. I will draw on the detail, and there is no shortage of that, but this is not a talk about the detail of bank capital, you can find that in plenty of other places.  Another objective is to tackle some urban myths of today. Let me start with an important one, the so-called “liquidity narrative1” which sets up in order to knock down, and attributes to regulators, the view that the financial crisis (indeed crises more generally) was caused by a lack of liquidity rather than solvency in the banking system, and this blinded people, notably regulators, to the real cause of the problem, namely solvency and capital. Whatever happened in the past, it is most certainly not true today. Loss of liquidity is much more the symptom than the cause of crises, and while symptoms have to be observed, and some actions taken to minimise their effects, I am in no doubt that the cause is usually either an actual solvency problem or critically rising expectations that there will be such a problem in the future. If you spend time in the PRA, you would quickly learn that capital is front and centre in what we do as supervisors.  Why is that so? Banks are different from other financial firms because they provide deposit contracts to their customers. A deposit is a very particular form of debt contract. For all of us the essential feature of a deposit contract is simple – we put our money (our asset) on deposit at a bank, and we expect all of it back, with whatever rate of return is agreed, and we expect to have access to it in line with the terms of the contract.  Let’s contrast that with non-deposit debt (bonds) and equity contracts. If you invest in either of these, you are not promised all of your investment back, though of course you expect to make a positive return. Such an investor ordinarily expects the full return of their investment, but this is not assured. Investment in debt and equity can of course be managed on a collective basis, as asset management. You may remember the Woody Allen quote that a stockbroker is someone “who invests your money until it’s all gone”. Cruel I know, but it illustrates the difference between deposits, other forms of debt and equity.  A distinguishing feature of banks is that by providing deposit contracts, far more of their liabilities take the form of value certain contracts. This alone makes capital and solvency critical for banks. In contrast, for asset managers, the contract does not promise such value certainty. Two particular conditions need to be met in my view to make asset management effective and robust to wider economic conditions. First, that there is no lack of clarity of the nature of the assets held under management. Second, that there is no illusion give to investors about                                                 1  Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig: “The Bankers New Clothes: What’s wrong with Banking and what to do about it”. P38–40 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  liquidity of their assets. It follows therefore that capital and solvency matter much more for bank supervision, and market liquidity conditions matter more for asset management supervision.  So bank capital matters a lot. The next question, rather obviously, is how much of it banks should have as a liability on their balance sheet? This has been the subject of lively recent comment. Most of that comment has focussed on the core issue of how much capital and overall loss absorbency banks should have as part of their balance sheet liabilities to protect the value certainty of deposits. This is a very reasonable debate because there is no monopoly of wisdom on such a subject. I do however discount heavily those commentators who have seamlessly switched from attacking on the grounds that as supervisors we were choking off lending by requiring too much capital (the so-called at the time “Capital Taliban” argument) to arguing now that we are falling down by setting the standard too low.  The main argument of late has been whether our recent proposals on capital buffers for the largest banks operating in UK markets have diverged from previous post-crisis commitments on the level of capital banks should maintain both in going concern, and the overall level of loss absorbency available amongst the liabilities of a bank to enable a resolution to occur if needed. To put it into context, the capital standard we have developed is based on the last quarter century of bank performance – including the financial crisis – such that the probability of bank failure during that period would have been extremely low. In aggregate terms we have not diverged, and if anything our recent proposals put the level a little higher than that suggested, for instance, by the Independent Commission on Banking, but not by enough to make a big point of it. It is true that within that aggregate we have introduced a new element in the form of incentives to protect the stability of the financial system. We have followed through wherever possible on the principle that larger and more complex banks should have higher capital buffers because they pose a greater risk to the stability of the financial system. Consistent with that principle, we have created a tiered system of increasing capital requirements but left the topmost tier unpopulated. This empty tier is not a product of a craven fear of putting a bank there, but rather to create a disincentive to further complexity. So, we don’t see this element of the design as contradicting its goal.  We could argue about the merits of small changes in the capital standard, but that is not in my view a worthwhile exercise. What is more notable is the divide between this view of strengthening banks’ loss absorbency and the alternative view that the answer lies in a radical restructuring of the banking system to require banks to have loss absorbency which would be a substantial part (say 20% to 30%) of their total balance sheet2. It is wrong in my view to conflate an argument about small differences in capital buffers with one that is all about a different financial system.  I want to spend a few minutes on this alternative view, on what it would mean, and why it is advocated. To be clear, I am not commenting as a supporter, but rather to try to cast light on this big issue. The essence of the argument as I see it is that it is asserted by supporters of, let’s call it the “big equity” school, that we cannot value large banks adequately because they are too complex and opaque, cannot supervise them effectively and cannot resolve them, we must resort to an approach which requires a sizeable shift in the balance of their funding away from value certain deposits contracts towards loss absorbing equity type contracts. This is on the basis that there is then a large buffer to absorb the losses that will flow from inadequate valuation and supervision, and without recourse to resolution. For me, this begs the question of the appeal of a proposition which states to the public: “will you please provide equity funding to something we can’t value or properly oversee”. Put like that, the idea does not seem appealing. I cannot see why there would be a desire to provide equity funding for banks on such terms rather than invest in other companies either directly or through a collective asset                                                 2  To be clear, this is 20–30% of the total balance sheet not 20–30% of risk weighted assets, the latter being a considerably smaller number.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  scheme. I recognise that it has been proposed that the equity funding should be built up by retaining dividends, but to accumulate say 20% of a bank’s balance sheet by this means requires I think an implausibly long transition period. In fact, based on the current position of the major UK banks, including the average dividend payment rate, the transition period to 20% equity would be around 90 years. That’s a little bit longer than the 17 year transition period for Solvency II. I do not therefore see “big equity” as a sustainable solution because this sort of proposal is just not practical.  A more logical alternative to today’s approach is the narrow banking model3. Again, to be clear, I don’t support the approach, but it has the greater logic over the “big” equity approach of creating deposit funded banks which can only hold highly liquid and low risk government bonds. Loans would be made by other financial intermediaries. I think that the ring fence as proposed by the Independent Commission on Banking is a better way to achieve sensible and safe separation of functions within a bank while not causing great disruption to the overall financial system. Interestingly, the argument against narrow banking from the “big” equity school is that narrow banking exports all of the risk in the financial system to so-called shadow banks, thereby making them a danger to the system4. Again, this amounts to an argument that unmanageable risk should be kept in banks which must therefore attract substantial equity funding. It’s not a winner I’m afraid.  This brings me right back to the argument for what we are doing today, namely to strengthen the loss absorbency, risk management, governance, supervision and resolvability of the banks we do have. I do not accept the proposition that we can only abandon all hope of understanding the risks in banks. Likewise, I do not agree that large banks are unsupervisable and ungovernable. And, I do not concur with the view that large banks can never be resolved, thus leaving too big to fail always with us, and with the answer then to either require a lot of equity funding or to hope that the shadow banking system does not cause risks that threaten the whole system.   Let me finish by focussing on resolution and supervision. We went through the crisis without properly functioning bank resolution regimes in many countries including the UK, with the consequence that the response was a combination of using public money and improvisation to create resolutions where possible. But now we are well on the way to having properly functioning resolution regimes in place. So, what is the argument for why they will be ineffective? This is a crucial piece of the story, because it is a fundamental principle of the big equity school of thought that they reject resolution as a usable solution. The argument seems often to come down to doubting the will of the authorities to enact resolution5. True, in the past it was much harder to enact resolution in the absence of the means to do it, but that will not be so in the future. It is also true that resolution necessarily involves changing the property rights of investors which is a big thing. Will the authorities have the nerve? My view is that we must, because the alternative is much worse. We are making huge strides in resolution as a technical matter. Last year’s agreement on TLAC in the G20 was a landmark. But alongside that is a vast amount of work to get to grips with what it takes to resolve a major bank. If you are involved in that work, as I am, you can see that there is no lack of commitment and progress.  The remaining challenge then is whether the authorities will have the nerve to follow through and carry out a resolution. This is the charge that comes from opponents, namely that it will be “bottled”. I don’t see this as likely to be an issue, because if resolution is a credible route to take, as it will be, why would the authorities want to put the cost somewhere else?                                                  3  John Kay “Should we have ‘Narrow Banking’?” The Future of Finance, LSE Report, 2010 4  Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig: “The Bankers New Clothes: What’s wrong with Banking and what to do about it”. P271 5  Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig: “The Bankers New Clothes:  What’s wrong with Banking and what to do about it”. P74–78 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Now for supervision and whether it too can function effectively. Make no mistake, in many countries supervision failed badly in the run-up to the crisis. Prudential supervision of banks is all about understanding the risks firms take, the effectiveness of the controls in risk management, using the framework of rules and regulations to create the right incentives to control risks appropriately, and where necessary intervening directly to require actions to be taken that would otherwise lead the firm to a potentially unsafe or unusual position. There is nothing easy about this activity, and the lessons of the pre-crisis and crisis periods demonstrate the dangers of encouraging broader attitudes which act to discourage the work of supervision in favour of a light touch approach in which the risks in the system build up and are praised as contributors to stability and prosperity, until that is the crash comes.  Supervision is a continuous activity which needs to benefit from constant public attitudes towards it, and in turn supervisors need to be accountable and explain what they do. We have made big strides forward on these fronts in recent years.  When we talk about banks, solvency and capital is at the heart of effective prudential supervision. The capital regime that is being put in place is stronger not just in terms of the quantity and quality of capital that is funding banks, but also because of the incentives that are being embedded in the regime. To end, I don’t believe that we can ignore the risk in banks, and the consequence if it crystallises. This helps to explain why the exercise of judgement is such an important part of the supervision of banks. Therefore we have to create a system of rules, we have to supervise banks and have the scope and freedom to apply those rules in ways that create the right incentives for banks to maintain safety and soundness, and to guard against the time when something does go wrong we must be confident that our resolution regimes will work. I simply do not believe that the alternative approaches are sufficiently credible.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Turalay Kenç: The Turkish economic outlook and monetary policy – challenges and policy response Remarks by Mr Turalay Kenç, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the EU Ambassadors Meeting, Ankara, 28 January 2016. *      *      * I would like to start by thanking His Excellency Ambassador Cornelis van Rij for the opportunity to share with such distinguished audience some views about the Turkish economy, the challenges stemming from a very volatile external environment, and the policy approach that has been implemented to cope with these challenges. The Turkish economy has shown a relatively robust performance in the face of major external and internal shocks. GDP growth is estimated at around 4 percent in 2015 with an expected gradual strengthening of economic activity in 2016 and in 2017. The rise in GDP growth rate observed in 2015 is mostly attributed to strong private consumption. Private investment recorded a moderate recovery. The challenging external conditions especially geopolitical events in the region have adversely affected exports. However, the economic recovery in most EU member states enabled Turkey to largely compensate its loss in other exports markets as Turkey increased exports to the EU countries by more than 10 percent in euro terms in 2015. This outcome also highlights Turkish exporters’ resiliency in adopting to adverse economic conditions.  Of course, probably the most significant development of the last year or so has been the sharp decline in oil prices. Turkey, being an energy importing country benefited from lower oil prices in many dimensions. The current account deficit fell from $52 billion in June 2014 to below $35 billion in November 2015 in 12 month rolling terms. This sharp improvement in the current account balances is also greatly helped by prudent macro-economic polices including monetary, macro-prudential and fiscal policies. Tight monetary policy, well-targeted macro-prudential measures and strong fiscal balances have all contributed to lower levels of domestic demand by stabilizing loan growth and reducing risk taking behavior. Going forward, the current levels in oil prices and depressed producer prices in most part of the world due to weak economic activity are expected to lead to further improvements in external balances. Therefore, it is highly likely that Turkey will record a current account deficit of below 4 percent of its Gross Domestic Product in 2016, representing a major achievement in satisfying the norm of the European Union’s Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure. Unlike these positive developments in the economy, inflation increased and its outlook worsened in 2015 reflecting the pass-through from the TL depreciation, elevated food inflation, and markedly increased minimum wages. These factors together with some deterioration in inflation expectations led the MPC to revise its inflation forecasts for 2016 and 2017 up to 7.5 percent and 6 percent respectively and postpone the projected realization year of the 5% target to 2018.    Going ahead, we see there are three potential developments which would improve the inflation outlook a great deal. First, the latest improvement in the external balances together with the already strong fiscal balances is likely to boost the effectiveness of the monetary policy. The ongoing tight monetary policy stance is then likely lead to lower inflation than otherwise. Second, in coming years the implementation of the structural reforms identified in the 10th Development Plan aims to address the structural causes of inflation and hence is expected to support disinflation process. Finally, the Food Committee (the Food and Agricultural Products Markets Monitoring and Evaluation Committee) was founded in December 2014 with an objective of identifying policies to alleviate the contribution of structural and cyclical factors to elevated food inflation. Of course, the credibility of monetary policy is key to achieving price stability. Therefore, let me devote the final part of my talk to explaining our policy strategy to cope with current challenges. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Like most emerging market economies (EMEs) Turkey has also faced tightening external financial conditions since May 2013. The normalization of US monetary policy, diverging monetary policies of advanced economies, uncertainty in commodity prices and the risk of China’s economic hard-landing all have created volatile global financial markets and widened spreads for EMEs. The Central Bank of Turkey has introduced several mutually complementary policies and announced a “road map” document back in August 2015 outlining monetary policy, foreign currency liquidity and financial stability related measures. The aim of the CBRT’s road map is to improve the resiliency of the economy to external shocks through (i) maturity lengthening – encouraging banks to shift their non-core liabilities from short-term to long-term; (ii) providing incentives to banks for borrowing and lending directly from and to the Central Bank on times when foreign players are reluctant to engage with banks in Turkey due to heightened volatility in global markets; (iii) bolstering safety-nets – making sure that the banking sector has access to adequate foreign exchange liquidity in times of market stress; (iv) supporting financial stability – providing incentives to banks to improve loan to deposit ratios; and (v) simplifying the monetary policy framework to improve the communication of the monetary policy stance. All but the interest rate corridor simplification step on the roadmap have already been taken and the focus is now firmly on fine-tuning their parameters. Overall, these measures ease the policy tradeoffs posed by the excessive volatility in cross border flows, enabling the interest rate policy to concentrate on the primary objective of price stability. So far the financial market performance of Turkey suggests that the measures undertaken since August 2015 have helped Turkey outperform many peer EM countries. Of course, on the way, Turkey also enjoyed the benefits of lower oil prices relatively more than many EMEs and reduced political uncertainty after the general election result in November 2015. The banking sector maintains its strong and sound position as banks in Turkey are well-capitalized with high quality and highly liquid assets and continue to offer solid rates of return on capital. As a result the banking sector still provides a reasonable loan growth for the economy despite heightened uncertainty in global markets.  To conclude given the ongoing challenging external conditions it will be essential to continue to implement a tight and flexible monetary policy in order to lower inflation in a volatile environment. Meanwhile, taking liquidity stabilizing measures for the foreign currency market and ensuring the stability of the financial system are key to alleviate policy tradeoffs. Last, but not the least, maintaining the fiscal discipline; and adhering strictly to the announced structural reform agenda in order to lift potential growth in accordance with the country’s needs remains the key to stability. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 10 March 2016. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council, which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis. Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we have conducted a thorough review of the monetary policy stance, in which we also took into account the new macroeconomic projections by our staff extending into the year 2018. As a result, the Governing Council has decided on a set of measures in the pursuit of its price stability objective. This comprehensive package will exploit the synergies between the different instruments and has been calibrated to further ease financing conditions, stimulate new credit provision and thereby reinforce the momentum of the euro area’s economic recovery and accelerate the return of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2%.  First, as regards the key ECB interest rates, we decided to lower the interest rate on the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem by 5 basis points to 0.00% and the rate on the marginal lending facility by 5 basis points to 0.25%. The rate on the deposit facility was lowered by 10 basis points to –0.40%.  Second, we decided to expand the monthly purchases under our asset purchase programme from €60 billion at present to €80 billion. They are intended to run until the end of March 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with its aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. To ensure the continued smooth implementation of our asset purchases, we also decided to increase the issuer and issue share limits for the purchases of securities issued by eligible international organisations and multilateral development banks from 33% to 50%. Third, we decided to include investment-grade euro-denominated bonds issued by non-bank corporations established in the euro area in the list of assets that are eligible for regular purchases under a new corporate sector purchase programme. This will further strengthen the pass-through of our asset purchases to the financing conditions of the real economy. Purchases under the new programme will start towards the end of the second quarter of this year. Fourth, we decided to launch a new series of four targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II), starting in June 2016, each with a maturity of four years. These new operations will reinforce the ECB’s accommodative monetary policy stance and will strengthen the transmission of monetary policy by further incentivising bank lending to the real economy. Counterparties will be entitled to borrow up to 30% of the stock of eligible loans as at 31 January 2016. The interest rate under TLTRO II will be fixed over the life of each operation, at the rate on the Eurosystem’s main refinancing operations prevailing at the time of take-up. For banks whose net lending exceeds a benchmark, the rate applied to the TLTRO II will be lower, and can be as low as the interest rate on the deposit facility prevailing at the time of take-up. There will be no requirement for mandatory early repayments under TLTRO II, and switches from TLTRO I will be allowed. Finally, looking ahead, taking into account the current outlook for price stability, the Governing Council expects the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Separate press releases with further details of the measures taken by the Governing Council will be published this afternoon at 15:30 CET.  Adding to the measures taken since June 2014, with today’s comprehensive package of monetary policy decisions we are providing substantial monetary stimulus to counteract heightened risks to the ECB’s price stability objective. While very low or even negative inflation rates are unavoidable over the next few months, as a result of movements in oil prices, it is crucial to avoid second-round effects by securing the return of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% without undue delay. The Governing Council will continue to monitor very closely the evolution of the outlook for price stability over the period ahead.  Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Euro area real GDP growth was confirmed at 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the fourth quarter of 2015, supported by domestic demand, while being dampened by a negative contribution from net exports. The most recent survey data point to weaker than expected growth momentum at the beginning of this year. Looking ahead, we expect the economic recovery to proceed at a moderate pace. Domestic demand should be further supported by our monetary policy measures and their favourable impact on financial conditions, as well as by continued employment gains benefiting from past structural reforms. Moreover, the low price of oil should provide additional support for households’ real disposable income and private consumption, as well as corporate profitability and investment. In addition, the fiscal stance in the euro area is slightly expansionary, partly reflecting measures in support of refugees. However, the economic recovery in the euro area continues to be dampened by subdued growth prospects in emerging markets, volatile financial markets, the necessary balance sheet adjustments in a number of sectors and the sluggish pace of implementation of structural reforms. This outlook is broadly reflected in the March 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.4% in 2016, 1.7% in 2017 and 1.8% in 2018. Compared with the December 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, the outlook for real GDP growth has been revised slightly down, mainly reflecting the weakened growth prospects for the global economy. The risks to the euro area growth outlook remain tilted to the downside. They relate in particular to the heightened uncertainties regarding developments in the global economy, as well as to broader geopolitical risks. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was –0.2% in February 2016, compared with 0.3% in January. All main HICP components contributed to this decline. Looking ahead, on the basis of current futures prices for energy, inflation rates are expected to remain at negative levels in the coming months and to pick up later in 2016. Thereafter, supported by our monetary policy measures and the expected economic recovery, inflation rates should recover further. The Governing Council will closely monitor price-setting behaviour and wage developments in the euro area, paying particular attention to ensure that the current low inflation environment does not become entrenched in second-round effects on wage and price-setting. This broad pattern is also reflected in the March 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 0.1% in 2016, 1.3% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018. In comparison with the December 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, the outlook for HICP inflation has been revised down, mainly reflecting the fall in oil prices over recent months. Turning to the monetary analysis, recent data confirm solid growth in broad money (M3), with the annual rate of growth of M3 standing at 5.0% in January 2016, after 4.7% in December 2015. Annual growth in M3 continues to be mainly supported by its most liquid components, with the narrow monetary aggregate M1 growing at an annual rate of 10.5% in January, after 10.8% in December. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Loan dynamics continued the path of gradual recovery observed since the beginning of 2014. The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) increased to 0.6% in January 2016, up from 0.1% in December 2015. Developments in loans to enterprises continue to reflect the lagged relationship with the business cycle, credit risk and the ongoing adjustment of financial and non-financial sector balance sheets. The annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) remained stable at 1.4% in January 2016. Overall, the monetary policy measures in place since June 2014 have clearly improved borrowing conditions for firms and households, as well as credit flows across the euro area. To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming from the monetary analysis confirmed the need for further monetary stimulus in order to secure a return of inflation rates towards levels that are below, but close to, 2% without undue delay. Monetary policy is focused on maintaining price stability over the medium term and its accommodative stance supports economic activity. However, in order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must contribute decisively. Given continued high structural unemployment and low potential output growth in the euro area, the ongoing cyclical recovery should be supported by effective structural policies. In particular, actions to raise productivity and improve the business environment, including the provision of an adequate public infrastructure, are vital to increase investment and boost job creation. The swift and effective implementation of structural reforms, in an environment of accommodative monetary policy, will not only lead to higher sustainable economic growth in the euro area but will also make the euro area more resilient to global shocks. As indicated by the European Commission, the implementation of country-specific recommendations continued to be fairly limited in 2015; reform efforts thus need to be stepped up in the majority of euro area countries. Fiscal policies should support the economic recovery, while remaining in compliance with the fiscal rules of the European Union. Full and consistent implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact is crucial to maintain confidence in the fiscal framework. At the same time, all countries should strive for a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies. We are now at your disposal for questions.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jorgovanka Tabaković: Strategic analysis of Serbia’s position and perspectives of recovery Speech by Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the Kopaonik Business Forum 2016 “Catching up and convergence with leading trends: how to fix up the main fractures of the system”, organized by the Serbian Economists Association and the Association of Corporate Directors of Serbia, Kopaonik, 8 March 2016. *      *      * Esteemed members of the diplomatic corps, members of the Government, fellow economists, businessmen, ladies and gentlemen, Allow me to extend special greetings, and I shall presently explain why, to Prime Minister Mr Vučić and the representative of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Mr Vladimir Kostić. Two years ago at this gathering I spoke of temporariness and of divisions, the two long-standing drawbacks of the Serbian people identified long ago by Isidora Sekulić. And look at us today – Mr Šoškić is moderating this panel, I am at the speaker’s stand, many of my fellow economists, at one time in government, yet at other in opposition, we are all gathered here. It is so because we are on the right path to overcome the divisions between us and to ensure continuity for the Serbian people, as Mr Vladimir Kostić phrased it in his first TV appearance that I had the opportunity to watch. “When young people are leaving“, I apologise for imprecise quoting, “I feel sorry not because they are leaving, but because they burn bridges behind them”. Since everything we do, we do it for the sake of the people, for the people and with the people, our first task is to help the person who is prepared to make unpopular political moves and to gather us all, to give credit to everyone who deserves it, without a touch of conceit, a credit for even the slightest contribution to the wellbeing of us all and the Serbian people whom we represent, in whatever office we may hold. I am very honoured to be participating in our work today, now, and at this particular place. Traditionally, these annual gatherings give us an opportunity to analyse what was achieved thus far and to listen to new ideas on how we can attain our common objective, that magic word – sustainable economic growth. This time last year we all hoped that measures which at that moment had been in place for a few months only, would be successful and would trigger an irreversible economic recovery. Today we can say, with great satisfaction, that numerous results have been achieved over the last year, outperforming even the most optimistic expectations in some areas. It is precisely these successes that cause the public to put the manner of policy implementation into the focus of attention and to call for re-examination of solutions and identification of potential weaknesses. Placing in the foreground the importance of the Kopaonik Business Forum and its mission, as a gathering of all of us who have the leverage and wish to contribute to the adoption of best solutions, I believe this is the right occasion to compare where we were a few years ago to where we stand today. First, I would like to highlight what is very important for sustainable growth, as also pointed out by Mr Vlahović – the fact that we switched to a different growth model. And maybe I could finish my speech by an illustration of that change. As of 2013 exports have grown much faster than imports, thus driving down the goods and services deficit from 17.4% to 10% of GDP. Not less importantly, the current account deficit is by around 2.5 times lower, i.e. reduced from 11.6% to 4.8% of GDP. In the same period gross FX reserves declined from RSD 10.9 bln at end-2012 to RSD 10.4 bln at end-2015. At the same time, FX reserves – usually referred to as NBS FX reserves, and in fact FX reserves of the Republic of Serbia, increased from EUR 6.6 bln in late 2012 to EUR 8.4 bln in late 2015. And if anyone asks: “What is the price paid for the stability?”, I will reply as follows: it was paid by gross FX reserves, reduced by EUR 500 mln only. These were actually the foreign currency reserves 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  of banks, as well as funds under the unsuccessfully initiated and uncompleted arrangement with the IMF from 2011. So in fact, the stability was achieved through an increase in net FX reserves of the NBS, i.e. of the Republic of Serbia. When we speak of spending the FX reserves, it often brings to mind the topic which is favourite among many – these being interventions in the FX market. In this regard, allow me to say that the 2010–2012 period was marked by pronounced volatility of the dinar, although the NBS intervened by selling EUR 3.7 bln net cumulatively over three years. Since 2013 to date, EUR 1.4 bln net have been sold in interventions, at significantly weaker daily volatility of the dinar exchange rate against the euro, with special attention paid to movements in the FX market and the spillover of effects from international markets. By responding in a timely fashion, the NBS aims to mitigate short-term and temporary shocks affecting exchange rate volatility, while being mindful of the need to rationally spend FX reserves. I believe this is also underpinned by the data that we put forward – EUR 3.7 bln (for the same period) versus EUR 1.4 bln in interventions, net. It is noteworthy that – unlike in the earlier times, the achieved and maintained relative stability of the exchange rate is an important pillar for the improvement of the business and investment climate. Thus, last year as well, the NBS was carefully monitoring and assessing the magnitude of external shocks, responding when necessary in order to cushion these shocks at home. Depending on the direction and intensity of pressures, we intervened in the FX market on both sides – as both the buyer and the seller of foreign currency. Having bought EUR 970 mln and sold EUR 450 mln in 2015, we ended the year with FX reserves of the NBS and of the Republic of Serbia bolstered by more than half a billion euros. The stability of the national currency is also conducive to a higher degree of dinarisation of the financial system, which is a common objective of us all. Economic policy makers have long been advocating a greater use of the dinar, but the growth in dinar deposits and dinar lending to households has been particularly noticeable only lately. It may sound little to some, but if we say that dinar savings are 2.6 times higher today compared to end-2012, this result is no longer so negligible. The share of dinar in total savings is still not high, but it climbed from 1.9% to 4.3%. More than two thirds of new household loans (67.5%) in 2015 were extended in dinars. We are happy to see that the achieved price stability and the relative stability of the exchange rate have encouraged dinarisation, but we know it is a long ride yet. We have embarked on it, and that is what counts. The example of the dinarisation makes it clear that models, causality and predictions are not tied up in a methodological knot that cannot be untangled, and that the results are sure to follow from a firm commitment to that objective. The results are guaranteed by committed work in line with that and similar goals, which gradually restores confidence in the system and the domestic currency. That what the language amounts to a nation is what domestic currency amounts to its economy. Those of you who closely monitor the work and results achieved by the NBS will only be reminded, while for others this will be news – inflation in Serbia has been low and stable at around 2% for three years now. It averaged 1.9% in 2015. This period is sufficiently long to give us grounds to conclude that, in terms of price stability, Serbia has become comparable to other European countries, and that we have at the same time managed to avoid deflation. We expect inflation in the coming period to remain low and stable, which will continue to be the result of a balanced monetary policy and its coordination with fiscal policy measures. And this is why the general public has been so interested in the coordination of the monetary policy with the executive branch of government, with clearly demarcated responsibilities. The professional public also can and must make a contribution by choosing not to identify the superiors and subordinates, the victors and the vanquished, but rather by proposing the best solutions for our coordinated activities. The credibility of our monetary policy is also confirmed by low inflationary expectations, both in the financial sector and the real economy. Such expectations confirm that these sectors, which most reliably identify the outlook for investments in Serbia, are the sectors which contribute the most to the accelerated recovery of economic activity and higher employment. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  In addition to contributing to Serbia’s recovery based on the achieved and preserved monetary and financial stability, the NBS paved the way for a strong decline in interest rates on dinar loans. Owing to the results in terms of inflation, we began the cycle of policy rate cuts in May 2013. Since then, the key policy rate was reduced 16 times by a total of 7.5 percentage points, to 4.25%, its lowest level in the inflation targeting regime. In 2015, monetary policy was substantially eased, including the cuts in the required reserve ratio, all of which was first and above all permitted by the excellent fiscal policy results. How did this reflect on dinar interest rates and lending activity? In the period from September 2013 to January 2016, banks cut interest rates on dinar corporate loans by 11.7 percentage points, to 5.9%. Interest rates on dinar household loans were lowered by 7.9 percentage points on average, to 12.1%. Overall, interest rates on dinar loans were more than halved relative to September 2013. You will agree this is neither a small nor a negligible amount. Interest rates on euro loans were also reduced in the same period – by 2.9 percentage points, to 4.2% in January, which is linked in part to the ECB’s accommodative monetary policy, but also to the reduction in Serbia’s risk premium. This cleared the way for the recovery in lending activity and the expected growth in economic activity. We are aware that we cannot change external circumstances. Geopolitical tensions, volatile movements in the global commodity and financial markets, unpredictable capital flows, weaker prospects of global recovery illustrate the existence of uncertainties. Our joint strategic response must and can come through our will and determination to steadfastly complete the not so easy reforms that we have undertaken. This will undoubtedly accelerate economic growth and further reduce Serbia’s exposure to external challenges. Serbia’s improved growth prospects have been confirmed by world-known rating agencies, international financial institutions, but what is more important, by the behaviour of domestic and foreign investors. In the last year, investments gave a strong positive contribution to the achieved economic recovery. In financial terms, it was the inflow of FDIs that gave an additional contribution, besides higher disposable income made available by lower costs of borrowing and lower price of energy products. What I would like to underscore is the rise in newly approved investment loans. In 2015, net FDI inflow in Serbia rose by 45.6% from 2014 and came at EUR 1.8 bln, their highest level in the last four years. Consequently, in 2015 Serbia managed to use the net FDI inflow to more than fully cover its current account deficit which equalled EUR 1.6 billion. All this speaks of improvement in the quality of sources of funding, of improvement in the manner of final consumption of disposable assets, now used for investment rather than for consumption. Finally, I believe that the results we have achieved so far allow us to reaffirm yet again the NBS’s commitment to actively contributing to economic recovery, higher employment and the standard of living in the period ahead, while at the same time safeguarding price and financial stability. The results speak for themselves. We expect them to be acknowledged, just as we expect that all of you, people of influence, resolve and knowledge will help our nation to overcome that feature of temporariness, of not being persistent in either financial reforms or in its presence on the world political scene. Thank you.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Turalay Kenç: Emerging market policies in a volatile global environment – the case of Turkey Remarks by Mr Turalay Kenç, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the National Asset-Liability Management Europe Symposium, London, 3 March 2016. *      *      * Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. I would like to thank Central Banking Publications for the honor of being invited to deliver the keynote address at this European Meeting of National Asset-Liability Management. I am delighted to be back. The first time I did this was back in 2011 in Istanbul.  In my remarks today, I will focus on policies of emerging market central banks in a volatile global environment with a particular focus on Turkey. I will begin with an overview of the challenges facing emerging market central banks in an increasingly interconnected world. I will then discuss resilience of emerging economies (EMEs) to global financial conditions together with their macroeconomic and prudential policy responses. I will finish my talk with the Central Bank of Turkey’s roadmap of policy actions before and after global monetary policy normalization. Heightened global financial market volatility The volatile global environment mostly likely stems from the gradually worsening global economic and financial problems and the increasingly interconnected world through production, financing and communication technology channels. The former is essentially related to growth, stock balances and policy uncertainty problems. The latter underscores higher degree of external shocks’ transmission across globe.  After almost a decade since the global financial crisis (GFC) erupted, the long awaited strong global economic recovery has not been realized in spite of unprecedented accommodative monetary policies in the large part of the world (Figure 1). In fact, growth is slowing in many EMEs with a modest recovery in advanced economies (AEs) and recent low prices depressing commodity exporters. After their strong performance during the great recession most EMEs face a synchronous and protracted deceleration in growth rates owing to the weakened external and domestic factors. Some commodity exporting EMEs even suffer from an economic recession. China grapples with the appropriate policy actions and uncertainty associated with the ongoing transformation of the export – investment led growth model to a domestic consumption – services sector driven economy.1  Furthermore, potential growth across the world has declined due to the global slowdown in productivity growth, persistently weak investment, aging population and weakened global trade (Figures 2–3).2 Rising inequality, on the other hand, exacerbates both the recovery and long-term growth problems. To this end, global policy coordination is the way forward. The G20’s framework for strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth with strong commitments on structural reforms as well as aggregate demand stimulating policies provides a good mechanism to serve this purpose.                                                   1  T. Didier, M. A. Kose, F. Ohnsorge and L. S. Ye (2015), Slowdown in Emerging Markets: Rough patch or prolonged weakness?, Policy Research Note 4, World Bank, Washington, DC. 2  OECD (2016), Economic Policy Reforms 2016: Going For Growth Interim Report, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches The weak recovery is also very much related to the problem of demand deficiency – a situation associated with aggregate demand being less than the aggregate supply corresponding to full employment level of output in the economy. And this is probably driven by high indebtedness levels in government and private balance sheets across the world including both advanced and emerging market economies. As a matter of fact, the impaired private balance sheets caused the so-called balance sheet recession of 2008–2009 in AEs as in the USA during the great depression and in Japan during the years following the Japanese financial crisis of 1991. Now, not only the private sectors – financial, non-financial and households – of AEs but also their governments and more importantly EME private sectors suffer from high indebtedness levels. For example, some EME households have debt as large as 75 to 95 percent of GDP. Moreover, EME private balance sheets largely consist of external liabilities as opposed to domestic currency denominated assets, which expose them to increases in the cost of debt-servicing foreign currency – denominated external obligations in cases of real exchange rate depreciation. Recent research suggests that agents tend to cut back their spending when their debt reaches certain levels.3,4 Going forward, we are likely to see only a gradual improvement in this stock balances problem as they take longer time to heal than flow balances problems. Again, the cases of Japan and the great depression testify this observation.5 Policy uncertainty over the appropriate policy actions has recently heightened. The policy uncertainty is associated with the question of appropriate mix of demand and supply side policies, the extent and type of suitable monetary policy and the effectiveness of macro-prudential policy are the sources of policy uncertainty. Likewise, China has its own acute policy uncertainty problem as mentioned above. Reasons behind heightened policy uncertainty are policy paralyses and unconventional policies such as monetary quantitative easing policy and negative nominal policy rates following financial crises. Elevated policy uncertainty holds back investment and growth6 and causes heightened market volatility.  Over the recent globalization period the world has become an increasingly interconnected place. Global trade has increased, broadened and deepened drastically because of trade liberalization, unprecedented capital flows and the international fragmentation of production in global value chains. EMEs have contributed to this development significantly as they have become increasingly more connected to the global production, monetary and financial systems. The unprecedented capital flows have also made global financial markets more interconnected than at any time in history. Advances in communication technology have further heightened and extended the interconnectedness of global financial markets. The increased interconnectedness together with sharply risen external liabilities has reinforced the proposition of the Impossible trinity (also known as the Trilemma) on monetary policy dependence as monetary conditions have become more correlated than before.  Resilience of emerging market economies to global financial conditions In the 1980s and 1990s EMEs experienced financial crises following a sudden reversal of capital flows. In fact, during this period there were two waves of financial crisis in the EME world. The first wave was associated with currency crises as significantly strengthened US                                                  3  Cecchetti, S, M Mohanty and F Zampolli (2011), “Achieving growth amid fiscal imbalances: the real effects of debt”, in Achieving maximum long-run growth, a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 4  Lo, S. and K. Rogoff (2015), Secular stagnation, debt overhang and other rationales for sluggish growth, six years on, BIS Working Papers No 482. 5  Koo, R. (2009), The Holy Grail of Macroeconomics: Lessons from Japan s Great Recession, Revised Edition, John Wiley & Sons. 6  Baker, Bloom and Davis (2013), “Measuring economic policy uncertainty”, Chicago Booth Research Paper, no 13–02, May. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 dollar led to massive adjustments in the fixed EME exchange rates. This followed sovereign debt crises in many emerging markets, i.e., Mexico, Brazil and Argentina. The second wave was triggered by sudden stop of capital inflows. The EM banks having intermediated these flows, as a result, caused these severe financial crises in several EMEs such as Mexico and Turkey in 1994, East Asian countries after mid-1997 and Russia in 1998. The insufficient volume of external safety nets as well as the underdeveloped nature of financial markets in EMEs made financial crises unavoidable. In addition, inability to implement countercyclical policies made EMEs suffer from larger damaging effects of financial crises on their real economies than otherwise. It is noteworthy that despite the lack of capacities in avoiding financial crises, EMEs mostly managed to recover swiftly from their acute past financial crises succeeding severe economic recessions. Likewise, most EMEs survived the – a once in a century event – GFC of 2008 in spite of its profound impacts on the financial systems of AEs with the subsequent “balance sheet recessions”. EMEs again largely escaped the great recession though some of them had brief economic recessions. With lessons learned from previous episodes and improvements over the years EMEs are, on average, better positioned to withstand financial turbulences, both now and in the near future, than in the past. First of all, they embarked on extensive structural reforms aimed at overhauling financial regulatory and supervisory systems, strengthening public finances and fiscal discipline, granting central banks independence, and adopting flexible exchange rate systems. These reforms enabled them to implement more prudent and countercyclical policies as well. EMEs solidified their post crisis reforms by accumulating adequate foreign exchange reserves as an alternative to the IMF provided financing, which carries strong conditionality, as well as further deepening and broadening their domestic financial markets. As a result, stock and flow balances, policy frameworks, and levels of economic confidence and market development in EMEs have strengthened substantially and radically.  Stock ad flow balances Since EMEs mostly suffered from sovereign debt crises, fiscal discipline has been the cornerstone of the first generation of structural reforms. Prudent fiscal policies have played a key role in maintaining low budget deficits and hence lowered debt levels to the extent that budgets delivered primary surpluses (Figure 4). Lower interest rates implied by diminished financing requirements of the government sector then further reinforced fiscal positions. As a consequence, the share of government bonds in emerging debt markets has declined and created room for the private sector debt market to grow. Private debt levels in emerging markets have also stayed at moderate levels on average (Figure 4).  Declined public debt also implied lower bases for external debt. In addition to this development, EM governments have consciously borrowed less in foreign currencies in the wake of their earlier financial crises. Combined effects have, on average, reduced government owned external debt to GDP ratio from 28 percent at the beginning of the 2000s to 18 percent in 2014. This decline in Eurodollar loans manifests deepened domestic debt markets and hence have reduced the so called “original sin” problem of emerging markets to the extent that foreign investors willing to lend in domestic currency as opposed to hard currencies. It is argued that one of the factors that created economic instability in EMEs is the “original sin” problem. According to this hypothesis emerging and developing countries are unable to borrow abroad in their own currencies reflecting lower degrees of portfolio diversification at the global level to emerging currency denominated investments. Needless to say, borrowing in foreign currencies creates currency mismatch problem – increases in the cost of debt-servicing of foreign currency – denominated external obligations in cases of real exchange rate depreciation. The cost is measured in terms of the reduced purchasing power of domestic output over foreign claims following the depreciation. The original sin indicator depicted in Figure 5 shows that original sin level is much below that of the 1990s despite its rise since the beginning of 2012. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches In other words, EMEs’ share of obligations in foreign currencies is well below those observed in the 1990s.7 Bailing out banks during the above mentioned EME financial crises put heavy burden on government budgets of EMEs. It was well-understood that banking sector plays a systemic role. In order to avoid bailout costs and disturbances to the intermediation of loans to real economy EMEs overhauled their banking sector regulatory and supervisory systems. These reforms tried to ensure that banks hold adequate capitals to be resilient to shocks and, in general, run their businesses in a prudent way. Figure 6 shows that leverage ratios measured as (risk unweighted) capital divided by total assets, on average, stayed above the average levels of the 1980’s and 1990’s and also the average ratio of advanced economy banks. After evaluating the key stock balances, I now move to flows balances to uncover the dynamics governing stock balances in the economy. They include economic growth, inflation and current account balance. The left window of Figure 7 shows that the average GDP growth rates of EMEs are still above that of AEs and EMEs still contribute to global growth significantly despite the latest synchronous and protracted slowdown in emerging markets. The right window of Figure 7 reveals that the probably biggest post-crises’ success of EMEs is in the area of price stability. Prudent macroeconomic and financial policies and improved macroeconomic policy frameworks are the key factors behind this much lower inflation outcome. Among them the granting of independence to many EM central banks has been the most significant progress in improving the institutional quality of EM institutions. Their successes in lowering inflation over the years have resulted in desirable gains in monetary policy credibility. The adoption of inflation targeting frameworks provided beneficial nominal anchors and further enhanced policy credibility. To the extent that prudent policies and frameworks succeeded in achieving their targets the key dominances, especially in fiscal area, have eased and thereby the effectiveness of monetary policy increased significantly. One of the chief causes of the GFC is the existence of global external imbalances. The G20 led policy coordination has reduced the imbalances to a certain degree. In this process, some EMEs suffered from declines in their surplus levels but the others succeeded improvements.  How resilient are EMEs to global financial conditions? In this section I assess EMEs’ resilience to external shocks by discussing the ways and extents of external shocks are transmitted to domestic economies of emerging markets. The first transmission way of external shocks is the trade channel. In recent decades EMEs have increased their share of global exports and recorded strong growth in inter-regional and intra-regional trade among emerging markets. As a result, EMEs currently make up around one-fifth of the world’s total trade. In addition, they have diversified their production and exports. Although increased trade openness of EMEs magnifies the potential impact of external shocks on these economies, there are also positive developments such as strengthened product and regional diversity providing a degree of mitigation. Similar arguments can be made for the second transmission channel, namely funding channel: increased external liabilities but well diversified sources together with significantly lengthened maturities. But there is a negative development worth mentioning is that capital flows are mostly by driven by the unconventional                                                  7  Hausmann, Ricardo and Ugo Panizza (2013), On the determinants of Original Sin: An empirical investigation, Journal of International Money and Finance, Volume 22(7), Pages 957–990. Hausmann, Ricardo and Ugo Panizza (2011), Redemption or Abstinence? Original Sin, Currency Mismatches and Counter Cyclical Policies in the New Millennium, Journal of Globalization & Development, Volume 2(1), Pages 1–35. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 policies of major central banks drive capital flows and they have become highly volatile since the GFC. Finally, the aforementioned improvements in EMEs are likely to constrain the deterioration in business and consumer expectations. This is also a crucial development as the lessons learned from the past financial turmoils and crises revealed that the most distinguishing feature of an emerging market economy is the significant adverse effects on the real economy through the expectations channel. Among many advances in EMEs, rich policy frameworks have played an important role in improving economic agents’ confidence in EMEs. In addition, EMEs ability and policy conduct to accumulate policy spaces have made significant contributions to solidifying gains in confidence. It is worth noting that in addition to conventional macroeconomic policies EMEs have also extensively used macro- and micro-prudential policies, serving as buffers for shocks (Figure 8). Since the EM financial crises EMEs have continued to use a number of macro-prudential measures when conventional policies, such as rate hikes to manage aggregate demand, were realized to be ineffective and/or insufficient. Such macro-prudential tools have not only maintained low levels of leverage but also accumulated buffers that can serve as policy spaces in cases of economic downturn. Additionally, macro-prudential policy helped monetary authorities implement monetary policy exclusively to achieve price stability. Finally, EMEs learned macro-prudential policy is more appropriate to limit and repair maturity and currency mismatch problems.  In addition to the macro-prudential policy, EMEs implemented rigorously micro-prudential policies rigorously in order to make their financial firms, especially banks, more resilient and safer against financial stresses. The macro and micro prudential policies of EMEs in the previous decades have succeeded in lowering levels of leverage, not only in financial sectors, but also in nonfinancial and household sectors. This, in turn, lowered levels of maturity and currency mismatches. This gave rise to high capital adequacy ratios and low non-performing loan rations in banking sectors of many EMEs. Moreover, in relative terms fiscal positions of EMEs have further strengthened while those of AEs have worsened in the aftermath of the GFC due to sizeable fiscal stimulus policies. Keeping this systemically important sector free from solvency risk has helped EMEs gain business confidence (Figure 9). Lower deficit and debt levels imply ample policy spaces for EMEs in cases of economic downturn. Creditworthiness together with policy spaces on the EM fiscal fronts have contained upward pressures on interest rates and have kept the effectiveness of other policies intact. It is fair to say that they now look strong enough to render the adverse effects of external financial shocks manageable.8 Policy actions in EMEs However, the current unconventional monetary policies of AEs in the form of low or even negative nominal policy rates as well as quantitative easing and unintended consequences of the financial sector reforms across the world pose new challenges to EMEs. Until recently, because of better growth prospects and lower levels of leveraging, EMEs attracted capital inflows with their nonfinancial corporates having lion shares. The normalization of global monetary policies has reversed the course of capital flows and led to the sizable depreciation of EM currencies against the dollar. This creates inflationary pressures due to the pass-through impact and impairs balance sheets due to tightening global financial conditions and worsening growth prospects. Furthermore, the sharp fall in oil prices exacerbates the deterioration in economic outlook for commodity exporting countries. Going forward, the normalization of US monetary policy, diverging monetary policies of AEs, uncertainty in commodity prices and the                                                  8  Kenç, Turalay, Fatma Pınar Erdem and İbrahim Ünalmış (2016), Resilience of Emerging Market Economies to Global Financial Conditions, Central Bank Review, forthcoming.  
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches risk of China’s economic hard-landing all will be likely to contribute to volatile global financial markets and widening spreads for EMEs.  Large asset purchasing programs of the major central banks have depressed global bond markets with decreasing long-term yields as well as short-term yields and their negative nominal policy rates further destabilized bond markets and in general financial markets. Heightened volatility in global financial markets (Figures 10–11) can be associated with the presence of very low and even negative rates rather than the underlying macroeconomic and external imbalances. In these circumstances, any change in interest rate differential across countries will likely create greater impacts than otherwise. If this interest rate change takes place in the largest and most significant economy in the world, then the impact will expectedly be magnified further. The Fed’s normalization of interest rate demonstrated that its impact on the global economy and financial markets indeed has been large, giving rise to significant capital outflows from EMEs, large adjustments and volatility in exchange rates as well as widened EM spreads and interest rates. The adverse effects of the Fed’s interest rate normalization has been on average larger than those occurred in previous two financial turmoil episodes namely the Eurozone sovereign debt crisis and the US tapering tantrum. Moreover, the disparity between the effected countries has been large too. The plummeted commodity prices as well as other factors led to this outcome as commodity importers suffered from both the lower commodity revenues and the tightening global financial conditions. Financial markets also differentiated EMEs by policy frameworks and prudent policies. Those having rich and better policy frameworks and prudent policies have withstood the recent global financial turmoil better than others.  Commodity-exporting and commodity-importing EMEs have different monetary policy options. While commodity exporters have limited monetary policy space, commodity importers have some rooms to counteract. In the former group, inflations increased and balance sheets weakened due to the currency depreciation. In the latter group, in some countries, inflations decreased and central banks cut policy rates thanks to the low oil prices. However, in several oil importing countries, inflation is near or above the target bands. For central banks in these countries, tightening the monetary policy may be a priority for the credibility of central bank. In oil exporting countries where growth has weakened and inflation has gone up by currency depreciation, banks with high foreign currency vulnerabilities or heavy reliance on short-term debt need close monitoring or tighter prudential requirements. Moreover, due to the different internal (growth and inflation) and external conditions (balance of payments strength), monetary policy positions have also diverged. Economies with current account deficits have been facing difficulties to balance internal pressures such as above-target inflation and slowdown in growth against reduced global capital inflows. These countries come to terms with limitations on countercyclical monetary policies to support the adversely affected domestic demand from tightened global financial conditions. On the other hand interest rates in other countries such as emerging Eastern European countries rates are at their historically low levels in order to avoid the disinflation imported from the Eurozone. EMEs with higher GDP growth, stronger external current account positions, lower inflation, and more liquid financial markets have managed to mitigate market volatility. Likewise, countries with more resilient financial sectors limited the adverse effects of volatility. As a result, out of 19 EMEs, 9 EM central banks have decreased the policy rate since the taper tantrum, 8 increased and 2 did not change. Overall, policy rate has increased 1070 bps. Along with the easing cycles of AEs central banks and ample global liquidity, the capital flows into EMEs have been increased which encouraged public and private leveraging and fueled credit growth in these countries. In response to the impact of the increased liquidity, EMEs implemented some macro-prudential policies. Macro prudential policies in EMEs are even more important than before due to the divergent monetary policies in AEs. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 The Central Bank of Turkey’s roadmap of policy actions before and after global monetary policy normalization The Turkish economy has shown a relatively robust performance in the face of major external and internal shocks. GDP growth is estimated at around 4 percent in 2015 with an expected gradual strengthening of economic activity in 2016 and in 2017 (Figure 12). The rise in GDP growth rate observed in 2015 is mostly attributed to strong private consumption. Private investment recorded a moderate recovery. The challenging external conditions especially geopolitical events in the region have adversely affected exports. However, the economic recovery in most EU member states enabled Turkey to largely compensate its loss in other exports markets as Turkey increased exports to the EU countries by more than 10 percent in euro terms in 2015. This outcome also highlights Turkish exporters’ resiliency in adopting to adverse economic conditions.  Of course, probably the most significant development of the last year or so has been the sharp decline in oil prices. Turkey, being an energy importing country, benefited from lower oil prices in many dimensions. The current account deficit fell from $52 billion in June 2014 to below $35 billion in November 2015 in 12 month cumulative terms. This sharp improvement in the current account balances has also been greatly helped by prudent macro-economic polices including monetary, macro-prudential and fiscal policies. Tight monetary policy (Figure 13), well-targeted macro-prudential measures (Figure 14) and strong fiscal balances have all contributed to lower levels of domestic demand by stabilizing loan growth and reducing risk taking behavior. Going forward, the current low levels in oil prices and depressed producer prices in most part of the world due to weak economic activity are expected to lead to further improvements in external balances. Therefore, it is highly likely that Turkey will record a current account deficit of below 4 percent of its Gross Domestic Product in 2016, representing a major achievement in satisfying the norm of the European Union’s Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure (Figure 15). Unlike these positive developments in the economy, inflation increased and its outlook worsened in 2015 reflecting the pass-through from the TL depreciation, elevated food inflation, and markedly increased minimum wages. These factors together with some deterioration in inflation expectations led the MPC to revise its inflation forecasts for 2016 and 2017 up to 7.5 percent and 6 percent respectively and postpone the projected realization year of the 5 percent target to 2018 (Figure 16). Going ahead, I see three potential developments, which would improve the inflation outlook a great deal. First, the latest improvement in the external balances together with the already strong fiscal balances is likely to boost the effectiveness of the monetary policy. The ongoing tight monetary policy stance is then likely lead to lower inflation than otherwise. Second, in coming years the implementation of the structural reforms identified in the 10th Development Plan aims to address the structural causes of inflation and hence is expected to support disinflation process. Finally, the Food Committee (the Food and Agricultural Products Markets Monitoring and Evaluation Committee) was founded in December 2014 with an objective of identifying policies to alleviate the contribution of structural and cyclical factors to elevated food inflation. Of course, the credibility of monetary policy is key to achieve price stability. Therefore, let me devote the final part of my talk to explaining our policy strategy to cope with current challenges. Like most EMEs Turkey has also been facing tightening external financial conditions since May 2013 and accordingly introduced several mutually complementary policies and announced a “road map” document back in August 2015 outlining monetary policy, foreign currency liquidity and financial stability related measures. The aim of the CBRT’s road map is to improve the resiliency of the economy to external shocks through (i) maturity lengthening – encouraging banks to shift their non-core liabilities from short-term to long-term (Figure 17); (ii) providing incentives to banks for borrowing and lending 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches directly from and to the Central Bank in times when foreign players are reluctant to engage with banks in Turkey due to heightened volatility in global markets; (iii) bolstering safety-nets – making sure that the banking sector has access to adequate foreign exchange liquidity in times of market stress; (iv) supporting financial stability – providing incentives to banks to improve loan to deposit ratios; and (v) simplifying the monetary policy framework to improve the communication of the monetary policy stance. All but the interest rate corridor simplification step on the roadmap have already been taken and the focus is now firmly on fine-tuning their parameters. Overall, these measures ease the policy tradeoffs posed by the excessive volatility in cross border flows, enabling the interest rate policy to concentrate on the primary objective of price stability. So far the financial market performance of Turkey suggests that the measures undertaken since August 2015 have helped Turkey outperform many peer EMEs. Of course, on the way, Turkey also enjoyed the benefits of lower oil prices relatively more than many EMEs and reduced political uncertainty after the general election result in November 2015. The banking sector maintains its strong and sound position as banks in Turkey are well-capitalized with high quality and highly liquid assets and continue to offer solid rates of return on capital. As a result the banking sector still provides a reasonable loan growth for the economy despite heightened uncertainty in global markets.  To conclude given the ongoing challenging external conditions it will be essential to continue to implement a tight and flexible monetary policy in order to lower inflation in a volatile environment. Meanwhile, taking liquidity stabilizing measures for the foreign currency market and ensuring the stability of the financial system are key to alleviate policy tradeoffs. Last, but not the least, maintaining the fiscal discipline; and adhering strictly to the announced structural reform agenda in order to lift potential growth in accordance with the country’s needs remains the key to stability. Thank you.   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 Figure 1: Ongoing Weak Recovery    Figure 2: Weak Investment and Lower Productivity Growth     
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches Figure 3: Weakened Global Trade Growth    Figure 4: Indebtedness Levels of EME Government and Private Sectors     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 Figure 5: Declined Original Sin Ratio    Figure 6: Well Capitalized EME Banking Sector    
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches Figure 7: GDP Growth Rates of EMEs and AEs and Inflation Rate in EMEs    Figure 8: Accumulated Macro-prudential Policy Space in EMEs     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 13 Figure 9: Improved Economic Confidence in EMEs    Figure 10: Volatile Global Financial Markets    
   14 BIS central bankers’ speeches Figure 11: Volatility in EME Financial Markets    Figure 12: GDP Growth Rates in Turkey     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 15 Figure 13: Monetary Policy and Monetary Policy Conditions in Turkey           Figure 14: Differentiated Loan Growth Rates in Turkey 
   16 BIS central bankers’ speeches Figure 15: Current Account Balance in Turkey      Figure 16: Worsened Inflation Expectations in Turkey     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 17 Figure 17: Maturity Lengthening in External Liabilities of the Turkish Banking Sector   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Stanley Fischer: Reflections on macroeconomics then and now Speech by Mr Stanley Fischer, Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the “Policy Challenges in an Interconnected World” 32nd Annual National Association for Business Economics Economic Policy Conference, Washington DC, 7 March 2016. *      *      * The chart can be found at the Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System’s website I am grateful to David Lopez-Salido, Andrea Ajello, Elmar Mertens, Stacey Tevlin, and Bill English of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance. Views expressed are mine, and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to the National Association for Business Economics (NABE) for conferring the fourth annual NABE Paul A. Volcker Lifetime Achievement Award for Economic Policy on me, thereby allowing me the honor of following in the footsteps of Paul Volcker, Jean-Claude Trichet, and Alice Rivlin. The honor of receiving the award is enhanced by its bearing the name of Paul Volcker, a model citizen and public servant, and a giant in every sense among central bankers.  One thinks of many things on an occasion such as this one. My mind goes back first to growing up in a very small town in Zambia, then Northern Rhodesia, and to the surprise and delight my parents would have felt at seeing me standing where I am now. They would have been even more delighted that my girlfriend, Rhoda, whom I met when my parents moved to a bigger town in Zimbabwe, and I have been happily married for 50 years. But that is not the story I will tell today. Rather, I want to talk about our field, macroeconomics, and some of the lessons we have learned in the course of the last 55 years – and I say 55 years, because in 1961, at the end of my school years, on the advice of a friend, I read Keynes’s General Theory for the first time. Did I understand it? Certainly not. Was I captivated by it? Certainly, though “captured” is a more appropriate word than “captivated.” Does it remain relevant? Certainly. Just a week ago I took it off the bookshelf to read parts of chapter 23, “Notes on Mercantilism, the Usury Laws, Stamped Money and Theories of Under-Consumption.” Today that chapter would be headed “Protectionism, the Zero Lower Bound, and Secular Stagnation,” with the importance of usury laws having diminished since 1936. There is an old joke about our field – not the one about the one-handed economist, nor the one about “assume you have a can opener,” nor the one that ends, “If I were you, I wouldn’t start from here.” Rather it’s the one about the Ph.D. economist who returns to his university for his class’s 50th reunion. He asks if he can see the most recent Ph.D. generals exam. After a while it is brought to him. He reads it carefully, looking perplexed, and then says, “But this is exactly the same as the exam I wrote over 50 years ago.” “Ah yes,” says the professor. “It is the same, but all the answers are different.” Is that really the case? Not really, though it is true to some extent in the realm of policy. To discuss the question of whether the answers to the questions of how to deal with macroeconomic policy problems have changed markedly over the past half-century or so, I will start by briefly sketching the structure of a basic macro model. The building blocks of this model are similar to those used in many macro models, including FRB/US, the Fed staff’s large-scale model, and a variety of DSGE (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) models used at the Fed and other central banks and by academic researchers. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The structure of the model starts with the standard textbook equation for aggregate demand for domestically produced goods, namely:1  1.   ; 2. Next is the wage-price block, which is based on a wage or price Phillips curve. Okun’s law is included to make the transition between output and employment; 3. Monetary policy is described by a money supply or interest rate rule; 4. The credit markets and financial intermediation are built off links between the policy interest rate and the rates of return on, and/or demand and supply functions for, other assets; 5. The balance of payments and the exchange rate enter through the balance of payments identity, namely that the current account surplus must be equal to the capital account deficit, corrected for official intervention; 6. Dynamics of stocks: There are dynamic equations for the capital stock, the stock of government debt, and the external debt. When I was an undergraduate at the London School of Economics (LSE) between 1962 and 1965, we learned the IS-LM model, which combined the aggregate demand equation (1) with the money market equilibrium condition set out in (3). That was the basic understanding of the Keynesian model as crystallized by John Hicks, Franco Modigliani, and others, in which it was easy to add detail to the demand functions for private-sector consumption, C; for investment, I; for government spending, G; and for net exports. The Keynesian emphasis on aggregate demand and its determinants is one of the basic innovations of the Keynesian revolution, and one that makes it far easier to understand and explain what factors are determining output and employment. Continuing down the list, on price and wage dynamics, the Phillips curve has flattened somewhat since the 1950s and 1960s.2 Further, the role of expectations of inflation in the Phillips curve has been developed far beyond what was understood when A.W. Phillips – who was a New Zealander, an LSE faculty member, and a statistician and former engineer – discovered what later became the Phillips curve. The difference between the short- and long-run Phillips curves, which is now a staple of textbooks, was developed by Milton Friedman and Edmund Phelps, and the effect of making expectations rational or model consistent was emphasized by Robert Lucas, whose islands model provided an imperfect information reason for a nonvertical short-run Phillips curve. In Okun’s law, the Okun coefficient – the coefficient specifying how much a change in the unemployment rate affects output – appears to have declined over time. So has the trend rate of productivity growth, which is a critical determinant of future levels of per capita income. In (3), the monetary equilibrium condition, the monetary policy decision was typically represented by the money stock at the LSE and perhaps also at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) after the Keynesian revolution (after all, “L” represents the liquidity preference function and “M” the supply of money); now the money supply rule is replaced by an interest-rate setting rule, for instance a reaction function of some form, or by a calculated “optimal” policy based on a loss function. The development of the flexible inflation-targeting approach to monetary policy is one of the major achievements of modern macroeconomics. Flexible inflation targeting allows for flexibility in the speed with which the monetary authority plans on returning to the target inflation rate, and is thereby close to the dual mandate that the law assigns to the Fed.                                                 1  A fuller description of the equations is contained in the appendix. 2  See Blanchard (2016). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  A great deal of progress has been made in developing the credit and financial intermediation block. As early as the 1960s, each of James Tobin, Milton Friedman, and Karl Brunner and Alan Meltzer wrote out models with more fully explicated financial sectors, based on demand functions for assets other than money. Later the demand functions were often replaced by pricing equations derived from the capital asset pricing model. Researchers at the Fed have been bold enough to add estimated term and risk premiums to the determination of the returns on some assets.3 They have concluded, inter alia, that the arguments we used to make about how easy it would be to measure expected inflation if the government would introduce inflation-indexed bonds failed to take into account that returns on bonds are affected by liquidity and risk premiums. This means that one of the major benefits that were expected from the introduction of inflation-indexed bonds (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, generally called TIPS), namely that they would provide a quick and reliable measure of inflation expectations, has not been borne out, and that we still have to struggle to get reasonable estimates of expected inflation. As students, we included NX, net exports, in the aggregate demand equation, but we did not generally solve for the exchange rate, possibly because the exchange rate was typically fixed. Later, in 1976, Rudi Dornbusch inaugurated modern international macroeconomics – and here I’m quoting from a speech by Ken Rogoff – in his famous overshooting model.4 As globalization of both goods and asset markets intensified over the next 40 years, the international aspects of trade in goods and assets occupied an increasingly important role in the economies of virtually all countries, not least the United States, and in macroeconomics. At the LSE, we took a course on the British economy from Frank Paish, whose lectures consisted of a series of charts, accompanied by narrative from the professor. He made a strong impression on me in a lecture in 1963, in which he said, “You see, it (the balance of payments deficit) goes up and it goes down, and it is clear that we are moving toward a balance of payments crisis in 1964.” I waited and I watched, and the crisis appeared on schedule, as predicted. But Paish also warned us that forecasting was difficult, and gave us the advice “Never look back at your forecasts – you may lose your nerve.” I pass that wisdom on to those of you who need it. I remember also my excitement at being told by a friend in a more senior class about the existence of econometric models of the entire economy. It was a wonderful moment. I understood that economic policy would from then on be easy: All that was necessary was to feed the data into the model and work out at what level to set the policy parameters. Unfortunately, it hasn’t worked out that way. On the use of econometric models, I think often of something Paul Samuelson once said: “I’d rather have Bob Solow’s views than the predictions of a model. But I’d rather have Solow with a model than without one.” We learned a lot at the LSE. But wonderful as it was to be in London, and to meet people from all over the world for the first time, and to be able to travel to Europe and even to the Soviet Union with a student group, and to ski for the first time in my life in Austria, it gradually became clear to me that the center of the academic economics profession was not in London or Oxford or Cambridge, but in the United States. There was then the delicate business of applying to graduate school. There was a strong Chicago tendency among many of the lecturers at the LSE, but I wanted to go to MIT. When asked why, I gave a simple answer: “Samuelson and Solow.” Fortunately, I got into MIT and had the opportunity of getting to know Samuelson and Solow and other great professors. And I also met the many outstanding students who were there at the time, among them Robert Merton. I took courses from Samuelson and Solow and other MIT stars, and I wrote my thesis                                                 3  See D’Amico, Kim, and Wei (2014). 4  See Dornbusch (1976) and Rogoff (2001). 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  under the guidance of Paul Samuelson and Frank Fisher. From there, my first job was at the University of Chicago – and I understood that I was very lucky to have been able to learn from the great economists at both MIT and Chicago. Among the many things I learned at Chicago was a Milton Friedman saying: “Man may not be rational, but he’s a great rationalizer,” which is a quote that often comes to mind when listening to stock market analysts. After four years at Chicago, I returned to the MIT Department of Economics, and thought that I would never leave – even more so when MIT succeeded in persuading Rudi Dornbusch, whom I had met when he was a student at Chicago, to move to MIT – thus giving him too the benefit of having learned his economics at both Chicago and MIT, and giving MIT the pleasure and benefit of having added a superb economist and human being to the collection of such people already present. MIT was still heavily involved in developing growth theory at the time I was a Ph.D. student there, from 1966 to 1969. We students were made aware of Kaldor’s stylized facts about the process of growth, presented in his 1957 article “A Model of Economic Growth.” They were: 1. The shares of national income received by labor and capital are roughly constant over long periods of time. 2. The rate of growth of the capital stock per worker is roughly constant over long periods of time. 3. The rate of growth of output per worker is roughly constant over long periods of time. 4. The capital/output ratio is roughly constant over long periods of time. 5. The rate of return on investment is roughly constant over long periods of time. 6. The real wage grows over time. Well, that was then, and many of the problems we face in our economy now relate to the changes in the stylized facts about the behavior of the economy: Every one of Kaldor’s stylized facts is no longer true, and unfortunately the changes are mostly in a direction that complicates the formulation of economic policy.5  While the basic approach outlined so far remains valid, and can be used to address many macroeconomic policy issues, I would like briefly to take up several topics in more detail. Some of them are issues that have remained central to the macroeconomic agenda over the past 50 years, some have to my regret fallen off the agenda, and others are new to the agenda. 1. Inflation and unemployment: Estimated Phillips curves appear to be flatter than they were estimated to be many years ago – in terms of the textbooks, Phillips curves appear to be closer to what used to be called the Keynesian case (flat Phillips curve) than to the classical case (vertical Phillips curve). Since the U.S. economy is now below our 2 percent inflation target, and since unemployment is in the vicinity of full employment, it is sometimes argued that the link between unemployment and inflation must have been broken. I don’t believe that. Rather the link has never been very strong, but it exists, and we may well at present be seeing the first stirrings of an increase in the inflation rate – something that we would like to happen. 2. Productivity and growth: The rate of productivity growth in the United States and in much of the world has fallen dramatically in the past 20 years. The table shows calculated rates of annual productivity growth for the United States over three periods: 1952 to 1973; 1974 to 2007; and the most recent period, 2008 to 2015. After having been 3 percent and 2.1 percent in the first two periods, the annual rate of productivity                                                 5  See Jones and Romer (2010). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  growth has fallen to 1.2 percent in the period since the start of the global financial crisis.  The right guide to thinking in this case is given by a famous Herbert Stein line: “The difference between a growth rate of 1 percent and 2 percent is 100 percent.” Why? Productivity growth is a major determinant of long-term growth. At a 1 percent growth rate, it takes income 70 years to double. At a 2 percent growth rate, it takes 35 years to double. That is to say, that with a growth rate of 1 percent per capita, it takes two generations for per capita income to double; at a 2 percent per capita growth rate, it takes one generation for per capita income to double. That is a massive difference, one that would very likely have severe consequences for the national mood, and possibly for economic policy. That is to say, there are few issues more important for the future of our economy, and those of every other country, than the rate of productivity growth. At this stage, we simply do not know what will happen to productivity growth. Robert Gordon of Northwestern University has just published an extremely interesting and pessimistic book that argues we will have to accept the fact that productivity will not grow in future at anything like the rates of the period before 1973. Others look around and see impressive changes in technology and cannot believe that productivity growth will not move back closer to the higher levels of yesteryear.6 A great deal of work is taking place to evaluate the data, but so far there is little evidence that data difficulties account for a significant part of the decline in productivity growth as calculated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.7  3. The ZLB and the effectiveness of monetary policy: From December 2008 to December 2015, the federal funds rate target set by the Fed was a range of 0 to ¼ percent, a range of rates that was described as the ZLB (zero lower bound).8 Between December 2008 and December 2014, the Fed engaged in QE – quantitative easing – through a variety of programs. Empirical work done at the Fed and elsewhere suggests that QE worked in the sense that it reduced interest rates other than the federal funds rate, and particularly seems to have succeeded in driving down longer-term rates, which are the rates most relevant to spending decisions.  Critics have argued that QE has gradually become less effective over the years, and should no longer be used. It is extremely difficult to appraise the effectiveness of a program all of whose parameters have been announced at the beginning of the program. But I regard it as significant with respect to the effectiveness of QE that the taper tantrum in 2013, apparently caused by a belief that the Fed was going to wind down its purchases sooner than expected, had a major effect on interest rates. More recently, critics have argued that QE, together with negative interest rates, is no longer effective in either Japan or in the euro zone. That case has not yet been empirically established, and I believe that central banks still have the capacity through QE and other measures to run expansionary monetary policies, even at the zero lower bound. 4. The monetary-fiscal policy mix: There was once a great deal of work on the optimal monetary-fiscal policy mix. The topic was interesting and the analysis persuasive. Nonetheless the subject seems to be disappearing from the public dialogue; perhaps in ascendance is the notion that – except in extremis, as in 2009 – activist fiscal policy                                                 6  See, for instance, Mokyr, Vickers, and Ziebarth (2015). 7  See Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf (forthcoming). 8  Inside the Fed, the range of 0 to 1/4 percent is generally called the ELB, the effective lower bound. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  should not be used at all. Certainly, it is easier for a central bank to change its policies than for a Treasury or Finance Ministry to do so, but it remains a pity that the fiscal lever seems to have been disabled.  5. The financial sector: Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rogoff’s book, This Time Is Different, must have been written largely before the start of the great financial crisis. I find their evidence that a recession accompanied by a financial crisis is likely to be much more serious than an ordinary recession persuasive, but the point remains contentious. Even in the case of the Great Recession, it is possible that the U.S. recession got a second wind when the euro-zone crisis worsened in 2011. But no one should forget the immensity of the financial crisis that the U.S. economy and the world went through following the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers – and no one should forget that such things could happen again. The subsequent tightening of the financial regulatory system under the Dodd-Frank Act was essential, and the complaints about excessive regulation and excessive demands for banks to hold capital betray at best a very short memory. We, the official sector and particularly the regulatory authorities, do have an obligation to try to minimize the regulatory and other burdens placed on the private sector by the official sector – but we have a no less important obligation to try to prevent another financial crisis. And we should also remember that the shadow banking system played an important role in the propagation of the financial crisis, and endeavor to reduce the riskiness of that system.  6. The economy and the price of oil: For some time, at least since the United States became an oil importer, it has been believed that a low price of oil is good for the economy. So when the price of oil began its descent below $100 a barrel, we kept looking for an oil-price-cut dividend. But that dividend has been hard to discern in the macroeconomic data. Part of the reason is that as a result of the rapid expansion of the production of oil from shale, total U.S. oil production had risen rapidly, and so a larger part of the economy was adversely affected by the decline in the price of oil. Another part is that investment in the equipment and structures needed for shale oil production had become an important component of aggregate U.S. investment, and that component began a rapid decline. For these reasons, although the United States has remained an oil importer, the decrease in the world price of oil had a mixed effect on U.S. gross domestic product. There is reason to believe that when the price of oil stabilizes, and U.S. shale oil production reaches its new equilibrium, the overall effect of the decline in the price of oil will be seen to have had a positive effect on aggregate demand in the United States, since lower energy prices are providing a noticeable boost to the real incomes of households.  7. Secular stagnation: During World War II in the United States, many economists feared that at the end of the war, the economy would return to high pre-war levels of unemployment – because with the end of the war, demobilization, and the massive reduction that would take place in the defense budget, there would not be enough demand to maintain full employment.  Thus was born or renewed the concept of secular stagnation – the view that the economy could find itself permanently in a situation of low demand, less than full employment, and low growth.9 That is not what happened after World War II, and the                                                 9  I am distinguishing in this section between secular stagnation as being caused by a deficiency of aggregate demand and another view, that output growth will be very slow in future because productivity growth will be very low. The view that future productivity growth will be very low has already been discussed, with the conclusion that we do not have a good basis for predictions of its future level, and that we simply do not know whether future productivity growth will be extremely low or higher than it has been recently. There is no shortage of views 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  thought of secular stagnation was correspondingly laid aside, in part because of the growing confidence that intelligent economic policies – fiscal and monetary – could be relied on to help keep the economy at full employment with a reasonable growth rate. Recently, Larry Summers has forcefully restated the secular stagnation hypothesis, and argued that it accounts for the current slowness of economic growth in the United States and the rest of the industrialized world. The theoretical case for secular stagnation in the sense of a shortage of demand is tied to the question of the level of the interest rate that would be needed to generate a situation of full employment. If the equilibrium interest rate is negative, or very small, the economy is likely to find itself growing slowly, and frequently encountering the zero lower bound on the interest rate. Research has shown a declining trend in estimates of the equilibrium interest rate. That finding has become more firmly established since the start of the Great Recession and the global financial crisis.10 Moreover, the level of the equilibrium interest rate seems likely to rise only gradually to a longer-run level that would still be quite low by historical standards. What factors determine the equilibrium interest rate? Fundamentally, the balance of saving and investment demands. Several trends have been cited as possible factors contributing to a decline in the long-run equilibrium real rate. One likely factor is persistent weakness in aggregate demand. Among the many reasons for that, as Larry Summers has noted, is that the amount of physical capital that the revolutionary information technology firms with high stock market valuations have needed is remarkably small. The slowdown of productivity growth, which as already mentioned has been a prominent and deeply concerning feature of the past six years, is another important factor.11 Others have pointed to demographic trends resulting in there being a larger share of the population in age cohorts with high saving rates.12 Some have also pointed to high saving rates in many emerging market countries, coupled with a lack of suitable domestic investment opportunities in those countries, as putting downward pressure on rates in advanced economies – the global savings glut hypothesis advanced by Ben Bernanke and others at the Fed about a decade ago.13  Whatever the cause, other things being equal, a lower level of the long-run equilibrium real rate suggests that the frequency and duration of future episodes in which monetary policy is constrained by the ZLB will be higher than in the past. Prior to the crisis, some research suggested that such episodes were likely to be relatively infrequent and generally short lived.14 The past several years certainly require us to                                                 on this issue among economists, but the views to some extent appear to depend on whether the economist making the prediction is an optimist or a pessimist. 10  This research includes recent work by Johannsen and Mertens (2015) and Kiley (2015) that uses extensions of the original Laubach and Williams (2003) framework. An international perspective on medium-to-long-run real interest rates is provided by U.S. Executive Office of the President (2015). Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Hall (2014) discuss the long-lived effects of financial crises on economic performance. See also Hamilton and others (2015). I have, in addition, drawn on Fischer (forthcoming). 11  It is also a major factor explaining the phenomenon of the economy’s impressive performance on the jobs front during a period of historically slow growth. 12  See, for instance, Gordon (2014, 2016). 13  See Bernanke (2005). See also the recent work by Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008); and Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull (2009). 14  See, for instance, Reifschneider and Williams (2000), Blanchard and Simon (2001), and Stock and Watson (2003). 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  reconsider that basic assumption. Moreover, recent experience in the United States and other countries has taught us that conducting monetary policy at the effective lower bound is challenging.15 And while unconventional policy tools such as forward guidance and asset purchases have been extremely helpful and effective, all central banks would prefer a situation with positive interest rates, restoring their ability to use the more traditional interest rate tool of monetary policy.16  The answer to the question “Will the equilibrium interest rate remain at today’s low levels permanently?” is also that we do not know. Many of the factors that determine the equilibrium interest rate, particularly productivity growth, are extremely difficult to forecast. At present, it looks likely that the equilibrium interest rate will remain low for the policy-relevant future, but there have in the past been both long swings and short-term changes in what can be thought of as equilibrium real rates. Eventually, history will give us the answer. But it is critical to emphasize that history’s answer will depend also on future policies, monetary and other, notably including fiscal policy. Concluding remarks Well, are the answers all different than they were 50 years ago? No. The basic framework we learned a half-century ago remains extremely useful. But also yes: Some of the answers are different because they were not on previous exams because the problems they deal with were not evident fifty years ago. So the advice to potential policymakers is simple: Learn as much as you can, for most of it will come in useful at some stage of your career; but never forget that identifying what is happening in the economy is essential to your ability to do your job, and for that you need to keep your eyes, your ears, and your mind open, and with regard to your mouth – to use it with caution. Many thanks again for this award and this opportunity to speak with you. References Bernanke, Ben S. (2005). “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” speech delivered at the Homer Jones Lecture, St. Louis, April 14. Blanchard, Olivier (2014). “Where Danger Lurks: The Recent Financial Crisis Has Taught Us to Pay Attention to Dark Corners, Where the Economy Can Malfunction Badly,” Finance and Development, vol. 51 (September), pp. 28–31.  –  –  –  –  (2016). “The U.S. Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s? (PDF)“ Policy Brief 16-1. Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, January. Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). “Inflation and Activity – Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF),” IMF Working Paper WP/15/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November. Blanchard, Olivier, and John Simon (2001). “The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output Volatility (PDF),” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 135–74. Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer (1972). “Money, Debt, and Economic Activity,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 80 (September-October), pp.951–77.                                                 15  For a discussion of various issues reviewed by the Federal Open Market Committee in late 2008 and 2009 regarding the complications of unconventional monetary policy at the ZLB, see the set of staff memos on the Board’s 16  See Williams (2013). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall Reinsdorf (forthcoming). “Does the United States Have a Productivity Problem or a Measurement Problem?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2008). “An Equilibrium Model of ‘Global Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, vol. 98 (1), pp. 358–93. Daly, Mary C., John G. Fernald, Òscar Jordà, and Fernanda Nechio (2014). “Output and Unemployment Dynamics (PDF),” Working Paper Series 2013–32. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November.  –  –  –  –  (2014). “Interpreting Deviations from Okun’s Law,” FRBSF Economic Letter 2014-12. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. D’Amico, Stefania, Don H. Kim, and Min Wei (2014). “Tips from TIPS: The Informational Content of Treasury Inflation-Protected Security Prices (PDF),” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014–24. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Dornbusch, Rudiger (1976). “Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 84 (December), pp. 1161–76. Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer, and Richard Startz (2014). Macroeconomics, 12th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Education. Fischer, Stanley (forthcoming). “Monetary Policy, Financial Stability, and the Zero Lower Bound,” American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings). Friedman, Milton (1968). “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, vol. 58 (March), pp. 1–17. Gordon, Robert J. (2014). “The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, and Reflections,” NBER Working Paper Series 19895. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February.  –  –  –  –  (2016). The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Hall, Robert E. (2014). “Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy from the Financial Crisis,” in Jonathan Parker and Michael Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014, vol. 29. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). “The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present and Future,” NBER Working Paper Series 21476. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. Hicks, John R. (1937). “Mr. Keynes and the ‘Classics’: A Suggested Interpretation,” Econometrica, vol. 5 (April), pp. 147–59. Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). “The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound,” FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9. Jones, Charles I., and Paul M. Romer (2010). “The New Kaldor Facts: Ideas, Institutions, Population, and Human Capital,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. 2 (January), pp. 224–45. Kaldor, Nicholas (1957). “A Model of Economic Growth,” Economic Journal, vol. 67 (December), pp. 591–624. Keynes, John Maynard (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. London: Macmillan. 
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Kiley, Michael T. (2015). “What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)“ Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015–077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Knotek, Edward S., II (2007). “How Useful Is Okun’s Law? (PDF)“ Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic Review, Fourth Quarter, pp. 73–103. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063–70. Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1972). “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,” Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 4 (April), pp. 103–24. Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull (2009). “Financial Integration, Financial Development, and Global Imbalances,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 117 (3), pp. 371–416. Modigliani, Franco (1944). “Liquidity Preference and the Theory of Interest and Money,” Econometrica, vol. 12 (January), pp. 45–88. Mokyr, Joel, Chris Vickers, and Nicolas L. Ziebarth (2015). “The History of Techonological Anxiety and the Future of Economic Growth: Is This Time Different?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 29 (Summer), pp. 31–50. Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff (1996). Foundations of International Macroeconomics. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Okun, Arthur M. (1962). “Potential GNP: Its Measurement and Significance,” Proceedings of the Business and Economics Statistics Section of the American Statistical Association, pp. 98–104. Phelps, Edmund S. (1967). “Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and Optimal Unemployment over Time,” Economica, vol. 34 (August), pp. 254–81. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009). This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Rogoff, Kenneth (2001). “Dornbusch’s Overshooting Model after Twenty-Five Years (PDF),” speech delivered at the Mundell-Fleming Lecture, Second Annual Research Conference, International Monetary Fund, Washington, November 30 (revised January 22, 2002). Solow, Robert M. (2004). “Introduction: The Tobin Approach to Monetary Economics,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 36 (August), pp. 657–63. Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2003). “Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2002, vol. 17 (January). Tobin, James (1969). “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory (PDF),” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 1 (February), pp. 15–29. U.S. Executive Office of the President, Council of Economic Advisors (2015). Long-Term Interest Rates: A Survey (PDF). Washington: EOP. Williams, John C. (2013). “A Defense of Moderation in Monetary Policy (PDF),” Working Paper Series 2013–15. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, July. Woodford, Michael (2010). “Financial Intermediation and Macroeconomic Analysis,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 24 (Fall), pp. 21–44. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11  Appendix  The following model includes a number of elements that play a central role in the analysis of economic fluctuations and in larger policy models as I have encountered them at the Federal Reserve and other institutions. An aggregate demand relationship, in the form of the investment-saving (or IS) curve, characterizes the negative dependence of economic activity on the real borrowing rate,       , and the positive dependence on expected output,     ; government spending,   ; and net exports,   , as a function of the exchange rate,   , and foreign output,     :              . (1) The Phillips curve describes a relationship between inflation and labor market slack. Inflation responds negatively to the level of the unemployment gap,     , and to changes in aggregate productivity,   (including shocks to commodity prices). Current inflation also responds positively to expected future inflation,     , and to the level of the borrowing rate and of the exchange rate,     (cost - push shocks):         . (Phillips curve) (2) Current issues regarding the role of expectations, the size of the slope, and the pass-through from exchange rate movements to domestic prices and wages can be addressed in this context. Recent discussions can be found in Blanchard’s (2016) reference to the back-to-the-1960s thinking about the Phillips curve and in Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers’s (2015) thoughts on hysteresis mechanisms underlying the inflation and unemployment dynamic. To connect cyclical fluctuations in the level of aggregate activity with changes in employment, Okun’s law has been proved useful as an empirical description of the relationship between the output gap and the unemployment gap,          (see Knotek (2007); and Daly, Fernald, Jordà, and Nechio (2013, 2014)):       . (Okun’s law) (3) To characterize monetary policy, it is nowadays useful to consider how the central bank affects the level of interest rates by setting the federal funds rate,   , in response to deviations of expected inflation from its target,         (inflation gap), and percent deviations of output from its potential level,          (output gap):         . (4) To capture the role of credit and financial intermediation in the economy, consider a loan market equation, where the demand on the left-hand side depends negatively on the borrowing rate,     , and the level of economic activity (higher income implies lower financing needs). The supply of loans depends negatively on the level of interest rates,   , and positively on the level of intermediation spreads,   , and income,   (to the extent that higher aggregate income increases deposits and banks’ capitalization and hence the supplies of intermediated funds). This equation pins down the equilibrium level of the intermediation spread,   :         . (5) The borrowing rate,     , is then equal to the sum of the risk-free rate set by the central bank,   , and the spread,   :     . (6) This analysis is in the spirit of James Tobin’s approach to monetary economics as was recently described by Solow (2004) and extended by Woodford (2010) to describe the role for financial intermediation shocks. It also captures the work by B. Friedman, B. Bernanke, and A. Blinder 
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches  in thinking about the role of credit and credit spreads in the transmission of monetary policy impulses. Open economy aspects are captured by the following equations: The balance of payment is in equilibrium when net exports are compensated by capital flows of opposite sign. Capital flows depend on the difference between the domestic interest rate and the foreign rate adjusted for depreciation:           . (7) Furthermore, the uncovered interest rate parity equates the rate of return on domestic assets,   , to the rate of return on foreign assets,     , plus future expected changes in the exchange rate,    , and a residual risk premium component,   :      . (8) For a detailed description of these relationships, see Dornbusch, Fischer, and Startz (2014); and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996).  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Salvatore Rossi: The launch of Solvency II – the implementation of the new regime: open issues, implications for business models, and effects on institutional and financial communication *      *      * Keynote address by Mr Salvatore Rossi, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy and President of IVASS (Istituto per la Vigilanza sulle Assicurazioni), at the IVASS Conference 2016, Rome, 3 March 2016. Ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted to welcome you to this Conference on the launch of Solvency II. I want to thank Victoria Saporta, Chair of the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), Gabriel Bernardino, Chair of the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA), Frank Grund of BaFin and all the other panelists, for kindly accepting our invitation. I also want to thank you all, the audience, for being so numerous. This is the proof that the topic we will be discussing today – namely the Solvency II implementation challenges we are facing only two months after the entry into force of the new regime – is of great relevance, for both regulators and the industry. Indeed, this is not the first conference on Solvency II and will not be the last. Actually a lot of other conferences and seminars have already taken place since the project started. But we still need some more discussion, and a deeper and wider comprehension of the implications of this multifaceted issue. We will start with a keynote speech by Gabriel Bernardino. Two panel discussions will follow. The first one on the most relevant and controversial aspects of Solvency II implementation. The second one devoted to a specific but crucial feature of the new framework: information disclosure. The panelists are very distinguished and well known representatives of both the supervisory community and the industry. The moderators will be Ferdinando Giugliano, former editorial writer of Financial Times, now at the Italian newspaper la Repubblica, and Fausto Parente of IVASS. Alberto Corinti, member of the board of IVASS and of the management board of EIOPA, will offer some concluding remarks. I am sure that we will gain important insights from today’s debate, also based on everybody’s concrete experience in the past few weeks of the new regime. Now a few introductory words on my part. Solvency II was born on 1st January 2016 after a pregnancy lasting more than 10 years. We all remember the last thrilling moments when the Directive Omnibus II, essential for advancing the project, seemed for a while too hard to be agreed upon. A failure would have put the childbirth at deadly risk. But we made it. EIOPA had a fundamental role in that delicate process. It impressed a decisive push when it adopted the interim measures for the preparation to Solvency II in 2013. That move energized the whole insurance sector (both supervisors and the industry), keeping its attention high in view of the final goal of the new regime. Notwithstanding the long and complex preparatory works, not each and every detail is fully fixed yet, nor, I would add, fully understood. That is why we organized this Conference. Of course, we are not going to solve all our doubts today. In our ordinary work we continuously bump into new implementation problems, asking ourselves how to practically deal with this or that aspect of Solvency II. To some extent it is physiological, as it always happens when one moves from theory to practice. I am confident that at the end of the day we will be able to exploit all the benefits of the new regime, while minimizing the implementation costs. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Let me briefly touch upon what are – to my understanding – the key points we need to tackle now. First of all, we need to stimulate and accommodate a thorough cultural change in the insurance sector. The transition from the Solvency I static/historical approach to the Solvency II forward-looking one is revolutionary. It is not rhetoric: in the banking sector the same revolution – back in the remote past by now – required years to be digested by all the stakeholders. In a risk dominated environment, supervisors are expected to systematically challenge undertakings on their risk profile/appetite and on their ability to pursue it; for instance, supervisors should periodically discuss with the board of each company its risk profile and long-term strategies. IVASS has already taken some steps in this direction. One example: immediately after an on-site inspection we convene a dedicated meeting with the board of the company, to discuss the outcome and possible corrective measures. In our experience not all board members are always willing and able to sustain such a constructive dialogue with the supervisors, especially in small undertakings. But that is essential in the new regulatory framework. It is a cultural gap. We have to work together on it. All cultural changes require time, effort and perhaps even some pain. What is important is to keep moving ahead – step by step but constantly – towards the main goal: a forward-looking approach in assessing risks and vulnerabilities. Both camps have to adapt their way of reasoning: supervisors when analysing data coming from undertakings, the latter when, for example, performing the Own Risk and Solvency Assessment (ORSA). A second key point is what I consider now the top priority for the supervisory community in the EU: harmonization and convergence of supervisory practices. We cannot consistently manage a common regulatory framework if we accept for too long a playing field which is not level, arbitrages among national supervisors, discriminations in the protection of policyholders along national borders. This was often the case under Solvency I, with so many national differences permitted by the EU directives. Solvency II allows a much more limited number of national specificities. We can more easily work on harmonizing supervisory practices, pointing to a really common approach. This means identifying the best practices and being ready, each of us, to adopt them in our national sphere even if they do not come from our own experience. It is not easy. Day-to-day supervision remains in the national supervisory authorities’ responsibility, with their different stories and long years of experience. Spreading the best practices, irrespective of where they were developed, would sometimes require forgoing national pride in order to embrace the cause of rationality and efficiency. I believe EIOPA can do a lot in this field. Not only because “enhancing convergence” is in its mandate, but also because it is in the best position to collect and compare all the different approaches, identify and recommend the best ones, promote their common adoption, while acknowledging differences on aspects that actually merit to be treated differently.  To accomplish this task the tools are already there. Let me just mention the finalization of EIOPA’s supervisory handbook, which we believe is “the” essential tool. Hence, IVASS very much supports it and is actively working on it. Another important tool in order to select and share best practices is the “peer review work”. Even in this case, we will need time. From our side, I can assure that we are seriously committed to such collective effort. A third key point is public disclosure. Solvency II will be a fantastic opportunity to better understand the risk profile and the business model of each company, for all the stakeholders: supervisors first, but also market analysts, board members and managers, journalists, politicians, and the public opinion. The market disclosure rules foreseen by the new legislative framework will really allow everybody interested to have access to the financial 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  position of an insurer with an unprecedented level of detail. The inherent sophistication and complexity of Solvency II, however, raise issues that need to be addressed. It is essential that such informative treasure be of high quality, that could be easily understood and used. A possible complication stems, at least in our country, from the coexistence of the Solvency II informative approach with financial statements based on accounting standards not matching the former. It may be a source of confusion and misunderstandings, possibly endangering the reputation of both supervisors and companies. It will be interesting to exchange views on that today. Let me conclude, ladies and gentlemen, with a word of caution. Solvency II is just a regulatory framework. It designs the urban map, it imposes one-way streets and speed limits, it deploys traffic lights and traffic officers. All this infrastructure has just been changed, and today we are going to discuss how to ease the transition towards the new regime. But the traffic itself, the thousands of cars and drivers in a modern city, well, that is the market. And the insurance market, all over the world, is now facing a bigger challenge than the one posed by a change in the rules of the game, though radical. The challenge is twofold. A structural one: technological innovation. The other one is apparently of a conjunctural nature, but it is actually persisting almost like a structural feature: that is the environment of low and volatile financial returns in which we have been living for years now. I said low, I could have said negative, in the short-term segment of financial markets. How fast will the new technologies disrupt the traditional way of conducting the insurance business? How long will monetary policies keep interest rates at the present unprecedented levels, or even lower? Nobody knows, and every opinion is legitimate. But the whole business is rocked by these developments. Understanding the trends and the challenges behind the current state of affairs in the insurance market should be a common endeavor for regulators/supervisors and the industry. For the time being, we have to work together in order to make the implementation of Solvency II as smooth and effective as possible, also for the purpose of strengthening the insurance sector and make it capable of resisting the present headwinds and catch the opportunities of tomorrow. Thank you for your attention. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Benoît Cœuré: From challenges to opportunities – rebooting the European financial sector Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the SZ (Süddeutsche Zeitung) Finance Day 2016, Frankfurt am Main, 2 March 2016. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, For those of you here who work in the financial sector, your job depends on your ability to assess and manage risk. What allows you to do this is the fact that many risks are tangible – they can be identified through analysis, measured through models and hedged using financial instruments. Risk is not per se an obstacle to decision-making; it simply frames the parameters of those decisions. The situation is different, however, when risk morphs into uncertainty1. Uncertainty, by definition, cannot be predicted or quantified. It is therefore much more of an impediment to decision-making. And that brings with it economic costs: firms postponing investment, households postponing consumption and increasing savings. In the European economy today we face several sources of uncertainty. We face uncertainty about the outlook for the global economy. We face uncertainty about the direction of Europe and its resilience to new shocks – the UK referendum, the next wave of migration. And germane to this conference, we face uncertainty about the way forward for the European financial sector. A significant amount of this uncertainty stems from the fact that, eight years after the crisis, we are still in a transition phase. Financial institutions are considerably stronger than in 2008 but they are still adjusting their business models to a post-crisis world. We have a new regulatory regime, whose contours are not yet fully defined. And the new regime is being overlaid on a financial sector that, in some cases, still has substantial legacy issues to address. That creates unavoidable frictions. But uncertainty can also be self-imposed, and policy decisions can play a role in that. In the still fragile environment we face today, what is essential is that policy works to reduce uncertainty – and does not become a source of uncertainty itself. At the same time, policy cannot be an excuse for financial firms to put off revising their business models and updating their technologies. To build confidence in the European financial sector, all actors need to play their part. The post-crisis environment is a challenge, but it is also an opportunity: for the financial sector to become more profitable, more efficient and more stable. What I would like to do in my remarks today is look more closely at the sources of uncertainty we face today, and at what policymakers and private players can do to address them. There are three areas in particular I would like to focus on: the business environment, the regulatory environment, and the technological environment. Business environment The business environment confronting the European financial sector today is evidently challenging.                                                 1 See F. Knight (1921). Risk, Uncertainty and Profit, Boston: Hart, Schaffner and Marx. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Earnings among euro area banks continue to be weak, with their average return on equity – although markedly improved since the crisis2 – remaining below their cost of equity. Cost cutting and rationalisation has been ongoing since 2008, making further cost savings harder to achieve. Low profitability constrains the capacity of banks to generate capital internally. And new challenges have arisen in the face of an uncertain economic outlook, especially given the weakness in emerging markets and in commodity-producing sectors. So are there ways that policymakers can reduce this uncertainty? One topical issue is, of course, whether monetary policy is contributing to weak profitability. In particular, a concern has built up that, as central banks lower interest rates into negative territory, the impact of monetary policy on banks is becoming increasingly adverse. That is because bank lending rates fall linearly but their funding costs are non-linear – as interest rates on retail deposits are sticky – which puts a squeeze on net interest margins. Let me underline that we are well aware of this issue. We are monitoring it on a regular basis and we are studying carefully the schemes used in other jurisdictions to mitigate possible adverse consequences for the bank lending channel. But I also think we need to qualify the narrative that banks’ challenges flow largely from our monetary policy. So far, many banks have been able to more than offset declining interest revenues with higher lending volumes, lower interest expenses, lower risk provisioning and capital gains. Last year, for example, euro area banks’ aggregate net interest income increased, especially as crisis-hit banks refinanced expiring high-yield liabilities. And negative interest rates are complementary to our asset purchase programme, which has had clearly positive effects on asset prices, credit risk and intermediation volumes. This has to be set against the direct costs from our measures to net interest margins. Moreover, in an environment of rising global uncertainty, what would be the costs for the financial sector if monetary policy had not responded? We have seen from the recent sharp fall in bank equity prices that the sector is highly sensitive to a weaker-than-expected economic outlook. In that context, our commitment to our price stability mandate is vital to anchor expectations of nominal growth. Those who call for a less accommodative monetary policy have to ask themselves what would be the impact on banks’ lending volumes and loan-loss provisions if output were stagnant and prices falling. More generally, market jitters have particularly focused on banks perceived to have residual weaknesses – in particular those with high stocks of non-performing loans (NPL) and those perceived to lack sustainable business models. These are challenges that have little to do with the central bank. Reducing uncertainty from these sources requires other policymakers and private players to act. Two priorities stand out. The first is moving more decisively to deal with legacy assets. Progress in NPL resolution is still slow when compared with the volume of problem loans. In countries most affected by the crisis3, the ratio of non-performing exposures to tangible equity and loan loss provisions – the so-called “Texas ratio” – currently stands at around 100% for many banks. That undermines confidence in their ability to absorb further losses, creating volatility in the event of economic bad news, as well as hampering loan growth to the real economy. All the preconditions are now there to accelerate NPL resolution: NPL levels and provisioning have been reviewed by the supervisory arm of the ECB as part of the Asset Quality Review.                                                 2 For the euro area banking sector, the annualised return on equity for the first three quarters of 2015 was 5.7% in 2015 compared with 3.4% in 2010. 3 See ECB Financial Stability Review, November 2015. The analysis is based on publicly available data for a sample of 60 significant banking groups. Countries most affected by the crisis include Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Slovenia and Spain. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  The challenge now is to speed up the process of writing off and/or disposal. There are various policy measures that can facilitate this process. One is improving insolvency regimes, which help separate viable from non-viable borrowers and enable the valuation of assets to be sold off. Another is increasing the efficiency of judicial systems, which allows faster foreclosure of collateral underlying NPL portfolios. And in my view there are also merits in facilitating the carve-out of substantial portions of bank balance sheets. But this assumes, of course, that workable solutions exist for the transfer of legacy assets at sensible prices to investors able and willing to manage them. It also assumes decisive action to kick-start the market for loans in those jurisdictions where NPL ratios are the highest – that is, in Cyprus and in Greece. Second, banks with perceived business model risks need to do more to mitigate uncertainty by reshaping their business mix and their operational models. Asset carve-outs could be catalytic here as well: streamlining their balance sheets by disposing of assets can allow banks to concentrate on developing new business, as opposed to managing legacy assets – in other words, it can save them from “zombification”. Beyond that, banks with weak profitability need to find ways to increase non-interest income and, where possible, to reduce further their operating costs. There appears to be scope for this too.4 On the earnings side, for example, we have already observed a trend among banks to compensate for lower interest income by increasing fees and commissions. There is some evidence that banks are offering fee-based products to clients as substitutes for interest-based products. On the cost side savings are more challenging given the extensive rationalisation efforts of recent years, but there is still one obvious “low hanging fruit” to be picked: consolidation within the sector. Indicators of market concentration suggest some over-capacity in the European banking sector, especially in countries with more fragmented banking systems. For example, the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index for the euro area, though rising in recent years, still stands below 750. As a general rule, a figure below 1000 signals low concentration.5 Cost-income ratios in some banking sectors also remain high. That implies there would be efficiency gains from consolidation without exacerbating “too-big-to-fail” problems. The fact that we now have a European supervisory and resolution regime presents the ideal conditions for banks to capitalise on new cross-border M&A opportunities. What our economy needs is European banks operating in a European market: large enough to operate across borders and diversify risks, but small enough to be resolved with the resources of the Single Resolution Fund. This would reap the full benefits of banking union and improve the terms of the trade-off between financial stability and economic efficiency.6 For that to happen, however, we need to remove any remnants of the regulatory framework that implicitly support home bias. For example, how much national discretion is allowed in implementing rules; how fungible are liquidity and capital across borders; how regulations affect the choice of subsidiaries versus branches – all these issues will crucially shape the incentives of banks to become European. And if we do not get them right, the risk is that consolidation ultimately happens through the more painful route of resolution.                                                 4 See D. Nouy (2016), “Risks and resilience – the European banking sector in 2016”, speech at the Deutsche Bank – Bank Capital Forum, London, 23 February 2016. 5 See ECB Report on financial structures, October 2015. The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) is defined as the sum of the squares of the market shares of all firms within the industry, where the market shares are expressed as fractions. As a general rule, an HHI below 1,000 signals low concentration, while an index above 1,800 signals high concentration. For values between 1,000 and 1,800, an industry is considered to be moderately concentrated. The range of the index lies between 0 and 10 000. 6 See B. Cœuré (2014), “On the optimal size of the financial sector”, speech at the ECB conference on the optimal size of the financial sector, Frankfurt, 2 September. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Regulatory environment This brings me to the second part of my remarks: the regulatory environment. Clearly, the European financial sector is facing a profoundly changed regulatory environment after the crisis. That applies to quantity and quality of capital, to leverage, to funding profiles, to bail-in-able debt, to risk management practices. Derivatives markets and market infrastructures have also been subject to a comprehensive reform agenda. Is this regulation a source of uncertainty? Taking a longer-term view, I find it difficult to believe so. Thanks to regulatory initiatives, capital ratios for euro area banks have risen from around 8% in 2008 to close to 14% today. Leverage ratios have improved in most countries. And funding has become more stable: median loan-to-deposit ratios have fallen from more than 140% in 2008 to around 110% now. Forcing over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives onto central clearing has also netted out counterparty risk and reduced uncertainty over who owns what in a crisis. All this contributes to a more robust financial sector that is better able to absorb shocks. And though there are always costs to regulation, most studies suggest that, in the steady state, the macroeconomic benefits outweigh them. For example, Commission simulations find that the new regulatory framework will deliver macroeconomic benefits of around 0.6–1.1% of EU GDP per year, compared with long-term costs of about 0.3% of EU GDP per year.7 Where regulation can create uncertainty, however, is in two areas. The first is if there is a lack of visibility on what the future regulatory regime will look like. And the second is if there is uncertainty about how new regulation will be applied. The volume of new regulation coming in has created uncertainty in the financial sector in recent years. But I think the contours of the new regime are now clearer than before. The key unfinished parts of the Basel III agenda, such as the leverage ratio, reductions in the variability in risk-weighted assets, total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) and the fundamental review of the trading book, look set to be finalised in Europe by the end of this year. That should help provide clarity on the post-crisis steady state. As confirmed by G20 Finance Ministers and Governors at their meeting in Shanghai, the aim is now to focus on making Basel III effective without further increasing regulatory capital requirements.8 But there are still some areas where, I think, more visibility would be beneficial. One is the timeline for the Directive on Markets in Financial Instruments, which was recently postponed. Regulators no doubt face a difficult trade-off between the urgency of reform and the need for such a fundamental change in regulation to meet technical and logistical reality. But it is also important that the process does not lose momentum, not least as this legislation will be the backbone of a future Capital Markets Union. Another area is the resilience, recovery and resolution of clearing houses, on which the Commission will make a proposal later this year when the global framework has been clarified. The CPMI, IOSCO and the FSB are making good progress in this area and will deliver guidance ahead of the G20 Hangzhou summit.9                                                 7 See European Commission (2014), Economic Review of the Financial Regulation Agenda, May. 8 See Communiqué G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting, Shanghai, February 27, 2016. 9 Still another area is how pension funds will be impacted by the move towards central clearing for OTC derivatives. Central counterparties generally only accept cash as margin, while pension funds typically hold few liquid assets. That is why, in June last year, the Commission agreed a two year exemption for pension funds to find a technical solution to this issue. Until it is resolved, however, there may be uncertainty among investors about how pension funds will be able to meet their clearing requirements without shedding profitable assets. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  In terms of the application of regulation, we have also seen – perhaps inevitably – a degree of uncertainty as the new regime beds in. For example, some of the recent volatility we saw in bank shares seems to have coincided with uncertainty around how pillar 2 capital requirements would be applied. But recent clarifications by the European Banking Authority (EBA)10 and additional communication by the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM)11 have now, I think, gone a long way towards allaying concerns. All things being equal, supervisory requirements will also not be increased further. What perhaps remains to be clarified is exactly how the new resolution framework will work. The resolution cases in Portugal and Italy last year have sparked concerns about equal treatment, but it is important to underline that this was not an application of the bail-in tool in the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, but rather of the EU state aid rules. What is key now is that creditors have certainty about where they stand in the new resolution hierarchy. That would be enhanced, in my view, by ensuring that MREL (the minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities) is consistently implemented across the EU, including a common EU framework on the degree of subordination of senior unsecured bank bonds12. It would also benefit from clarifying the interaction between MREL and TLAC (total loss-absorbing-capacity), in particular the differences in subordination and the treatment of additional capital buffers. The ongoing MREL review, which will also implement TLAC, will need to address any remaining inconsistencies and uncertainties, as banks need clarity to start issuing the bail-in-able debt that will make the new resolution regime fully effective. I trust many of these issues will be addressed and finalised in the course of 2016. Technological environment Finally, let me say a word about the third and in my view the most important area of potential uncertainty in the financial sector: the evolving technological environment. What I am referring to here is the emergence of disruptive new technologies – so-called “FinTech” – which look set to profoundly reshape the structure of financial intermediation. FinTech now spreads across financial market segments and along the value chain. It is present, albeit still at an early stage, in payments, credit provision, investment and financial advice, insurance. It runs from front office to back office. And FinTech innovations are increasingly cascading into new areas. For example, the development of instant payments infrastructures has helped develop new markets for mobile P2P, e-commerce or point-of-sale payment solutions, which may become a new standard of payments in some areas. On the face of it, I have no doubt that this is a positive development for the financial sector. It leads to greater efficiency, better products and lower prices for consumers. It also has the potential to support financial inclusion. In short, FinTech can be part of the answer to the fundamental questions facing our economies: lack of productivity and rising inequalities. That is why regulation is generally supporting opening up market access by introducing legal certainty to previously unregulated services. For example, the revised Payment Services Directive is expanding the list of activities that payment service providers can carry out to include the initiation of payments and account information services. Where the uncertainty comes in, however, is how this will affect incumbents.                                                 10 See Opinion of the European Banking Authority on the interaction of Pillar 1, Pillar 2 and combined buffer requirements and restrictions on distributions. 11 See SSM SREP Methodology Booklet. 12 See ECB (2015). Opinion of the European Central Bank of 2 September 2015 on bank resolution (Con/2015/31). 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  FinTech presents an opportunity for new start-ups to compete with established financial institutions in specific financial services, but without the costs of legacy IT systems and a compliance-oriented business culture. FinTech also opens the market for “BigTech” firms such as Apple, Google and Amazon, which have an in-built advantage in digital technology. This threatens to take business away from banks which traditionally offered a package of services, potentially weakening their business models. What is more, over the longer-term technological innovations, such as distributed ledger technologies (DLTs), could have profound impacts on financial intermediation. DLTs have the potential to substantially reduce reconciliation costs for market participants, to disintermediate incumbents in the financial value chain, and to allow for a more efficient use of collateral. Through decentralised update and validation of records, they may even challenge the basic business models of intermediaries or central market infrastructures. So should policymakers be concerned about this? Generally speaking, it is up to market incumbents to rise to this challenge. In particular, banks facing questions about their business models should see the new wave of innovation as an opportunity – to reach out to new customers, to increase efficiency, to revamp their business models. After all, they still retain economies of scale unavailable to small start-ups and intellectual capital unavailable to outsiders. FinTech may be exactly the shock the sector needs to restructure after the crisis. But policymakers also need to monitor developments closely. As more firms enter the market it will be important to ensure a level playing field between entities providing similar financial services. Moreover, market fragmentation might create challenges for a single European market, as market innovators have a tendency to build closed-loop solutions or “silos”, and challenge the existing approaches towards containing systemic risk. For example, the emergence of popular retail payment platforms in one country could undermine the market integration already achieved in the context of SEPA. We will have to see how the market evolves before assessing whether regulation should provide a steer in one direction or another, whether the new approaches will provide full legal certainty to market participants, and whether regulatory space can be provided to let innovation develop without hindering financial stability. But we have started moving along a steep learning curve. For example, the CPMI has launched work in partnership with IOSCO and other standard-setting bodies on the impact of the distributed ledger technology and related digital innovations on payments and market infrastructures. Conclusion Let me conclude. The euro area is still recovering from a once-in-a-generation economic and financial crisis that has left deep scars on the economy. It urgently needs higher growth to bring down high unemployment, to deleverage the economy and to raise inflation back to our price stability objective. Uncertainty in the financial sector only blocks that path. To reduce uncertainty, both policymakers and financial institutions need to play their part. They need to ensure that the financial system is fit for purpose and able to finance the recovery. And they need to do so today, not tomorrow. But we should keep in mind that the challenges facing the financial sector also present an opportunity. A tough business environment can push banks to be more efficient. A new, stable regulatory environment will make the financial system safer. And a disruptive technological environment can lead to new business models and better financial services. It is in all our interests to rise to this challenge. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Theodore Mitrakos: Distressed loans in the Greek banking system – restructuring portfolios, reviving enterprises Address by Mr Theodore Mitrakos, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the workshop co-organised by the Bank of Greece and EBRD on “Distressed loans in the Greek banking system – restructuring portfolios, reviving enterprises”, Athens, 10 March 2016. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, dear guests,  It is a great pleasure for me to welcome here at the Bank of Greece Mr. Nick Tesseyman, Managing Director Financial Institutions of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the distinguished speakers and all the participants in today’s workshop, focusing on the management of non-performing exposures (NPEs).  Let me take this opportunity to welcome the activity of the EBRD in Greece. The EBRD Governors, following a request of the Greek authorities, voted in February 2015 with overwhelming majority for the Bank to invest in Greece until the end of 2020. The Bank’s investments, backed by technical assistance and policy dialogue, are intended to strengthen progress in the reform of Greece’s economy and contribute to its recovery. In this vein, as you probably know, the EBRD Representative Office in Athens was recently established. Greece will benefit greatly from the expertise and the finance that the EBRD can bring to projects designed to contribute to sustainable growth and encourage trade. The EBRD has already participated in the recapitalisation of the four significant Greek banks in late 2015, which shows its confidence in the prospects of the entire Greek banking sector, and has invested overall around €300 million in Greece. Moreover, as of early March the EBRD is supporting the expansion of international trade with a facility to National Bank of Greece under the EBRD’s Trade Facilitation Programme (TFP). Through the programme, the EBRD provides guarantees to international confirming banks and short-term loans to selected banks and factoring companies for on-lending to local exporters, importers and distributors. The facility will help National Bank of Greece to scale up its trade finance activities, despite the financial market conditions, and reaffirm itself as a prime trade partner, supporting trade activities of exporters, importers and distributors of imported goods in Greece. It is anticipated that similar agreements will be signed with other Greek banks in the near future. More generally, the EBRD’s commitment to the country sends a strong signal to private sector investors that Greece is serious about reform and rebalancing its economy. I would like therefore to thank Ms. Sabina Dziurman, EBRD Director for Greece and Cyprus, for her contribution so far, as well as for putting forward the idea of holding a joint workshop on non-performing exposures. Ladies and gentlemen,  The Bank of Greece, as you all know, has taken a series of initiatives to promote more rigorous and efficient management of non-performing exposures. It has also underpinned government efforts towards shaping and implementing a national NPL strategy.  In this regard, let me very briefly mention some of these Bank of Greece initiatives: • The issuance of the Executive Committee Act 42/2014 on the supervisory framework regarding the NPE management by commercial and cooperative banks.  • The activation of the Code of Conduct, which provides guidelines regarding the interaction of credit and other financial institutions with borrowers in arrears.  • The conduct of several on-site inspections to monitor banks’ progress in implementing the supervisory framework.  • The conduct, with the support of an external consultant, of a study on NPL segmentation and the preparedness and capacity of banks to deal with each NPL segment in a rigorous manner.  
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  • The issuance of the Executive Committee Act 82/2016 (under publication) regarding the framework for the licensing and operation of NPL servicing and acquiring firms. Last but not least, the Bank of Greece, in cooperation with the ECB Banking Supervision and the commercial and cooperative banks, is in the process of agreeing a set of operational targets for NPEs. Meanwhile, the Bank of Greece is setting up a Coordination Office to support the monitoring of the implementation of the national NPL strategy. • Against this background, in today’s workshop we will have the opportunity to extensively discuss three main topics:  • Solutions for borrowers with exposure to multiple banks. The bulk of distressed large corporate borrowers have exposures to multiple banks rendering necessary a coordinated approach among creditors to agree comprehensive and sustainable solutions in a reasonable timeframe. The Hellenic Financial Stability Fund (HFSF) has recently launched a study regarding this pertinent issue of “common borrowers”.  • Development of a secondary market for NPL servicing and sales. The recent Law 4354/2015 laid down the framework for the development of a secondary market for NPL servicing and sales. There will be two panels covering essential aspects in the process of setting up the local infrastructure for NPL servicing and sales respectively.  • The banks’ internal workout: managing distressed SMEs. SMEs are the backbone of the Greek economy. The shift of banks towards long-term forbearance measures coupled with the restructuring of viable businesses with appropriate changes in their structure, business model and, if necessary, corporate governance would help stimulate an uptick in economic activity and assist the rebalancing of the Greek economy towards export-oriented sectors. Ladies and gentlemen, The successful completion of the recapitalization of Greek banks in late 2015 has been a decisive first step towards safeguarding financial stability and restoring the intermediation role of banks. The capital adequacy ratio of the Greek banking sector stands (pro forma) at around 18% and compares favorably with the average for European Union banks. The next milestones for the Greek banking sector relate to a return to profitability, a return of deposits through the restoration of depositors’ confidence and, more importantly, the supply of credit for working capital and investment. Undoubtedly, these goals are closely linked to the politically and socially sensitive issue of tackling non-performing exposures, which poses a real challenge for us all. As of September 2015, non-performing exposures stood at €107 billion, representing 43.6% of total exposures. Hence, the more effective management of non-performing exposures, avoiding the pitfalls of regulatory forbearance or over-enforcement alike, will bring about multiple benefits for banks, households, businesses and the society at large. In the process, it will unlock funding to the real economy, bolstering investment and employment. This in turn will enable the Greek banking sector to protect and strengthen the productive fabric of the country, while concurrently enhancing its social role. I am confident that today’s workshop will show the significant progress that has already been made regarding the development of an appropriate institutional and supervisory framework for a more effective NPE management. Moreover, it will help to identify the appropriate tools and approaches to this end. I look forward to an exciting discussion and a very fruitful exchange of views. The overwhelming interest of market participants, from Greece and abroad, to join this workshop is, I think, a key ingredient for its success.  Thank you again for being here today.   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Henry Ohlsson: Decision today, consequences far into the future Speech by Mr Henry Ohlsson, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a breakfast event, organised by Swedbank, Stockholm, 18 March 2016. *      *      * I would like to thank Bo Enegren, Hanna Köhler, Gustaf Norrefeldt, Cecilia Roos-Isaksson, Marianne Sterner and Ulf Söderström for their help with this speech. Accompanying figures and the table can be found at the end of the speech. Some of the decisions we make only have significance for the here and now. Others may have consequences for many decades to come, in some cases for the rest of our lives. Our choice of education and purchase of a home are examples of decisions that have considerable significance over a long period of time. For a person who puts themselves in debt through decisions with long-term consequences, it is of course important how high the interest rates on the debt are. And this does not concern the interest rates paid now or in the medium term, but also interest rates several decades ahead. In recent years, interest rates have been at their lowest level in modern times. Several other central banks have done as the Riksbank and cut their policy rates below zero, and government bond yields at longer maturities are now at historically low levels. This is partly due to the prolonged recession following the financial crisis. However, in the really long term, it is structural factors such as long-term growth, propensity to save and technological progress that are crucial for movements in interest rates rather than short-term fluctuations. Let us begin with a definition that can help us bring some structure to the discussion and to understand the challenges we are facing. The interest rate we normally see is nominal, and measures how much we pay in terms of money when we borrow or how much we receive when we save. But as prices usually rise over time, the value of our money also declines. To take this into account, one can look at the real interest rate, that is, the nominal interest rate minus the expected rate of inflation. The real interest rate measures how much we pay for our loans in real terms, that is, in terms of our purchasing power. In the very long turn, the real interest rate is determined by structural factors, such as savings and investment. And in a small, open economy like Sweden’s, these factors are primarily determined by international developments. Monetary policy, on the other hand, does not have any marked effect on the real interest rate in the long run. However, monetary policy does influence the rate of inflation and inflation expectations. If monetary policy is based on an inflation target that is perceived as credible, long-term inflation expectations will coincide with the inflation target. In other words, we can say that the long-term nominal interest rate is determined by two factors: • the long-term real interest rate, which in turn is determined by structural factors and is global, and • the inflation target, which monetary policy can make credible. I shall discuss these two factors today and speculate how they may develop in the really long term. Firstly, I intend to take up the fact that real interest rates have shown a falling trend over a long period of time at a global level. What factors lie behind this? Will the trend prevail and, if so, what consequences will it have for monetary policy? And what will it mean for households and companies? 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Secondly, I will discuss the inflation target. Here in Sweden the target has been 2 per cent since it was introduced in the mid-1990s. Most other countries with inflation targets also have their targets at around 2 per cent. What are their experiences of having a target at this level? Should the level be lower or higher? Interest rates have thus been very low for a long time now, but it is reasonable to expect that in the long run they will be 3–4 times higher than they are now. This must be taken into account; otherwise decisions taken today will have major consequences much further ahead. It is thus important to remember that the conditions applying today will not apply for decades into the future. Lower real interest rate trend since the 1980s As the process of financial and economic integration in the global economy has increased, common factors such as global growth and global saving have played an increasingly large role with regard to interest rates.1 Real interest rates have fallen around the world which justifies calling this a global real interest rate. The fall is in the order of 4–5 percentage points since the 1980s.2 As Sweden is a small, open economy, the long-term global real interest rate can be regarded as an anchor for the Swedish real interest rate. During brief periods, the real interest rate in Sweden may deviate from the global real interest rate, but over longer periods of time the Swedish real interest rate will be determined by global factors. Figure 1 shows how the long-term real interest rate has developed in Sweden and the United Kingdom since the mid-1980s. More specifically, the figure shows the 10-year yield on Swedish and British real government bonds. From the mid-1980s and ten years onwards, the real interest rate varied around almost 4 per cent in the United Kingdom, while in Sweden it was much more volatile and at a higher level. This was followed by a trend decline that has continued until today. At present, the Swedish real interest rate is around –0–5 per cent, while the British one is around –1 per cent. It also appears that in most countries the lower real interest rates are the main reason for the fall in nominal interest rates during this period. During the 1990s, when a number of central banks introduced inflation targets, lower inflation expectations also contributed to the fall in nominal interest rates. Secular stagnation or debt adjustment? An international discussion has been going on for some years now with regard to the causes of the fall in the global real interest rate. In simpler terms, one can say that two main explanations have been put forward in the debate.3 According to one explanation, the fall is primarily due to factors determining the long-term trends in investment and savings, such as demographic developments. This is partly connected to the discussion on secular stagnation initiated by Lawrence Summers, amongst others.4 In this view, long-term trends in saving and investment have pulled down the interest rate level compatible with full employment. The fall is so great that this interest-rate level is below zero.                                                 1 See IMF (2014). 2 See King and Low (2014). 3 See Armelius et al. (2014). 4 See Summers (2014). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Representatives of the other explanation, for instance Kenneth Rogoff,5 put greater emphasis on more short-term factors directly linked to the financial crisis, such as high indebtedness and increased uncertainty, which have held back investment and got households to save more. Regardless of what significance one attributes to the financial crisis, it is clear that the downward trend in interest rates began much earlier. Back in the period prior to the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve Governor of the time, Alan Greenspan, described the low long-term US interest rates as a mystery. Growth, savings and technology determine the real interest rate Regardless of which explanation one concurs with, most people consider the long-run global real interest rate to be primarily governed by expectations of potential growth, the propensity to save and technological advances. I will therefore first describe how the various factors can influence the real interest rate. I will then discuss possible explanations as to how growth, propensity to save and technology may change. Lower potential global growth gives lower global real interest rate According to economic theory, expected growth should play an important role for the development of the real interest rate; the lower the growth, the lower the real interest rate. International organisations such as the IMF and the OECD have made downward adjustments to their assessments of the global growth trend in recent years. This could lead to a lower real interest rate. At the same time, one can note that global growth was both stable and relatively high during the 15–20 years prior to the financial crisis. It is thus not possible to explain the long-term fall in interest rates prior to the financial crisis as due to lower global growth. One possible explanation could instead be that the global population increase has fallen over a long period of time, and is expected to continue falling in the coming period. This could contribute to lower potential growth in that the labour force will increase at a slower pace. At the same time, this effect will be counteracted if labour productivity rises. Slower population growth and the fact that the working age population is shrinking indicate that growth will remain lower than in the pre-crisis decades. The prospects for labour productivity are much more difficult to assess. The rate of increase in labour productivity declined in connection with the economic downturn following the financial crisis and it is uncertain how lasting the effects will be. Demography affects propensity to save and thus the real interest rate Demographic developments also affect the propensity to save. Life expectancy has increased and the birth-rate has fallen in recent decades. This has meant that the population has aged in most parts of the world. It applies especially in developed countries but also in countries such as China and several other emerging markets. Merely the fact that people are on average living longer means that they need to save more money for their old age, unless the retirement age is raised at the same pace as the increase in life expectancy. Developments have also entailed a percentage increase in the older working age population (40–65 years old) – which normally has a high level of saving – in recent decades. There is thus good reason to assume that demographical developments have contributed to an increased propensity to save in the world and thus to a lower real interest rate.                                                 5 See Rogoff (2015). 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The demographic effect on saving in China is worth mentioning in particular. The single-child policy contributed to a severe decline in the birth-rate. At the same time, life expectancy increased. The combination of weak social safety net and fewer children to provide for the elderly was probably an important explanation for the increase in saving in the Chinese economy. As China has become increasingly integrated into the global economy, saving in China has also been increasingly channelled to other parts of the world for investment. Increased propensity to save in many emerging markets Many other emerging markets have also increased their savings, but partly for other reasons than a change in demographics. Experiences from the Asian crisis in 1998 contributed to many emerging market countries’ central banks building up their currency reserves to be able to withstand future currency outflows. The increased demand from these countries for low-risk assets, such as government bonds, led to yields being pushed down at the end of the 1990s and until the years prior to the financial crisis. The rising demand for safe assets also contributed to an increase in the differential between the risk-free rate and the rate on higher risk investments. More pensioners can in the long run lead to lower saving and thereby a higher real interest rate On the other hand, the saving may decline gradually as an increasingly large percentage if the world population attain the age of retirement. However the speed and strength of the impact that demographics will have on savings is uncertain. It depends partly on the extent to which older people choose to remain in work for longer and to what extent those who work save more for their retirement when their life expectancy rises. Greater income disparities also affect propensity to save Another factor that can explain why the propensity to save has increased is the increased income spread. In most developed countries, income spreads have increased since the 1980s. High-income earners normally have a higher propensity to save than low-income earners. The increase in the income spread could therefore have meant that saving has increased. At the same time, it should be said that even if income disparities have increased within a number of countries, they have declined on a global level in that the emerging markets are catching up with the developed economies. It is therefore difficult to say how global saving has been affected. Wages as a share of added value have declined The greater income spreads are also visible in other ways. The trend towards increased saving has been so extensive that wealth has risen substantially in most industrial nations. Wealth has also risen faster than the national income.6 These increases in wealth are transferred and transformed into capital that is used in production. In most cases, this is done via the financial markets. The global real interest rate will in turn adapt so that the desired capital stock matches the available wealth. In recent decades, the upturn in wealth and capital in relation to national income has proved to be relatively greater than the downturn in the real interest rate. This has meant that the capital share of the added value (the ratio between the real interest rate multiplied by capital and national income) has risen despite the real interest rate declining. The capital share and the wage share always add up to one. Consequently, wages share of added value has                                                 6 See Piketty & Zucman (2014). Waldenström (2015) provides an account of the wealth/national income ratio in Sweden.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  declined in many countries.7 Another way of expressing this is that such large real interest rate cuts have not been needed for capital to absorb the increase in wealth. And this in turn is due to the production technology used. Following this discussion on what determines the development of the real interest rate in the long run, I shall now go on to discuss the inflation target, which is the other factor of significance for nominal interest rates in the longer run. Inflation in the long run Most of Sweden’s most important trading partners have inflation targets in one form or another. Usually, these are a target for the inflation rate of around 2 per cent a year, see Table 1. More common for interest rate to be limited by lower bound When the long-term level of the global real interest rate is low, there is an increased risk that the nominal interest rate will reach its lower bound in future economic downturns. Many have therefore argued in various contexts in favour of raising the inflation target.8 This increases the distance to the nominal interest rate’s lower bound and makes it easier to stimulate the economy in a recession. At present, for instance, the Bank of Canada is reviewing the country’s inflation target, including an analysis of potential consequences of raising the inflation target.9 If the nominal interest rate remains at zero, the real interest rate can be cut in the short term to a lowest level of –2 per cent, with an inflation target of 2 per cent. If the inflation target and inflation expectations were instead 4 per cent, the real interest rate could be cut in the short term to –4 per cent. Even though interest rates have fallen below zero in Sweden and a number of other countries, the correlation between a higher inflation target and a short-term possibility to attain a lower real interest rate remains. Advantages and disadvantages of a higher inflation target The most obvious advantage of raising the inflation target to, say, 3 or 4 per cent would be that this increases the possibilities to stimulate the economy in future deep recessions and to bring up demand and inflation. The experience of the financial crisis shows that the risk of very deep and prolonged recessions has previously been underestimated. Prior to the financial crisis the risks of deep economic crises were assessed on the basis of experiences during the post-war period, when cyclical fluctuations were small and it was thus easy to underestimate the risks. If one studies economic data extending much further back in time, one can see that large downturns have been much more common.  At the same time, there are several factors that make raising the inflation target problematic, not least how the actual transition to a new inflation target would be implemented. For instance, the credibility of a new target would be weakened if it were announced in a situation where inflation was far from the old target.  It could also be problematic to introduce a new, higher inflation target in Sweden in isolation, if other important central banks around the world stood firm by a target of 2 per cent. Swedish competitiveness could be weakened, for instance, if inflation and wage increases in Sweden were higher than those abroad. In theory, the Swedish krona should weaken in this situation, so that competitiveness would be restored. But there are many factors affecting the                                                 7 See Karabarbounis & Neiman (2014) and Bengtsson & Waldenström (2015). 8 See, for example, Ball (2014). 9 See Kryvtsov and Mendes (2015).  
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  exchange rate and an adjustment could take a long time. And during this time Swedish competitiveness could deteriorate.  There is also a risk that inflation could vary more if we had a higher target. This could mean that it became more difficult for economic agents to distinguish upturns in the general price level from relative price changes and thus more difficult to make good financial decisions.  I have thus described the two factors that determine the nominal interest rate in the longer term. It is now time to put them together. The nominal interest rate in the long run Low interest rates for a long time... The fall in the global real interest rate naturally has consequences for monetary policy. Many central banks have cut their policy rates to historically low levels to stimulate demand and get inflation to rise. In Sweden, the Riksbank emphasises that nominal interest rates will be low for a long time to come. The Riksbank’s forecasts extend two or three years ahead. Figure 2 shows the repo-rate path the Executive Board of the Riksbank decided on at the monetary policy meeting in February. The Riksbank’s forecast is that the repo rate will remain at the current level of –0.5 per cent until some time around the end of June/beginning of July 2017. At the end of 2018/beginning of 2019 the forecast is that the repo rate will have risen to 0.5 per cent. The Riksbank assesses that this expansionary monetary policy is necessary to get inflation to rise and stabilise around 2 per cent in 2017.  The low interest rates mean that most of those who save or borrow for consumption and investment will receive or pay low interest rates during this period. But there are also financial decisions that have much further reaching consequences. ...but what then? Is it possible to say what nominal interest rates will be in 10, 15 or 20 years’ time? It would be presumptuous to attempt precise forecasts. But it is possible to reason out a scenario for a possible normal state of affairs based on what we know today and the factors I have discussed today. In a “normal state of affairs” necessary debt adjustments in the wake of the financial crisis would be complete. Through higher global growth, we could expect higher global real interest rates. Growth can in principle come from employment or labour productivity beginning to increase at a faster pace. If we have lower global saving, we can expect higher global real interest rates. Saving can decline if the percentage of elderly rises and the retirement age falls. If income spreads decline, this can also lead to lower global saving. When saving declines, this can put further upward pressure on global real interest rates, as the competition for savings can be expected to increase among those wanting to invest in new production technology. This can have significance for the development of the real interest rate.  Finally, there is the question of monetary policy. Will it be conducted with an inflation target? And, if so, what level will the target have? Nominal interest rates will become higher in the future The demographical changes we can see ahead indicate that global saving will decline. This would imply higher global real interest rates. The future conditions for growth are more 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  uncertain, but if labour productivity were to begin to increase faster than today, there would be further upward pressure on global real interest rates.  Let us therefore say that future global real interest rates will be in the order of 1.5–2.5 per cent. If we add to this an inflation target and inflation expectations of 2 per cent in Sweden, we get nominal interest rates of 3.5–4.5 per cent. Even if we do not see a return to the nominal interest rate levels we previously regarded as normal, long-term nominal interest rates will be much higher than they are today. The important thing is that economic agents who now make decisions with long-term consequences bear this in mind. This could refer, for instance, to households who now borrow money to buy a home. In the future the interest rates on these loans can be three or four times higher than the current mortgage rates. I began by discussing the major differences in time horizons in the financial decisions we all need to make. Some decisions apply only here and now. If we make the wrong decision it is not too difficult to put it right. In other cases, we make decisions today that have consequences far into the future. It is then important not to assume that the conditions applying today will apply for decades into the future. References Armelius, Bonomolo, Lindskog, Rådahl, Strid and Walentin (2014) “Lower neutral interest rate in Sweden?”, Economic Commentaries no. 8, Sveriges Riksbank. Ball, L. (2014) “The Case for a Long-Run Inflation Target of Four Percent”. IMF Working Paper WP/14/92, June. Bengtsson E & Waldenström D (2015) “Capital shares and income inequality: Evidence from the long run” CEPR Discussion Paper DP11022, December.  IMF (2014) “Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates”, World Economic Outlook, April. Karabarbounis, L & Neiman, B (2014) “The Global Decline of the Labor Share”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61–103. King, M, Low, D, (2014) “Measuring the ‘world’ real interest rate”, NBER Working Paper No. 19887. Kryvtsov, O, Mendes, R (2015) “The Optimal Level of the Inflation Target: A Selective Review of the Literature and Outstanding Issues”, Bank of Canada, Discussion Paper  2015–8. Piketty, T & Zucman, G (2014) “Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in Rich Countries 1700–2010”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3),1255–1310. Rogoff, K (2015). “Debt supercycle, not secular stagnation”, VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal. Summers, L. “Reflections on the new ‘Secular stagnation hypothesis’”, VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal, 30 October 2014. Waldenström, D (2015) “Wealth-income ratios in a small, late-industrializing, welfare-state economy: Sweden, 1810–2014” Department of Economics, Uppsala University, Working Paper 2015:4, October. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Karnit Flug: Israel’s Credit Information Bill Remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, to the Knesset Economic Committee regarding the Credit Information Bill, Tel Aviv, 14 March 2016. *      *      * In recent years, the Bank of Israel has been acting in various ways to increase competition in the banking system in general, and in the retail credit market in particular.  An important component of increased competition in the credit market is providing a solution to the problem of asymmetric information.  The banking ID card that all banking customers received a few days ago is an important measure in this area.  The credit information database is expected to provide a complete solution to this issue.  The database will serve as an additional tool in increasing competition and expanding access to credit while reducing the discrimination derived from a lack of information.  In addition, the database and the anonymous information it will include will assist the Bank of Israel in monitoring developments in the credit market from the standpoint of financial stability. In view of this, and since the Bank of Israel has the experience and the know-how necessary to advance projects of this kind, the Bank of Israel has decided to take upon itself the challenge of establishing and operating the database, with all that this involves. To that end, the Minister of Finance and I have appointed a higher steering committee led by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel and the Director General of the Ministry of Finance, and including the Director General of the Bank of Israel, the Deputy Budget Director at the Ministry of Finance, and representatives of the National Economic Council and the Ministry of Defense.  We have also established professional teams at the Bank of Israel to deal with ways to handle the challenges posed by the project, including: establishing and operating the database; security of the information that will be fed into the database, found in it and provided by it; maintaining the interests of customers and protecting their privacy; and more. The higher steering committee and the work teams are working in synergy with all parties involved in the process, and with the utmost cooperation of the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Justice, the National Economic Council, and other entities. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the representatives of the various ministries who took part in the formulation of the bill, and particularly the representatives of the Bank of Israel in the legislative process: the Deputy Governor and the Director General of the Bank of Israel, who took upon themselves the leadership of this complex and important project, and Adv. Shirley Avner, who led the legal aspect. I would like to relate to a number of main points that arose during the discussions in this committee: 1. Protection of privacy:  The Bank of Israel attributes tremendous importance to the protection of privacy, and we are aware of the responsibility placed upon the Bank in the context of establishing and operating the database.  We are certain that the Supervisor of Privacy Protection, whom I will appoint in accordance with the bill, will fulfill the role in the best way possible, and will assist us in ensuring maximum protection of privacy as part of the credit database. 2. “Consumer protection”: The Bank of Israel attributes great importance to giving the proper attention to the protection of the rights of consumers regarding whom information will be held in the database.  For this purpose, the bill sets out, inter alia, that I am to appoint a credit information supervisor, whose roles will include maintaining the interests of customers and ensuring the proper actions of the credit information bureaus and other entities.  The supervisor will also constitute the address for clarifying and handling public enquiries regarding the activity of the credit bureaus, sources of information sent to the database, credit information users, paid representatives, and any other entity involved in the database.  In addition, as part 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  of the bill, the supervisor will be given control and supervision authorities over the activity of the credit bureaus, including concerning the statistical models, among other things. By the way, the consumer supervision standard that will be implemented regarding the database, similar to the existing standard at the Banking Supervision Department, is worthy of being implemented for customers of all financial entities, both those already existing and those that will be established. 3. The sources of information and entities that will be required to provide information for the database:  In determining the scope of information to be found in the database, a balance will be struck between the various objectives of establishing and operating the database.  It is important to us that the information appearing in the database will be comprehensive and broad, but at the same time, we do not want to collect information that is not relevant or that is not of sufficiently high quality. It is important to note that the value of the information in the credit database for increasing competition and improving the customer’s status will increase as the financial literacy of the public becomes deeper, because the consumer’s ability to derive benefit from the solution to the information problem I outlined depends first of all on his own financial behavior.  It is therefore important that the government act to advance actions that will help increase financial literacy among the public.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Sustaining the momentum for inclusive growth Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central bank of the Philippines), at the Chamber of Thrift Banks Convention, Makati City, 18 March 2016. *      *      * In preparing for my remarks, I considered your theme and two words leapt at me. The first word is “momentum”. As you may know, this takes its roots from physics. Some may remember its formula -- “Mass x Velocity”. In other words, “mass in motion”. The second really, is a phrase -- “inclusive growth”. Picture this then, an object, say, a truck called “the initiatives and programs towards inclusive growth”, that is on the move and it will take some effort to stop it. That is what this conference is all about. First -- how can we ensure a critical mass of initiatives to keep us moving towards the goal of inclusive growth. And then, how can we make sure that we will continue in motion. Our current operating environment In gathering my thoughts for today’s event, I could not help but reflect on how the last seven months or so have affected our operating environment. Global growth has slowed. Developments out of China have surprised markets. The US Federal Reserve finally raised its target funds rate (Although just yesterday the Fed turned dovish, retreating on their initially indicated four rate hikes in 2016 to just two). Risk aversion was causing a de-risking. And oil supply was significantly much larger than demand. The net result has been a volatile financial market. And while it felt good to see a full tank’s worth of fuel cost significantly less, we remain cognizant of what this was doing to our countrymen working in oil-generating economies. Without overlooking these emerging developments, we should also not lose sight of the fact that our macroeconomic and financial market fundamentals remain solid and intact. We have now had 68 quarters of continuous growth, finishing 2015 at a full-year growth of 5.8 percent. Inflation was recorded at 1.4%, the lowest rate since the BSP adopted inflation targeting as our monetary policy framework in 2002. Our Balance of Payments position for 2015 was at a surplus of USD2.6 billion, a turnaround from the USD2.9 billion deficit in 2014. And with our gross international reserves still over USD80 billion, this is sufficient to service more than 10 months’ worth of imports of goods and payment for services. The exchange rate has sustained its relative competitiveness as it has moved in line with currencies in the region. Based on our assessments, therefore, the current stance of monetary policy remains appropriate, but we have flexibility to address developments should there be reason to adjust our policy levers. Certainly, the banking industry remains a clear pillar of strength. According to S&P, and I quote, “Philippine banks are looking forward to another solid year in 2016, thanks to the economy’s good growth prospects and banks’ healthy capitalization and asset quality.” Our favorable economic prospects are also noted by Fitch Ratings, which, for its part, gave the Philippines the only positive outlook among Asia Pacific banking systems for 2016 .  I am happy to note that thrift banks continue to contribute to the strength of the overall banking industry. The collective assets of TBs reached Php961.13 billion as of November 2015 after growing annually by 10.71 percent for the past five years. Over the same period, deposit balances have been expanding at nearly 11 percent per annum [Php773.37 billion as of 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  November 2015] while loans have grown just below 15 percent annually [Php 681.41 billion in November 2015]. Quo vadis? Given all of these developments, where do these take the thrift banking industry? The textbook answer, is to follow your mandate under the Thrift Bank Act. Under this law, TBs are expected to: 1. promote economic development and expand industrial and agricultural growth; 2. place within easy reach of the people the medium to long-term credit facilities to agriculture, services, industry and housing at reasonable cost and 3. encourage industry, frugality and the accumulation of savings among the public. While all of you are well aware of these, we all also recognize that these are not trivial tasks and targets. These speak of thrift banks as an enabler of economic development by encouraging retail savings and extending credit to targeted sectors. Your mandate makes no distinction of where you are based or the environment within which you operate. This, I feel, is important to highlight because your own business strategy appears to reflect the more “inclusive” track of the industry. By this I mean that your branching footprint has clearly extended beyond cities. Specifically, the number of thrift bank branches located in cities actually grew by 26.3 percent (from 991 to 1252) between 2010 and 2015 but your branches in 1st to 5th class municipalities grew by 37.5 percent (from 304 to 418). Certainly, the bulk of your branches are still in 1st and 2nd class municipalities but I am encouraged by the expansion elsewhere. What were just 35 branches in 3rd to 5th class municipalities in 2010 are now 73 branches as of end 2015. The numbers may be modest in absolute terms but the pace of growth is not trivial. Which brings me back to your conference theme: “Thrift Banks: Sustaining the Momentum for Inclusive Growth”. Now, a critical question comes to mind-- How can/do thrift banks contribute to inclusive growth? I think with some pragmatism and humility, we would be well-served to “scope” the response to this and say that thrift banks play a role in financial inclusion, which promotes inclusive growth. Inclusive growth and the role of the thrift banks There are several policy issues which are being considered in the space of financial inclusion. For thrift banks, I think two of these are most relevant. First, we would want to ensure that there is symbiotic relationship between financial inclusion and financial stability. Certainly, it defeats our prudential purposes if the attainment of one comes at the expense of the other. Here, your expanding footprint strategy is a critical element. As banking services are offered outside of the traditional city-centers, the expectation is that the dynamics between inclusion and stability can very well change. The BSP and the BIS are currently writing a paper on the relationship between inclusion and stability to explore the empirical linkages. The preliminary results suggest that information between a bank and its clients as well as the relationship between a bank and other banks in the vicinity do matter. This sounds rather straightforward but the implications on the operations of banks are not simple. In practice, this means each bank must maintain a continuing dialogue with its stakeholders. This kind of transparency is not just “another disclosure regime”. Rather, it is communication that prevents surprises and allows stakeholders to make informed decisions, avoiding the sharp spikes that often create and/or exacerbate evolving issues. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Furthermore, banks must be cognizant that stakeholders do look at the localized community of financial service providers. In this day and age of electronic communication and affordable channels, financial consumers demand “banking services”, which may no longer be necessarily supplied by the traditional “brick-and-mortar banking institutions. This leads me to my second policy area which I often refer to as the “totality of the client experience”. As far as financial consumers are concerned, we live in a digital age and financial services are expected to be delivered and are in the form defined by financial technology. The digitization of financial services, more popularly labeled as fintech, requires innovation and support. The BSP has put in place both its e-money and IT Risk framework to enable this environment. Financial consumers who need to transfer funds from one branch to another of the same bank (let’s say from Manila to relatives in the province OR between two branches here in Metro Manila) must be able to do so with as less friction as possible. In the event that something unexpected happens to such a transaction, this is where “support” comes into play. Here, the BSP issued its Consumer Protection Framework that focuses on pro-active interventions such as financial literacy initiatives and the necessity of having remedial recourse by way of redress. The issues I just discussed are certainly relevant to thrift banks because you are the ones defining your target audience and by extension, you will have to provide for the “totality” of your clients’ experience, regardless of where they may be. Final thoughts Ladies and gentlemen, we spoke of the links between financial inclusion and financial stability; of how, as an industry, you would need to harness fintech to enrich your clients’ total experience. We also spoke of how your strategy of expanding branching footprint is helping to reach the underserved. These support our belief that we are (well) on our way towards creating a critical mass in our collective initiatives towards inclusive growth. Importantly, this mass is moving. By definition therefore, we have momentum. But, that is not enough, we need to sustain it. As the banking regulator, we will enable the environment with a commensurate regulatory framework and calibrate as may be necessary. But the form and substance of the banking products and services, including the means of delivery and distribution, are choices that only the banks can make. Thrift banks will have to define your market niche, as individual institutions that compete with others and as an industry that collaborates with the whole. Competition and collaboration may be flipsides of each other but the end goal will have to be the totality of the experience of the financial consumer. Absent such a positive experience, the financial consumer simply drifts to the shadows (i.e., shadow banking) or chooses to be financially excluded. I trust that no one in this room will find that to be an acceptable outcome. The National Strategy for Financial Inclusion (NSFI) has been launched, and we now have to focus on its execution. I therefore look forward to your active participation in this endeavor. Ladies and gentlemen, the work of financial inclusion is enormous. If we pursue this individually, we are likely to only hardly make a dent. But collectively, and forming a critical mass, who knows where our efforts will take us? We could just very simply turn out to be unstoppable!  Thank you for your attention. Good morning. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  François Villeroy de Galhau: The role of monetary policy Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Global Interdependence Center – Central Banking Series “Inflation expectations, implications and policy response in a new paradigm for commodities”, Session I “Central bankers outlook”, Paris, 21 March 2016. *      *      * Since the financial crisis, central banks have been tested on several levels: their ability to keep the transmission channels of monetary policy active; their ability to deliver on price stability; their ability to support the economy. Central banks in many jurisdictions have done a lot to reach their objectives. And their role has largely been hailed as positive in exiting the crisis. But faced with inflation remaining below the target, commodity markets going persistently through bear territory and growth momentum losing steam, central banks’ action is now called into question: how effective is monetary policy and how effective can it be in the future? Aren’t central banks running out of ammo? Monetary policy faces challenges, that is true; but these challenges can be mitigated. Central banks have proven that they were ready to do their part; but my conviction is that they cannot remain the only game in town. Let me focus my remarks today on the case of the euro area. Jeffrey [Lacker, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond] will certainly give you more insight into the US situation. I would first like to elaborate on the challenges we face as central bankers, then on our instruments and their effectiveness. I.  Let me start with the challenges a)  As you all know, the Eurosystem’s primary objective is to maintain price stability, that is inflation rates below, but close to 2% over the medium term. However in the euro area, like in most advanced economies, inflation remains too low, despite the historically low interest rates: the harmonised index of consumer prices (HICP) indeed returned to negative territory, standing at –0.2% in February 2016, and underlying inflation, i.e. excluding energy and food, is only 0.7%. A certain number of factors are currently contributing to low inflation. Primarily, the euro area is faced with deflationary pressures associated with a series of economic shocks: firstly, the fall in oil prices, as well as the overall decline in commodity prices; secondly, the slowdown in growth in emerging economies and chiefly China; and, lastly, inadequate growth in the euro area with persistently high unemployment, which curbs wage rises and weakens demand and price growth. Moreover, structural factors, such as the ageing population, are also likely to exert downward pressure on the “natural” – or “Wicksellian” – interest rate. This rate can be defined as the interest rate consistent with the full employment of the factors of production. In this case, in order to achieve the right balance between savings and investment, markets rates must come down too. In normal times, central banks cut their key rates, and this passes through to the yield curve. However, in order to deal with the financial crisis, the ECB like other central banks have brought their key interest rates to very low levels, around zero. This means that our traditional monetary policy tools had to be supplemented by other instruments, known as non-standard instruments, in order to reach our prices stability objective. I will return to this point later. b)  What is more with regard to the challenges we currently face, these deflationary pressures create the risk of an unanchoring of expectations, which would make it harder for us to achieve our 2% target again. Indeed, if inflation stayed too low for too long, economic agents may revise downwards their inflation expectations, which would create second round effects. Lower inflation expectations influence economic agents’ price- and wage-setting behaviour, which in turn keeps inflation low. It can even raise the risk of deflation, defined as a cumulative process of falling prices, including those of assets, or even wages and production, as the world economy experienced in the 1930s or Japan partially underwent in the 1990s. Such deflationary dynamics are not at play today. But this risk is the 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  reason why our inflation target is symmetrical. We consider too low inflation to be just as costly as too high inflation. And, therefore, it is more risky for central banks to act too late than too early. Since the start of the year, we have observed that market-based measures of inflation expectations have fallen. Nevertheless, the latest forecasts provided by the ECB continue to point to a gradual rise in inflation over the coming years: 0.1% in 2016, 1.3% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018. c)  Some argue that these challenges mean that the Eurosystem can no longer achieve its price stability mandate. I don’t think so. Current challenges do not call into question our mandate, but they change the way in which we fulfil it. Some argue that the Eurosystem should rather change its objective. I don’t think so either. For the credibility of monetary policy, this objective must be maintained: this 2% target is a medium-term “anchor”, at a time when there is so much volatility and short-termism affecting the economy. Most central banks in advanced economies share this medium-term 2% objective, including the United States and Japan. This has been the ECB’s objective since 2003, when it was proposed by the German former chief economist, Otmar Issing. II.  This brings me to my second point: how effective is our monetary policy? a)  Since the summer of 2014, we have implemented a series of non-standard monetary policy measures to complement cuts to key interest rates. These non-standard measures have produced tangible results. They have translated into a substantial easing in borrowing conditions for euro area companies. Since June 2014, the cost of borrowing for businesses has fallen by 80 basis points. Without non-standard measures, we estimate that we would have had to lower key rates by around 100 basis points in June 2014 to achieve a similar effect on bank interest rates. This has also helped to stimulate lending to the real economy: in the euro area, outstanding loans to businesses have gone from a contraction of –2.5% in June 2014 to growth of 0.6% in January 2016. The impact is even more marked in France, where outstanding business lending grew by 4.8% year-on-year in the first month of 2016 – the highest pace of growth in the euro area and, what’s more, with the lowest rates of interest. Convergent estimates from the ECB and the Eurosystem indicate that, all other things being equal, the measures introduced since June 2014 should add 1 percentage point to inflation over the period 2015–2017, with a similar impact on growth. In France, they helped to boost 2015 growth by 0.3 percentage point, and estimates from INSEE even put the impact slightly higher at +0.4 pp. That represents about 80,000 additional jobs for the economy – although only structural reforms can generate lasting gains for a country’s growth and employment. To conclude on this estimate of effectiveness, the IMF – regarded as an objective judge of the relevance of economic policies – was unequivocal in its assessment at the last G20 meeting in Shanghai at the end of February, saying, “The ECB’s asset purchase programme has supported the recovery by improving confidence and financial conditions [and] monetary policy should remain accommodative”. b)  Why have we decided to do more on 10 March? The comprehensive package that has been introduced by the ECB sends out two clear messages: First, our decisions are guided by our mandate which is to bring inflation back towards our target of 2% over the medium term. We are firmly set on this objective, and we have a broad range of instruments with which to achieve it. In addition to interest rates, we are also acting both on: bank credit easing with the new series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO 2); and on market financing via the extended QE asset purchase programme, to 80 billion EUR per month including corporate bonds. On top of that, we are guaranteeing that we shall continue to do so for as long as necessary – via forward guidance. So, negative interest rates are only part of a much more comprehensive package. We think that they have been effective, but they naturally have their limits. Furthermore, the Governing Council gave a strong signal of its will towards an internationally cooperative attitude, as it decided not to opt for a tiering system exempting banks from negative rates. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Second message: our priority is to promote the financing of the real economy. The goal of TLTRO 2 is not, as some have claimed, to offset the impact of negative rates on banks. It is to encourage banks to lend to corporations, SMEs and households alike; similarly, extending the asset purchase programme to corporate bonds will be of particular benefit to large French corporations. In other words, we are securing the provision of credit to businesses and households, and protecting it from tensions linked to market volatility. c)  Now, what about the risks? I talked earlier about the risks of doing nothing: we need to take action in order to bring inflation back up towards 2%. That said, we also need to keep a close eye out for any possible negative side-effects of our monetary policy, notably for financial stability. We are actively monitoring the financial cycle, including in France where the task falls to the High Council for Financial Stability set up in 2013. I took part in its 8th meeting at the Finance Ministry last week. For the time being, there are no signs of bubbles forming in our main financing markets: on the whole, developments in the equity markets appear in line with corporate profit forecasts, while evolutions in bond yields also seem consistent with the outlook for inflation and growth. Nor are there any signs of excessive credit growth in the financial system. Nevertheless, we remain vigilant over all aspects of the current macroeconomic and financial environment. Last week the High Council for Financial Stability alerted on potential risks associated with commercial real estate, especially: “the sharp rise in demand by investors on certain market segments and a high level of prices, in particular office prices in the Paris area”. The HCSF’s assessment will be released for public consultation in the coming weeks. We are ready, when needed, to take action with macroprudential measures, to prevent and mitigate any systemic risks that might arise. In sum, monetary policy is doing a great deal to counter weak inflation and support economic activity – it is our duty and we will continue to do so with steadfast resolve: we are consistent in our objective, ready to act with the right instruments, and alert to any possible risks. However, I would like to stress again that “monetary policy cannot be the only game in town”. Other economic policies also have a crucial role to play. This is precisely what the members of the G20 reiterated in Shanghai on 27 February: “Monetary policies will continue to support economic activity and ensure price stability, consistent with central banks’ mandates, but monetary policy alone cannot lead to balanced growth”. Where there is sufficient margin to do so, fiscal policy must support demand – this is not currently the case in France, but it is in other countries in Europe. Moreover, structural reforms remain absolutely vital in France, to encourage creations of jobs and of businesses and thus bring the economy back to full potential. At European level, we need to move finally towards a true economic union, in addition to the monetary union embodied in the Eurosystem. Only by optimising the governance of the euro area can we optimise growth. The current extremely accommodative monetary policy stance creates the ideal conditions for carrying out much-needed reforms. It should not be used instead as an excuse for putting them off: Europe and France urgently need to make the most of this opportunity, right now. Thank you for your attention. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Benoît Cœuré: The future of the euro area Remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at Le Cercle Europartenaires, Paris, 21 March 2016. *      *      * The footnotes can be found at the end of the speech. President Guigou, Minister Jeanneney, Ambassador Meyer-Landrut, Excellencies,  Ladies and gentlemen,  Thank you for inviting me here.  This morning I would like to share with you some thoughts which echo your association’s motto “Acting for Europe with Europeans”.  Role of the European Central Bank “Acting for Europe with Europeans” could also be the ECB’s motto. One of its strengths is indeed its European mandate. The Governing Council takes its monetary policy decisions in the interest of the euro area as a whole, with a view to ensuring price stability. As a quid pro quo for its independence, the ECB is accountable for its actions to the people’s representatives, who are elected to the European Parliament by direct universal suffrage.  At a time when so many European citizens express doubts about Europe, the duty of European institutions is to strengthen their legitimacy both by reinforcing their democratic accountability and by showing that they meet the objectives they’ve been entrusted with.  Regarding democratic accountability, it would be wrong to underestimate the importance the ECB places on its relationship with the public. Recent studies show that people’s knowledge and understanding of the objectives and principles of monetary policy influence inflation expectations[1] as well as trust in the European Central Bank.[2] At the same time, these studies indicate that the level of knowledge and understanding can be further improved. We have taken several initiatives in this area in the last years, such as publishing the accounts of our monetary policy discussions and the diaries of the Executive Board members. But we can certainly do more to facilitate the understanding of the ECB’s role and policies by the general public. Rebuilding trust in Europe implies above all that European institutions deliver on the objectives which have been assigned to them as part of their mandates. During the crisis, the ECB did not hesitate to act decisively.[3] To preserve price stability, we have adopted an accommodative monetary policy stance that has no precedent. Our measures, whether standard (i.e. relating to the key interest rates) or non-standard, have achieved several objectives. • They have supported demand for goods and services in the euro area. As the ECB’s President recently stated[4], our models show that half of the recovery in the euro area (as a percentage of GDP) in the past two years is attributable to our monetary policy and half is mainly the result of lower oil prices. • Our monetary policy has also improved financing conditions and remedied financial fragmentation. As a result of our non-standard measures, credit conditions have improved across the euro area[5]: from May 2014 to January 2016, interest rates on loans declined significantly (by 84 basis points for non-financial corporations and by 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  68 basis points for households). Furthermore, the steepest decline observed was in the most fragile economies of the euro area.[6] • Finally, our decisions have helped maintain trust in the single currency in a context of financial instability and high uncertainty. Indeed, not only has market confidence in the euro remained strong, but public confidence has too: according to Eurobarometer data, trust in the euro is virtually unchanged compared to its pre-crisis level.[7] The measures we announced on 10 March 2016 form a very substantial package which gives priority to loans for households and businesses, and thus supports the recovery. They underline our determination to fulfil the mandate entrusted to us by the people of Europe: to bring inflation back to nearly 2%, and they show that we have no shortage of tools.  But the ECB cannot single-handedly create the conditions for a sustainable recovery in growth. This requires a concerted effort in terms of economic and fiscal policies. While unemployment started to decline in the euro area in January (10.3% compared with 11.9% two years earlier), ambitious reforms are still needed in most of the euro area economies, given the low growth potential and high structural unemployment. The measures to raise productivity and to improve the business environment, including public infrastructure, are essential to increase investment and boost job creation. It’s true that there is limited room for manoeuvre in terms of using fiscal policy to support growth, and the fiscal rules cannot be stretched to the point where they would lose all their credibility. But while some countries have such margins under the Stability and Growth Pact (which they are already partly using to support refugees), all countries can make their tax structures more favourable to growth and redirect public spending towards investment, research and education.[8] Our monetary policy provides a favourable context for these reforms.[9] It is sometimes argued that our monetary policy discourages governments from undertaking the necessary reforms. For one thing, this idea is belied by the facts: were these reforms carried out when interest rates were higher? Also, it fundamentally conflicts with the set-up of the euro area, which gives the ECB a narrow mandate focused on price stability. The ECB’s role is not to police fiscal and structural policies. It’s up to governments to do it with impetus from the Commission.  The progress necessary for Economic and Monetary Union We must also continue working to strengthen Economic and Monetary Union in order to increase its resilience to economic shocks. This is in our economic interest, of course, but it’s also a factor in terms of political stability. Uncertainty, polarisation and political fragmentation increase substantially in the aftermath of financial crises[10]. Such uncertainty is harmful, economically speaking[11], and tends to make crisis resolution more difficult.  The crisis we’ve just gone through is no exception. Across Europe, it led to a decline in confidence in the European institutions. The intergovernmental dimension of European decision-making mechanisms has also led to a polarisation of positions among Member States, stirring up nationalistic impulses and hampering decision-making[12]. Maintaining this approach would prevent the establishment of a common growth strategy and condemn us to a future of low growth and repeated crises. However, significant progress has been made as Member States remain determined to preserve the integrity of the euro. In particular, the euro area has adopted a crisis resolution mechanism (the European Stability Mechanism) and has developed financial, fiscal and economic supervisory tools. It has also created the Single Supervisory Mechanism for banks, which has been entrusted to the ECB, and a resolution mechanism for banking crises supported by a Single Resolution Fund.  However, there is still much work to be done to tackle the vulnerabilities that persist in certain Member States. The country-specific recommendations, which each year identify the key objectives to tackle these vulnerabilities, are hardly or not at all acted upon.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  The time has come to initiate a new economic convergence process, thus relaunching the convergence efforts that each euro area country agreed to prior to adopting the single currency[13]. After its adoption, these efforts dwindled and, before the crisis, we saw a divergence in terms of inflation levels, unit labour costs, current account balances and levels of GDP per capita[14]. The abrupt adjustment necessitated by the crisis showed the economic and social cost of this divergence.  Political convergence is a necessary condition for economic convergence[15], as it implies making economic and fiscal policy a shared competence in the same manner as policies relating to the internal market. This is particularly true for France and Germany, whose cooperation is a driving force. The idea isn’t to always move towards harmonisation, but rather to give ourselves the option to adopt common solutions where it makes sense to do so – a common framework to manage insolvent businesses and households could, for example, facilitate the resolution of non-performing loans and contribute to the development of cross-border investment.  Relaunching the economic convergence process is also essential if we eventually want to set up a fiscal tool to absorb shocks at the euro area level, without creating the risk of permanent, one-way transfers, which are not part of the euro area’s initial “contract”. As I said elsewhere, this is about establishing a new European social contract, which can only be designed under John Rawls’ “veil of ignorance”[16]. The private sector component of risk-sharing is also extremely important – in the United States, the capital and credit markets act as a buffer for around two-thirds of economic shocks[17]; flexible economies and the free movement of goods, services and workers are necessary conditions for the smooth functioning of the monetary union. Again, however, risk-sharing must be accompanied by a common framework that avoids excessive risk concentration. This is the essence of the ongoing debates concerning the European deposit guarantee scheme and the Capital Markets Union. This economic convergence process could include a timeline and clearly defined milestones, and would ultimately bring about deeper integration in the fiscal sphere and the creation of shared fiscal tools. The management of these tools, including the European Stability Mechanism, could be entrusted to a euro area treasury that is accountable to the European Parliament. Defining its mandate and its tools is a political issue that presupposes a democratic debate[18]. Ladies and gentlemen, The progress of European integration has increased interdependence between Member States. But we still haven’t drawn all the necessary conclusions and European politicians still don’t have the tools that would allow them to respond to the expectations placed on them. This shortcoming feeds popular frustration with European policies, sometimes to the point that they question European integration itself. There is nothing inevitable about the status quo, but, to move forward, we need to redefine a common project. It will take many years to implement this project. It is all the more urgent to start defining it. Thank you for your attention.  [1] Carvalho, C. and Nechio, F. (2014), “Do people understand monetary policy?”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 66, 108-123; van der Cruijsen, C., Jansen, D.-J. and de Haan, J. (2015) “How Much Does the Public Know about the ECB’s Monetary Policy? Evidence from a Survey of Dutch Households”, International Journal of Central Banking, 11, 169-218. [2] Ehrmann, M., Soudan, M. and Stracca, L. (2013), “Explaining European Union Citizens’ Trust in the European Central Bank in Normal and Crisis Times”, The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 115, 781–807; Hayo, B. and Neuenkirch, E. (2014), “The German public and its trust in the ECB: The role of knowledge and information search”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 47, 286–303. [3] A more detailed discussion of the measures taken during the crisis can be found in B. Cœuré, “Consolidating the euro area’s economic recovery”, introductory remarks prior to an informal exchange of views with the European Affairs Committee and the Finance Committee of the National Assembly, Paris, 13 May 2015.  
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  [4] Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Monetary Dialogue with Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, 15 February 2016.  [5] See also “Results of the January 2016 euro area bank lending survey”, 19 January 2016.  [6] Between May 2014 and January 2016, the composite rate of bank borrowing for non-financial corporations has fallen by 62 basis points in Germany, 46 in France, 111 in Spain and 130 in Italy. For households, the composite rate of bank borrowing has fallen by 65 basis points in Germany, 77 in France, 98 in Spain and 100 in Italy.  [7] The Standard Eurobarometer 84 survey published in December 2015 indicated that 68% of respondents trusted the euro (26% did not trust it), which is the same level as at the end of 2006. [8] In the euro area, the share of GDP accounted for by public investment fell from 3.2% in 2007 to 2.6% in 2015. The share of the total primary public expenditure accounted for by public investment also fell from 7.6% in 2007 to 5.8% in 2015. [9] Recent empirical research shows that an accommodative monetary policy stance strengthens the positive effects of structural reforms and increased investment in public spending. See Bordon, A.R., Ebeke, C. and K. Shirono, “When Do Structural Reforms Work? On the Role of the Business Cycle and Macroeconomic Policies”, IMF Working Paper, No. 16/62, March 2016, and “Public investment in Europe”, ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2, 2016, forthcoming. [10] Funke, M., M. Schularick and C. Trebesch (2015) “Going to extremes: Politics after financial crises, 1870–2014”, CEPR, Discussion Paper No. 10884. [11] Baker, S.R., Bloom, N. and S. J. Davis (2015), “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty”, NBER Working Paper No. 21633. [12] See B. Cœuré, “Drawing lessons from the crisis for the future of the euro area”, speech at “Ambassadors Week”, Paris, 27 August 2015. [13] “Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union”, report by J.-C. Juncker, in close cooperation with D. Tusk, J. Dijsselbloem, M. Draghi and M. Schulz, 22 June 2015. [14] Real convergence in the euro area: evidence, theory and policy implications, ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 5, 2015; Auf dem Brinke, A., Enderlein, H, and J. Fritz-Vannahme (2015), “What kind of convergence does the euro area need?”, Gütersloh: Bertelsmann Stiftung and Jacques Delors Institut – Berlin. [15] See B. Cœuré, “Towards a political convergence process in the euro area”, speech at the Interparliamentary Conference “Towards a Progressive Europe”, Berlin, 16 October 2015. [16] See B. Cœuré, “Drawing lessons from the crisis for the future of the euro area”, speech at “Ambassadors Week”, Paris, 27 August 2015. [17] Asdrubali, P., Sørensen, B. E. and Yosha, O., “Channels of interstate risk sharing: United States 1963–1990”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(4), 1996. [18] See B. Cœuré, “Time for a new Lamfalussy moment”, speech in Budapest, 1 February 2016. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  William C Dudley: Supervising large, complex financial institutions –defining objectives and measuring effectiveness Opening remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Conference on “Supervising Large, Complex Financial Institutions: Defining Objectives and Measuring Effectiveness”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 18 March 2016. *      *      * Welcome. It is great to see all of you here today to discuss the objectives and measurement of supervision for large, complex financial institutions. Nearly eight years have passed since the financial crisis hit, pushing the financial system and the U.S. economy to the brink, and leaving scars that are still evident today. The hardships of the financial crisis are unfortunately still open wounds for too many people, especially those who lost their jobs, homes or businesses, or those who struggled with the sharp fall in value of their homes and with staying current on their debts and bills. Understanding what went wrong and how to avoid severe financial crises in the future is, I am sure, an issue foremost in the minds of all the distinguished speakers here today, and I am no exception. Before continuing, let me indicate that what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.1  A central part of the financial crisis was the failure or near-failure of many large financial institutions – both institutions that were supervised by the Federal Reserve and many that were not – which constrained their ability to play their crucial role in supplying credit and financial services to businesses and consumers. In the wake of the crisis, considerable attention has been devoted to the role that supervisors – including those here at the New York Fed – played in this meltdown. But much of this discussion has taken place without a broad understanding of what supervisors actually do – the scope, breadth, and limits of their activities and authorities. Within the official sector, we make a distinction between regulation – the rules governing what financial institutions must and must not do, and supervision – which involves monitoring, oversight and enforcing compliance with law, regulation and supervisory expectations for firms’ governance, internal processes and controls, and financial condition. This distinction between regulation and supervision is often not well-understood, and thus their complementary roles are not always fully appreciated. Addressing this distinction, as we see it, is one important motivation for this conference. Through the papers presented today and the discussions by noted academic researchers, policymakers and senior supervisors from the U.S. and overseas, we hope to broaden the understanding of the role and objectives of supervision. The goal is to spur conversation and new research on what supervision should be trying to achieve and the best means for achieving those ends. Just as important, we want to generate ideas for how to better assess the effectiveness of supervisory activities. In a world of limited resources, how do we deploy our people and technology in the most effective way to limit disruption and distress at individual firms and to the financial system, while still fostering an efficient and innovative financial system? In considering these questions, a good starting point is to understand more fully what supervisors do and how they do it in the current environment. The papers that are being presented here today are largely aimed at achieving this goal. As described in the first paper – “Supervising Large, Complex Financial Institutions: What do Supervisors Do?” – bank supervision has long been an integral component of the Federal Reserve’s                                                 1  Beverly Hirtle, David Lucca and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  responsibilities. At a broad level, Federal Reserve supervision of large financial institutions is guided by two key objectives: “enhancing the resiliency of a firm to lower the probability of its failure or inability to serve as a financial intermediary [and] reducing the impact on the financial system and the broader economy in the event of a firm’s failure or material weakness.”2 In addressing these objectives, bank supervisors enforce laws and regulations, but there is much more to supervision than just enforcement. The activities and practices at large, complex financial organizations are simply too intricate and evolve too quickly to be fully described ex ante in regulation. Banking supervision works in concert with regulation as the more flexible element of banking policy. Supervisory policy and standards can, and do, evolve over time to reflect the evolution in practice in the banking industry and in financial markets. Overall, supervisors are guided by the mandate to identify any practices or conditions at supervised firms that are a threat to the safety and soundness of those firms – and, of course, to ensure that the firms take all necessary steps to promptly remediate any such conditions. Critically, the definition of what constitutes “safe and sound” is not hard-coded into regulation, but is guided by the information and analysis done by supervisors and other Federal Reserve staff, such as economists, attorneys and market analysts. Supervisory expectations and standards are expressed through public guidance such as Supervision and Regulation Letters (SR Letters), publicly-posted examination manuals and other guidance. On a day-to-day basis, banking supervisors collect information on financial institutions through examinations and analysis. Examiners look at key aspects of a supervised firm’s businesses and risk management functions. They use this information to assess the adequacy of the firm’s systems and processes for identifying, measuring, monitoring and controlling risks at the firm and in the financial sector more generally. That said, the ultimate responsibility for risk identification and risk management remains with the supervised institution. The Federal Reserve’s role is to ensure that the institution has the necessary strong processes in place to achieve this objective. As risks emerge, supervisors intervene, within the realms of their safety and soundness mandates, to require that banks take corrective actions as necessary. Supervision can reduce the chance that a financial firm fails, but it can never provide a guarantee against failure. Supervisory policies have undergone important changes over the past few years, especially in the context of the largest financial institutions. Banking supervision no longer focuses solely on the safety and soundness of individual institutions – so-called micro-prudential supervision – but now also focuses on the implications for financial stability more generally. The evolving supervisory framework has resulted in a number of organizational changes in the way supervision is conducted at the New York Fed and in the Federal Reserve System more broadly. A very important change in the Federal Reserve System is that supervision of the largest, most systemically important financial institutions are now coordinated across districts through the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC). The LISCC is a System-wide committee, chaired by the director of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve’s Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, and composed of senior officers at the Board and Reserve Banks. In addition, the Federal Reserve has instituted three major horizontal evaluations, which are a key element of the new enhanced supervisory framework for large banking companies. These horizontal evaluations, which focus on capital adequacy, liquidity resiliency and preparedness for recovery and resolution, examine practices and conditions across a group of firms simultaneously, enabling supervisors to develop peer perspectives about best practices and approaches. These programs involve a consistent and systematic assessment                                                 2  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. “Consolidated Supervision Framework for Large Financial Institutions.” Supervision and Regulation Letter 12–17. December 17, 2012. http://www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/srletters/sr1217.htm. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  of the financial strength and operational resiliency of the largest and most complex financial institutions, addressing both micro-prudential safety-and-soundness supervisory goals and broader macro-prudential financial stability objectives. Specifically, in the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), which applies to firms with at least $50 billion in total assets, Federal Reserve supervisors assess whether bank holding companies have sufficient capital to continue operations through times of economic and financial stress, and whether they have robust, forward-looking capital-planning processes that take into account whatever unique risks they might face. By including forward-looking elements, the CCAR complements the enhanced Basel capital requirements now being implemented in the United States. In addition, the Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review (CLAR), which applies to LISCC firms, reviews the liquidity positions and liquidity risk management of large, complex banking organizations, including internal stress-testing practices. Finally, the Federal Reserve does an annual evaluation of the LISCC firms’ options to support recovery and progress in removing impediments to orderly resolution in the Supervisory Assessment of Recovery and Resolution Preparedness (SRP). While these evaluations form the core of the supervisory program for large, complex banking companies, they are far from the only important activities pursued by supervisors. Day-to-day oversight of individual firms is a critical complement to these cross-firm, horizontal evaluations. There are three key channels that generate insight on firms: 1) continuous monitoring through meetings with bank senior management, business line management, risk managers, auditors and others; 2) review and analysis of internal reports; and 3) independent analysis by supervisory teams. These insights guide supervisory assessments and supervisory actions for individual institutions, as well as contributing to the assessments made as part of CCAR, CLAR and other horizontal exercises. We have come a long way since the financial crisis, and the financial sector today is much more resilient as a result of the evolving supervisory framework. However, more work still lies ahead. A key challenge in assessing the effectiveness of supervision is that much of what supervisors do, by necessity, is confidential. This reliance on confidential information and confidential actions can make supervision seem mysterious to outsiders, which complicates the evaluation of what policies may be effective or ineffective. For example, if a bank fails, is this evidence of poor supervision, or instead evidence that even good supervision can’t prevent all bank failures? Improving our ability to do this diagnosis is critical. I am confident that today’s panels and paper discussions will help us move forward in this direction. Thank you for participating in this conference.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Peter Praet: Interview in La Repubblica Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in La Repubblica, conducted by Mr Ferdinando Giugliano and Ms Tonia Mastrobuoni on 15 March 2016 and published on 18 March 2016. *      *      * Can you explain why you took such a big package of measures last Thursday? You have to put these decisions in the context of heightened risks to our price stability objective. External shocks, mainly originating from emerging markets, high market volatility and the crucial need to avoid second-round effects warranted a strong and comprehensive package to counteract these adverse forces. We don’t have a gloomy assessment of the economy, domestic conditions have improved, financial conditions have clearly improved. But it is still very fragile, and external shocks can easily trigger a vicious circle, with further downward pressure on inflation. We wanted to ensure that this did not happen, in line with our mandate. It was decided by the vast majority in the Governing Council, that we had to act very forcefully to ensure an even more accommodative monetary policy stance. What can be said about the composition of the measures? We discussed the pros and cons of the different measures. On the negative deposit rate: it is clear that it served us very well in the past, it has been quite efficient in easing financial conditions, including the exchange rate, as a natural by-product of differences in the monetary policy stance in the major currency areas. As we proceeded on the path of negative interest rates on our deposit facility, it was also clear we had to look at the impact on the profitability of the banks. Banks are very important for the monetary transmission mechanism, so you have to look at what is the impact of the package on the banking sector. Against this background, we decided in favour of a package which still made use of changes in the ECB interest rates but increased the weight of measures aimed at credit easing. Since the markets had already anticipated three cuts in the deposit rate this year many money markets traders had to turn their positions. However, with a little bit more time to scrutinize and digest the complex package, markets and analysts finally tuned again. Were you surprised by the strength of the market reaction? I expected that the short end was going to be repriced but that the rest of the package would dominate. Looking through some volatility, what we have got at the end makes sense from an economic point of view. Basically, we had a substantial impact on credit markets, which is good as financial conditions were worsening and credit spreads were going up. What dominated was very much the TLTRO and the broadening to corporate bonds of the asset purchases. In terms of other asset prices, I believe markets are very conscious already that the monetary policy courses of the major world currency areas remain quite on different trajectories as they reflect fundamentally different domestic underlying conditions. As we have said few times in the past, the fact that there are significant and increasing differences in the monetary policy cycle between major advanced economies will become ever more evident in the near future. But do you think the market is right to believe there will not be more cuts? In the Introductory Statement we said very clearly that we “expect the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases. So you haven’t reached the lower bound? 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  No, we haven’t. As other central banks have demonstrated, we have not reached the physical lower bound. This re-composition of the tool-box does not mean that we have thrown away any of our tools. If new negative shocks should worsen the outlook or if financing conditions should not adjust in the direction and to the extent that is necessary to boost the economy and inflation, a rate reduction remains in our armoury. On corporate bonds purchases: would this instrument be accessible for companies like, let’s say, Volkswagen? Yes, as long as they have investment grade. You have corporate bonds in other sectors too, such as utilities, insurance, telecommunications, energy. Don’t you think you are entering the dangerous territory of choosing who to distribute money to? For example, you may end up favoring larger companies. Normally what you do is that you give liquidity to the bank in exchange of collateral. Here, you take a direct exposure. The other point is, you want to avoid influencing relative prices. We asked the committees to work on the specific definition of the bonds we will buy. We could buy something that is close to the index, but excluding banks, so that we avoid price distortions in the corporate bond market. The important point is that if the price goes up because you are buying non-financial corporations, there will be search for other bonds by the markets participants so they will rebalance the portfolio with other bonds that are not in our portfolio. So the initial effect of our purchases will spread further and the market can still function. Can we put it like this: in countries like Germany and France with big companies with high ratings, you are helping with corporate bond purchases, and in countries like Spain or Italy, with less access to this type of measure, you will help via the TLTRO? It is true that in some jurisdictions you do not have many corporate bonds. But as I just said: the initial effect of our purchases will spread to other assets and other markets. So there will be a reinvestment of the liquidity. Those having sold corporate bonds will rebalance by buying other things. Some people will question the need for such a measure. They are right in saying that the situation is not dramatic, but I would stress that it is still fragile. Yes, we can see that the situation is improving, as, for example, unemployment is coming down. But we have not reached the “escape velocity” yet where the rocket is not bound by gravity anymore. On the TLTRO, some say it is not going to make much difference, because the problem is the demand, not the supply of credit. As shown by our Bank Lending Survey, credit demand is picking up and you also see from actual bank credit growth that the numbers are improving. So we now give a push for these developments to proceed and maybe to accelerate. Do not overlook the following: In the last tranches of the TLTRO I you could borrow for less and less time, as the loans had all the same maturity, that is September 2018, in an environment where the rates were falling. This time it’s different: in one year you can still borrow for four years at the conditions prevailing at that time. And, banks can benefit from a negative rate as low as our deposit facility rate if they meet the thresholds for credit growth. All this is quite bold. It will certainly facilitate cheaper funding of banks by replacing more expensive funding instruments by our TLTRO II. Don’t you think that the discussion in Germany about how harmful the accommodative stance of the ECB is lacks some analysis on some wrong business models, for example the one of the Sparkassen? What we experience in the banking sector is difficult and we have to be very attentive to that, but it is also true that the banks have to rethink their activities fundamentally. I mention here digitalization, which is a very big challenge for the banks. It has the potential to change the business model fundamentally. The interest rate is not a favourable factor, but it is one of the factors. And as long as you have a positive impact on the economy from negative rates, you have better growth, fewer NPLs, so we have seen positive factors for banks. The problem for 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  banks is not 2016, it is the medium term, if the situation becomes persistent and the business model is not adjusted, then profitability becomes a major issue. The staff projections don’t include the impact of the new measures. What will be the impact on inflation and growth of the package? The measures we took should bring us close to the 2 per cent target at the end of 2018. But don’t forget, the measures we take like the APP are supposed to remain in place as long as inflation has not reached a sustainable adjustment in the path of inflation. It must be sustainable. We are not yet there. In the forward guidance we said: we expect the interest rates to be low or lower for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases, which currently have an horizon to at least March 2017. Can I ask you about what’s left in the toolbox? Could we see “helicopter drops”? There has been a lot of skepticism recently about monetary policy, not only in delivering but in saying “your toolbox is empty”. We say, “no it’s not true”. There are many things you can do. The question is what is appropriate, and at what time. I think for the time being we have what we have, and it is not appropriate to discuss the next set of measures. But in principle the ECB could print cheques and send them to people? Yes, all central banks can do it. You can issue currency and you distribute it to people. That’s helicopter money. Helicopter money is giving to the people part of the net present value of your future seigniorage, the profit you make on the future banknotes. The question is, if and when is it opportune to make recourse to that sort of instrument which is really an extreme sort of instrument. There are other things you can theoretically do. There are several examples in the literature. So when we say we haven’t reached the limit of the toolbox, I think that’s true. In Germany, the biggest economy in Europe, there is a very distortive discussion about the ECB. Aren’t you worried that this discussion is very dangerous to maintain trust within the eurozone? I think the responsibilities for the problems we have are collective. I think everyone has to look from the point of view of the other. Don’t forget, a lot of excess German savings went to Spain, to the Spanish banking system. I don’t deny that the problem in creditor countries gets worse in some respects the lower we cut the deposit rate. It is true we are looking at this, and it is true that when we decided some recomposition of our toolbox, we took that into account. But, fundamentally, the issue is not so much the negative rates, the main issue is mistrust in the willingness of the more indebted countries to really seize this opportunity to forcefully address the problems. This is much more what drives the German view. Italy is often accused of not doing enough to solve its structural problems. What are the changes that could really unlock growth in Italy? The real question is “what drives prosperity?” I think prosperity is linked to education, productivity, the rule of law, property rights and all these things, certainly not monetary policy. In Italy productivity really started to stop growing in the early 1990s. I think this is a fundamental reflection for the country. Some key questions like the efficiency of the judicial system, the labour market reforms, liberalizations in services, have in all or in part been tackled. But I think the agenda remains unfortunately significant. To give you just a few examples, I have been worried by the insufficient spreading of ICT technology. Business investment is recovering everywhere, because demand is recovering so investment is following, but one of the weaker investment performances is in Italy. I think the minister of finance and the government are well aware of what the priorities are, of what needs to be done. One thing you haven’t mentioned is fiscal policy. In Rome one often hears the argument that Italy should be allowed to expand fiscal policy more to really help the 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  recovery. One also hears that the European fiscal rules are not fit for purpose. How do you respond to that? Experience tells that there is always a reason to postpone fiscal savings and that fiscal policy is often procyclical. So the only appropriate response to these experiences is having suitable fiscal rules and following them over the full cycle. Yes, there is the risk of doing the wrong things. For example, in 2011, not necessarily mentioning Italy but focusing on the European level, consolidation was necessary. However, the composition could have been more growth friendly. Instead of raising taxes, spending could have been cut, and instead of cutting investment in infrastructure, government consumption growth could have been reduced. And particularly in the current juncture, investment should not be penalized but encouraged in countries like Italy. Fiscal consolidation is always a lot about composition, about timing. Successful consolidation could involve pension reforms, which spread consolidation through the years. In this respect, in the past Italy went a long way to improve fiscal sustainability through its pension reform. I know in Italy there is a discussion over a coordinated tax reduction. What I see is that fiscal policy was slightly expansionary last year and will be this year. Well-designed structural reform packages, which entail short-term costs and have a clear impact on growth potential, are taken into account by the Commission and they may affect temporarily the adjustment toward the achievement of fiscal objectives. But of course the lower fiscal adjustment has to be commensurate to the beneficial impact of reforms on the growth potential and the sustainability of public finances. Do you think there should be a haircut on Greek debt? If you look at the wealth improvement of Greece in terms of disposable income, before the crisis it was spectacular and then it went the other way very quickly. So it was basically on shaky grounds, a large current account deficit, it borrowed money, so at some point it corrected. All this makes you very cautious to say we just do this or that and support the recovery in the absence of a very convincing programme of reforms. Greece was the extreme case, the demonstration that the monetary union was unprepared to deal with a financial cycle correction, especially in some countries. Fortunately, new institutions have been put in place, such as the European Stability Mechanism, the Single Supervisory Mechanism, the Single Resolution Mechanism. But we are not there yet, the banking union is not a real banking union yet. Who is stopping the third pillar of the banking union? It is always the same problem. All will accept it, if they can trust the other members of this mutualized system to address what they think are risks. Do you accept the argument that one needs to find ways to limit risks in the banking sector? Yes, but the question is how you define that. That’s where the differences are. The single deposit guarantee has rarely been called and only for very small institutions. There is plenty of bail-inable assets before you reach small deposits. This deposit guarantee for me is something which distracts. We should do it. We could take the risk of having this guarantee. A common deposit insurance would help, but it’s more important to allow a European bank to be able to operate in the euro area as a single entity. Even this small deposit guarantee scheme is a big political problem for Germany. I think personally you should announce an objective and a roadmap. We have a roadmap for the deposit guarantee scheme, but it is very far away. We have to spell out on paper what we consider as required conditions before you can mutualise in, for example, 5 years. That would create a new environment for banking. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  But the Germans have a roadmap: they say government bonds must not be risk-free and that they want a common bankruptcy law. These are very difficult conditions. As for sovereign debt, we have learnt from the crisis that it is not risk-free, that is clear. On the other hand, sovereign debt plays an important role in our economy, in the financial sector. So one needs a very thorough reflection on this. That’s why the sustainability of public finances is key. That’s why one can’t just say “let’s lower taxes and the economy will follow and we will self-finance the tax cut”. I think one needs to be careful as sovereign debt is a key pillar of our financial system. A final question on Brexit. Do you have any contingency plans in place at the ECB? Brexit is part of this tendency for some to say that independent nations can do it better than collective solutions. I am confident that the voters will understand that national solutions are worse, that we have to reinforce Europe and not the opposite. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Haruhiko Kuroda: Innovations in payments and FinTech – the central bank’s perspective Remarks by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Forum on Payment and Settlement Systems, Tokyo, 17 March 2016. *      *      * Introduction  It is a great pleasure to welcome you all today to our Forum on Payment and Settlement Systems.  I.  Innovations in payments and FinTech  Recent years have seen a number of developments in financial services, including in the area of payments. Innovations that combine finance and new technology, called “FinTech,” have become a particular focus of attention.  It is clear that there are both supply-side and demand-side factors behind such developments.  On the supply side, the advance in technological innovations related to information and communications is progressing. The processing power of computers continues to grow rapidly, and computers can analyze huge amounts of data – that is, “big data” – in a relatively short period of time.  There has also been a rapid spread of forms of infrastructure such as the internet and mobile terminals, which are easily accessible to a wide range of people. In other countries – particularly in emerging or developing nations where existing financial services provided by banks have not penetrated sufficiently – new services such as mobile payments are generating large expectations in terms of “financial inclusion” – or the promotion of access to financial services.  On the demand side, globalization of the economy continues to progress, and more and more transactions are being made across borders as well as time zones. New forms of economic activities have arisen both here and abroad – such as “e-commerce” and the “sharing economy” – while lifestyles have diversified. Reflecting such developments, the needs for financial services are growing increasingly diverse and complex. For example, there is an emerging need for payment methods that are compatible with internet shopping on weekends or at midnight as well as low-value cross-border remittances. There is also a growing need to use forms of information associated with payments by utilizing loyalty cards.  As I just pointed out, we can judge that there are factors on both the supply and demand sides which are affecting developments in FinTech. If we consider that the financial business has strong characteristics as an “information industry,” then it is not surprising that developments in information technology have a large influence, especially in finance. For example, credit, investment, and risk management are based on the accumulation of a great deal of information and analysis in which new technology has a large role to play. In these financial services, particularly in payments, the transmission of information has significant importance. Thus, it is natural that recent developments in information technology are generating a number of innovations and services in the area of payments.  II.  Benefiting from the merits of innovation  Innovations in financial services have the potential to improve efficiency and enhance access to financial services. They also bring a wide range of benefits to the economy as a whole.  
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  This happens in several ways. First, expansion of the frontier for financial services enlarges the possibilities for new economic activities. For example, if people who lack access to financial services become able to use mobile payments, potential customer base for many businesses will expand and new businesses targeting these people might arise more easily. Moreover, if payment methods are fast, inexpensive, and have ubiquity, this will expand the frontier of businesses that use them – for example, businesses that provide e-commerce, music, or software by precisely taking into account customer needs.  Second, new technologies arising from financial innovations will possibly be applied to other means. For example, distributed ledgers – a technology underpinning digital currencies – are receiving considerable attention as a way to secure the accuracy of ledgers through verification by their users, without relying on trusted third parties (that is, central operators such as government and central banks). And distributed ledgers are now under consideration for application to the recording of transfers of financial assets such as stocks as well as to the management of registry books for land and houses.  To sum up, innovations in finance including payments that are backed by innovations in information technology have the potential to boost economic welfare and revitalize economic activities through interaction with a range of businesses. Now, I would like to emphasize three points that I consider important in maximizing the benefits of these innovations and leading to further development of the economy.  The first point is public’s great sensitivity to innovations in information technology and financial requirements. At present, information technology is developing rapidly and new types of businesses are emerging one after the other. Accordingly, those involved in providing financial services – including financial institutions – are increasingly expected to pay close attention to changes in public’s requirements and development of technologies that can be applied, and to be sufficiently aggressive and flexible about using the new technology to provide concrete financial services.  The second point is the importance of communication with many entities across business categories. To expand financial services by capturing diversifying needs and adapting new technologies, it is useful to form new networks composed of entities such as financial institutions and high-tech and venture companies that enjoy advantages in information technology and data usage. It is also important to ensure communication, cooperation, and sound competition among these entities.  The third point is acquiring public’s trust regarding financial infrastructure. Financial services using the internet and mobile terminal are spreading, but new types of threats to the financial infrastructure – such as hacking and cyber attacks – are gaining prominence. If concerns spread that countermeasures against these threats are insufficient, this might lead to doubts about the innovative financial services themselves. Therefore, providers of new financial services should prepare sufficiently against new risks and threats. In this regard, it will be important to draw on technologies that help to enhance security such as encryption techniques and biometric authentication.  III.  The central bank and Innovations in payments  Lastly, I would like to talk about the Bank of Japan’s involvement in payment and settlement systems and our perspective on innovations in payments.  The Bank issues banknotes, which are the most familiar type of payment instrument. We also operate the Bank of Japan Financial Network System, or BOJ-NET, which enables the settlement of large-value funds and Japanese government bonds among financial institutions. Considering the fact that all funds are ultimately settled using central bank money – that is, cash or the central bank’s current account deposits – the settlement infrastructure provided by the Bank serves as the essential infrastructure of the Japanese economy.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  It is also crucial for the central bank to maintain stability and improve the efficiency of the payment and settlement systems, including those provided by the private sector. In this regard, the Bank – through oversight of private-sector payment and settlement systems – monitors, communicates and, when necessary, encourages these systems to achieve stability and improve their functionality.  Concurrently, the Bank has been enhancing its BOJ-NET. In Oct 2015, the new BOJ-NET was fully launched. It is a highly flexible system that uses the latest information technology and offers enhanced accessibility, and thus it provides a powerful base for the development of innovations in payment and settlements and the provision of new financial services. Furthermore, in February 2016, the BOJ-NET extended its operating hours to 9 p.m. (Japan Standard Time) to achieve an overlap with almost all Asian markets during the day and with European markets until about noon.  In addition, by taking part in a number of forums that discuss issues related to payment and settlement systems – including the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures of the Bank for International Settlements – the Bank actively participates in international discussions on innovations in payments and payment and settlement systems.  From the standpoint of a central bank, the Bank is monitoring closely and with great interest the developments in innovations in payments and payment and settlement systems, from a range of perspectives. These include the safety of payments, the efficiency of payment services and the convenience to users, stability of the financial system, and the influence on finance intermediation and the economy.  To make the innovations in payments that are taking place due to innovations in information technology truly useful for the users of financial services and the economy, it is important to develop a network and win-win relationships with a wide range of entities beyond the traditional financial industry. The Bank, as the nation’s central bank, is firmly committed to being a catalyst in fostering such developments. Moreover, I am pleased to announce that the Bank will soon establish a “FinTech Center” in its Payment and Settlement Systems Department. We aim to reinforce our efforts in which the new wave of FinTech will contribute to enhancing financial services and achieving sustainable growth of Japan’s economy.  I would like to close my remarks now by wishing that today’s Forum on Payment and Settlement Systems will generate new knowledge and perspectives, and that the stimulating discussions here will lead to further development of the financial markets and the vitalization of economic activities.  Thank you for your attention. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Raghuram Rajan: India in the global economy Text of the First Ramnath Goenka Memorial Lecture by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, New Delhi, 12 March 2016. *      *      * I thank Dr. Prachi Mishra and her team for assistance. Thank you for inviting me to deliver the first Ramnath Goenka lecture. As you know, Shri Goenka was a freedom fighter, who built the Indian Express into a national newspaper. In his time, it was arguably the best investigative newspaper in the country. He was instrumental in highlighting the excesses of the Emergency, which probably contributed to Indira Gandhi’s defeat when she lifted it. He continued to be a tireless scourge of corruption and government high-handedness, and was responsible for unsettling many a minister and business tycoon. It would be fitting in a lecture in his memory to speak about the efforts we are making in India today on increasing transparency and curbing corruption. However, I have said what I needed to on that elsewhere. Instead, I will speak today on India’s engagement with the global economy, and how best to manage it in these turbulent times The global economy is finding it hard to restore pre-Great Recession growth rates – every report of the IMF seemingly downgrades its previous growth forecasts. Why has the recovery been so slow? The immediate answer is that the financial boom preceding the Great Recession left industrial countries with an overhang of debt, and debt, whether on governments, households, or banks, is holding back growth. While the remedy may be to write down debt so as to revive demand from the indebted, it is debatable whether additional debt fueled demand is sustainable. At any rate, large-scale debt write-offs seem politically difficult even if they are economically warranted. But perhaps the debt overhang points to a deeper cause; the debt-fueled demand before the Great Recession, which has led to the debt overhang now, hid a fall in global potential growth, perhaps because of the difficult-to-understand consequences of population ageing across the industrial world, and the slowdown in productivity growth. Structural reforms, typically ones that increase competition, foster innovation, and drive institutional change, are the way to raise potential growth. But these hurt protected constituencies that have become accustomed to the rents they get from the status quo. Moreover, the gains to constituencies that are benefited are typically later and uncertain. No wonder Jean-Claude Juncker, the former Luxembourg Prime Minister, said at the height of the Euro crisis, “We all know what to do, we just don’t know how to get re-elected after we’ve done it!” Instead, industrial countries are engaged in ever more aggressive monetary policy moves. This imposes tremendous risks on emerging markets like ours, as we are faced with surges of capital inflows one day when investors go into “risk-on” mode only to see outflows the next as they switch risk off. At the same time, overcapacity in competitor countries threatens some of our key industries. What should India do? What should India do in this environment where the international investor is manic depressive in his behavior and all countries are striving for extra growth? Importantly, when global growth is uncertain, we should make sure that our domestic environment promotes strong, sustainable, and stable growth. This requires a firm platform of macroeconomic stability. Let me elaborate. The recent central budget emphasized fiscal prudence and adhered to past commitments, even while allocating resources towards capital spending and focusing on structural reforms, 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  especially in agriculture. The subsequent fall in government bond yields suggests that market investors were calmed by the Government’s overall message. Fiscal consolidation, combined with lower commodity prices, has also led to a lower current account deficit. Inflation is also clearly down since the days of double-digit CPI inflation not so long ago. The RBI’s inflation-focused monetary framework will be strengthened by the constitution of the monetary policy committee mooted in the Finance Bill. While the RBI Governor will no longer be able to set monetary policy unilaterally, I believe shifting the decision to a committee is in the economy’s interest. Not only will a committee aggregate multiple views better than an individual can, it will offer more continuity, and be less subject to undue pressure. I believe the monetary reforms of this Government will stand out as one of its signal achievements. The last leg of the stabilization agenda is to clean up the stressed assets in the banking sector so that banks have the room to lend again. The problem in the past was that banks simply did not have enough powers to force promoters to pay, or to put stressed assets back on track. Unlike more developed countries, we do not have a functioning bankruptcy system, though a bill is currently before Parliament. Therefore, we first had to create an effective out-of-court resolution system. Having done that, we are now working with banks to recognize and resolve stressed assets, even while getting them to raise capital where necessary. Our intent is to have clean and fully provisioned bank balance sheets by March 2017. Perhaps the hardest aspect of this stabilization agenda has been to persuade the economics commentariat of the need for macroeconomic stability when growth is below expectations. The constant call of the economic sirens, seeking to lure the economy onto the shoals of economic distress, is “Lord, give us stability, but not just yet!” Growth is always more important, no matter how the risks build up. Usually, the sirens call on you to not be doctrinaire (after all, only academic economists care about fiscal deficits), to be practical (does it really matter if an NPA is recognized a quarter or three later), and to appreciate Indian realities (everyone may say they hate inflation but no one really wants to bear the pain of the disinflationary process). I believe we are in the process of proving the sirens wrong. Given the inhospitable world economy and two successive droughts in India, either of which would have thrown the economy into a tail spin in the past, our focus on macroeconomic stabilization must be part of the explanation why we have over 7 percent growth, low inflation, and a low current account deficit unlike some of our emerging market counterparts. Now, we have to build on this sound base. What will be particularly important is how we engage with the world economy. I want to talk specifically about trade, the exchange rate, capital flows, and ideas. International trade For the first time in decades, global trade has consistently grown more slowly than global output. There are a number of possible explanations; as countries get richer, non-traded services constitute a greater fraction of GDP, causing GDP to grow faster than trade. Also, with trade-intensive capital goods’ investment muted because of global overcapacity, trade grows more slowly than GDP. Finally, as industrial countries become more competitive, and as China moves up the value chain, more of the inputs going into final products are being sourced from inside a country rather than from outside the country. Some global supply chains are therefore contracting. For all these reasons, the heady days when Indian trade in goods and services were expanding at a double digit pace will probably only be a memory for some time. It is useful to examine recent trade data to see how India compares with rest of the world. Figure 1 suggests the growth of Indian exports of goods and services broadly mirrors that of emerging markets. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3   Source. IMF Balance of Payment Statistics. Emerging markets (EMs) include Brazil, China, Indonesia, Mexico, Russian, South Africa, Thailand, Turkey, and India. The black line shows a simple average of growth rates across these EMs. Most recently, of course, emerging market commodity exporters have been hit by lower prices. Nevertheless, Indian goods exports seem to be doing worse recently than goods exports from emerging markets (see figure 2).  Source. IMF Balance of Payment Statistics. Emerging markets (EMs) include Brazil, China, Indonesia, Mexico, Russian, South Africa, Thailand, Turkey, and India. The black line shows a simple average of growth rates across these EMs. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  At the same time, the growth of Indian service exports seems to be doing somewhat better, perhaps because countries like the United States that we export services to are recovering more strongly. Of course, these differences are over very short periods, so it is probably unwise to draw strong conclusions from them. What one can probably take away is that India is not alone in suffering a fall-off in trade.  Source. IMF Balance of Payment Statistics. Emerging markets (EMs) include Brazil, China, Indonesia, Mexico, Russian, South Africa, Thailand, Turkey, and India. The black line shows a simple average of growth rates across these EMs. However, as Indian trade slows, industry bodies are urging authorities to do something. Of course, if all countries are experiencing slower trade, the remedies may be beyond the control of Indian authorities. While we can examine possible dumping in certain industries, we have to be careful that any remedies that increase prices in the protected industry do not render other domestic industries uncompetitive. It is at these times of slowing trade that our pundits look at the exchange rate and argue it is overvalued. Of course, I have just argued that we are not alone in experiencing a fall in trade, but let us examine the exchange rate. The exchange rate When most people think about the exchange rate, they think of the rupee’s value against the dollar. As Figure 4 indicates, the rupee seems to have weakened by about 6% against the dollar since the beginning of 2015, approximately the time our relative underperformance on goods exports started. This depreciation should have helped our exports, though the effects of depreciation show up only after a lag. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5   But we should note that other currencies have depreciated against the dollar also. So while we have gained an advantage versus US producers, other foreign producers may have become even more competitive because their exchange rate has depreciated more. Economists therefore advise looking at an index of the nominal effective exchange rate, which compares the rupee’s value versus other exchange rates, weighing each by their share in trade.  Sources. RBI and IMF. The indices are normalized to January 2013=100. An increase denotes an appreciation. By this metric in Figure 5, the rupee has remained relatively flat since early 2015. What we have given up against the dollar, we have gained against the Euro or the Real, so overall, in trade-weighted terms, the rupee has been flat. But wait a minute, our economist friends will say. Inflation in India is higher than inflation in most other countries. This affects competitiveness. If a widget cost a dollar to make a year 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  ago in the United States, and ₹63 in India then, the Indian producer would have been competitive with the United States because the dollar was worth ₹63. But if inflation in India is 5% and zero in the United States, it would cost the Indian manufacturer ₹66.2 to make it today. If the rupee stayed at ₹63 to the dollar, the Indian manufacturer would have become uncompetitive today – the US producer would be able to manufacture the widget at a cost equivalent of ₹63 only. In other words, to retain competitiveness, the rupee has to depreciate by the inflation differential vis a vis a trading partner. An index of how competitive we are is called the “real effective exchange rate”. Think of that as the nominal effective exchange rate adjusted for inflation. The higher it is, the less the exchange rate has depreciated to offset inflation, and the more uncompetitive we are.  Sources. RBI and IMF. The indices are normalized to January 2013=100. An increase denotes an appreciation. Figure 6, where I plot the real effective exchange rate, shows the age old truth that interpretation is in the eyes of the beholder. If a columnist wants to blame the exchange rate for our export slowdown, she can look at the index from the low point of September 2013 and argue it has appreciated 20% (based on the IMF measure). Of course, it would be hard to argue that the low point our exchange rate reached in September 2013 represented an equilibrium rate. Moreover, our exports were doing quite well relative to emerging markets for much of that period (see Figure 1).1 Indeed, over the last year when goods exports have slowed, the real effective exchange rate has been rather flat. So someone who wants to absolve the exchange rate of blame will point to the recent period.                                                 1 This is true even if we focus attention on manufacturing exports only. Based on data from the WTO, while manufacturing exports grew at an annual average rate of 6.3% for India during 2013–14, they grew at only 3% on average for emerging markets. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  But there is another reason to absolve the exchange rate of accusations of overvaluation. The real exchange rate is only one measure of competitiveness. Productivity also matters. In a rich country, firms are already at the productivity frontier, so they typically can improve productivity only through innovation. In a poor country, productivity can be improved simply by reducing existing bottlenecks or by moving a little closer to the productivity frontier through the adoption of already-known best practices. Productivity in India, for example, can improve simply if a better road is built from a factory to the rail head, or if the firm manages its inventories better. One reason Indian manufacturing GDP has been growing so fast when firms have been experiencing little increase in final sales is that firms have been focusing on improving productivity. So offsetting any rise in the real exchange rate is any productivity differential we enjoy with respect to the rest of the world. Assuming conservatively that this is about 2 percent a year, much of the real appreciation that economists complain about is offset by productivity differentials. The bottom line is that even though Indian trade has been slowing, the slowdown is similar to what has been happening elsewhere, with a significant portion due to a fall in commodity prices, and a smaller share due to a fall in trade volumes. While goods exports may have suffered a little more over the last year, it is too early to discern a clear pattern, and certainly hard to pin the slow down on the exchange rate.2  The goldilocks rate It is worthwhile to push this discussion a little further though. If the RBI could press a button and get the exchange rate it desired (as some economists imagine is possible) should it aim for a strong rupee or a weak rupee? Non-economists typically advocate a strong rupee – not only does it convey national strength, but you can buy more stuff with your rupee when you go abroad, and imports are cheaper. The non-economist is consumer focused. Of course, it is precisely because domestic tourism and domestic production are disadvantaged relative to tourism abroad and foreign production that many economists prefer a weak rupee. Yet these modern day, producer-focused, mercantilists do not acknowledge that undervaluation is a subsidy to domestic producers paid for by domestic consumers and savers. The domestic consumer pays too high a price for foreign goods, and interest rates have to be kept artificially low so as to reduce the cost of holding the enormous foreign exchange reserves built up through intervention. There are costs over the long run also. A sizeable portion of the investment made in the country based on an artificially low exchange rate will turn out be uncompetitive when the exchange rate normalizes. One might argue that this reflects the experience of Japan in the 1990s and possibly the experience of parts of Chinese industry today. An undervalued exchange rate might have made sense in the past for countries that had weak firms and small domestic markets. India is in a very different position today from the export-led East Asian tigers when they embarked on their growth path. The ideal exchange rate for us is neither strong nor weak, it is just right. Typically, market forces get you to this Goldilocks rate. Yet there are circumstances where rapid capital inflows or outflows can move the rate to a level that is unlikely to be supported by fundamentals. While the RBI would not claim to know precisely what the equilibrium level of the exchange rate is at any given point in time, we intervene to moderate adjustment whenever we believe the movement is extreme, driven by sentiment, and likely to be reversed. Our intent is to prevent overshooting and undue volatility, rather than to stand in the way of the needed adjustment.                                                 2 In fact, if we focus on manufacturing exports which are perhaps less susceptible to high frequency price movements, based on limited data for recent years we find that the magnitude of the slowdown in India over the last few years is comparable or even less than many emerging markets. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Of course, temporary irrationality in the market can overwhelm a central bank. Much like a bank run, a falling currency can prompt further fall as foreign investors attempt to get out before they lose everything. To maintain orderly movement of the rupee versus other currencies, we believe we need three ingredients. First, good policies that ensure macroeconomic stability and convinces investors their money is safe over the medium term. I have already discussed this earlier. Second, we should focus on attracting stable capital flows that will stay for the long run. This means resisting the temptation to open up too much to short-term- as well as foreign currency denominated debt flows in good times, no matter how low an interest rate they charge. In the last few years, we have limited foreign portfolio debt investment in short term rupee debt instruments. It is not that these investors cannot sell long term bonds and leave at a moment’s notice, it is that investors in longer maturity bonds are likely to be a little more stable than investors who want overnight exposure only. At the same time, we have steadily expanded investment limits for foreign investors in government bonds, and will continue doing so. Our new External Commercial Borrowing rules encourage infrastructure projects and other projects that have limited foreign earnings to either issue rupee Masala loans, or to borrow really long term tenors. This limits the risk that they will be required to repay when the exchange rate has moved adversely against them. Finally, the Government has been encouraging foreign investors to “Make in India”. One offshoot of this campaign has been a sizeable rise in foreign direct investment, the most stable sort of investment. With two months left in the year to go, net FDI is already at the second highest level ever, and comfortable higher than the current account deficit.  The bottom line is that our policy towards foreign capital flows is one of steady liberalization, where we try and not be tempted by cheap finance, but draw in the risk-bearing capital we need to finance our growth. We intend foreign investors to get decent returns and we do intend to continuously ease both entry into and exit from the country. Finally, our third line of defence is our foreign exchange reserves. We intervene in the exchange markets to smooth volatility, and typically find ourselves buying dollars at certain times and selling dollars at others in any given year. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  How to increase exports So if the exchange rate is unlikely to be a helpful tool in our quest to increase what we make in India, how should we export more? The answer is simple – improve productivity by building out infrastructure; improve human capital with better schools, colleges, vocational and on-the-job training; simplify business regulation and taxation; and improve access to finance. Fortunately, all this is what the government is focused on. I am often asked, “What industries should we focus on, what should we encourage?” Learning from our past, I would say let us not encourage anything; that might be the surest way of killing it. Instead, let us make sure we create a good business environment that can support any kind of activity, and then let our myriad entrepreneurs figure out what new and interesting businesses they will create. In the 1990s, the IITs that Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru created to supply engineers to the commanding public sector heights of the economy instead supplied managers and programmers to body shops focused on dealing with the Y2K bug. These in turn evolved into our world-beating software giants. While the government did not create the software industry, it was not inconsequential by any means to its emergence and development. Similarly, let us enable business activity but not try and impose too much design on it. Ideas and analysis Before concluding, let me emphasize one additional area of engagement with the world, ideas and analysis. Today, we have a seat at most international tables, many countries want to draw us into bilateral and multilateral treaties. When we were unimportant, we used to rail against the proposals that were inimical to us, knowing it would not make an iota of difference. As we get more power, we need to develop the capability of using it effectively. Today, it is an unfortunate reality that international meets are still dominated by the old powers. But it is less through brute power politics and more through the power of ideas, agenda setting, and organization that they dominate. Agendas in the G-20 are still largely set by elements of the old G-7, and often we find that they have already agreed on their preferred approach. It is only when the big powers disagree that the rest of us have some hope of influencing outcomes. The fault is not in the power structure, it is in us. Unless we amongst the emerging world put forward our agenda, build the intellectual and analytical basis for pushing it, and create coalitions to support it, we will have no chance of moving forward. Encouragingly, the BRICS do discuss policy issues and try and develop common approaches, but we need to do more. We also need to build coalitions with sympathetic industrial countries. In India, we need to build capacity in our think tanks and universities to inform our policy makers on how to approach and shape the international policy agenda. We need to be well prepared when we negotiate bilateral and multilateral treaties, so that we do not wake up too late to the fact that we have given away the house with little in return. With careful analysis, engagement, and coalition building we will be able to influence the global agenda, and will stop being seen as an obstructionist but ultimately powerless country that we may have been in the past. Conclusion Let me conclude. Shri Ramnath Goenka focused on unearthing facts that would help move the public debate forward. All too often, our public debates generate more noise than illumination, and we should learn from the example he set. As we cope with the global slowdown, and as we frame our policies going forward, we need to debate what our policy path will be, based on facts, empirical analysis, and sound arguments. I have laid out a view. I look forward to alternative viewpoints. Thank you for listening to me. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Raghuram Rajan: Towards rules of the monetary game Talk by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the IMF/Government of India Conference on “Advancing Asia: Investing for the Future”, New Delhi, 12 March 2016. *      *      * This talk draws extensively on a paper entitled “Rules of the Monetary Game” with Dr. Prachi Mishra at the Reserve Bank of India. There are few areas of robust growth around the world, with the IMF repeatedly reducing its growth forecasts in recent quarters. This period of slow growth is particularly dangerous because both industrial countries and a number of emerging markets need high growth to quell rising domestic political tensions. Policies that attempt to divert growth from others rather than create new growth, or that create growth while fostering instability elsewhere, are more likely under these circumstances. Even as we create conditions for sustainable growth, we need new rules of the game, enforced impartially by multilateral organizations, to ensure countries adhere to international responsibilities. I propose to sketch how we could do this in this talk. Why is growth weak? Why is the world finding it so hard to restore pre-Great Recession growth rates? The immediate answer is that the financial boom preceding the Great Recession left industrial countries with an overhang of debt, and debt, whether on governments, households, or banks, is holding back growth.1 While the remedy may be to write down debt so as to revive demand from the indebted, it is debatable whether additional debt fueled demand is sustainable. At any rate, large-scale debt write-offs seem politically difficult even if they are economically warranted. But perhaps the debt overhang points to a deeper cause; the debt-fueled demand before the Great Recession, which has led to the debt overhang now, hid a structural slowdown in global potential growth, perhaps because of the difficult-to-understand consequences of population ageing across the industrial world, and the slowdown in productivity growth. Structural reforms, typically ones that increase competition, foster innovation, and drive institutional change, are the way to raise potential growth. But these hurt protected constituencies that have become accustomed to the rents they get from the status quo. Moreover, the gains to constituencies that are benefited are typically later and uncertain. No wonder Jean-Claude Juncker, then Luxembourg’s prime minister, said at the height of the Euro crisis, “We all know what to do, we just don’t know how to get re-elected after we’ve done it!” The growth imperative If indeed fundamentals are such that that the industrial world has, and will, grow slowly for a while before new technologies and new markets come to the rescue, would it be politically easy to settle for slower growth? After all, per capita income is high in industrial countries, and a few years of slow growth would not be devastating at the aggregate level. Why is there so much of a political need for growth in industrial countries? One reason is the need to fulfil government commitments such as debt and social security entitlements. Another reason is that growth is necessary for inter-generational equity,                                                 1 See the interesting evidence in Atif Mian and Amir Sufi, House of Debt (Princeton University Press, New Jersey, 2014) and the cross-country evidence in Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff, This Time is Different (Princeton University Press, New Jersey, 2008). For an illuminating overall view of the global financial crisis and the policy remedies, see Martin Wolf, The Shifts and the Shocks: What We’ve Learned and Have Still to Learn from the Financial Crisis (Penguin USA 2015). 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  especially because the young, who are most benefited from job creation, are the generations that will be working to pay off commitments to older generations. Given the young are also the cohorts that can take to the streets, growth is essential for social harmony. A third reason is that, within country, long periods of below par growth can lead the unemployed to become unemployable. Growth is also extremely important for emerging markets and developing countries, where populations are typically younger, poorer, and social safety nets thinner. With everyone looking for growth, but limited political room for structural reforms and substantial time lags before they pay off, every country is looking for alternatives. The monetary dilemma Industrial country central bankers know that monetary policy cannot substitute for structural reforms and elevate growth potential. They have a different problem from the country’s political authorities, though its roots may be common. Inflation is flirting with the lower limit of their inflation mandate and threatens to stay lower for long. With interest rates already very low, and with pundits constantly reminding them that “inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon” they have to go beyond ordinary monetary policy, or lose credibility and risk violating their domestic mandate. No central banker can claim they are out of tools. For after all, if all else fails, there is the “helicopter drop”, where the central bank prints money and literally sprays it on the streets to create inflation (more prosaically, it sends a check to every citizen, perhaps more to the poor who are more likely to spend). But before it reaches this pass of monetary financing of the fiscal deficit, there are a whole range of unconventional tools ranging from various forms of asset purchases termed “quantitative easing” to negative interest rates. But as central bankers flirt with ever more unconventional policies, it is worth asking if these policies really move the economy towards the desired objective. Monetary policy works through the public’s expectations. If ever more aggressive policy convinces the public that calamity is around the corner, it may tempt large segments to save rather than spend. The effect is magnified if there is a sense that the consequences of today’s policies (distorted asset prices, high government debt, high private debt etc.) will have to be reversed in the future at great cost to the system. Perhaps worse is if the public believes that policies will never change, and takes on leverage and positions in assets commensurate with that. While this may help the central bank achieve its objectives in the short run, the shifts in asset price when policy does inevitably change, with effects exacerbated by enhanced leverage, could create enormous dislocation. While the jury is still out on the effects of unconventional monetary policy on the domestic economy, it seems fair to say that the benefits seem to be diminishing after years of effort, and the costs increasing. Also, if structural impediments are the primary cause of slow growth, one could ask if unconventional monetary policy, by giving the public the impression that something is being done, actually takes the pressure off politicians to undertake the required policy actions – by stating monetary policy is the only game in town, central bankers make it the only game in town. Unfortunately, given their domestic inflation mandate, central bankers cannot but try anything that could work. And this leads to an important consequence of their policies that is neglected, the external spillovers effects. Spillovers from monetary policy All monetary policies have external spillover effects. If a country reduces domestic interest rates, its exchange rate also typically depreciates, helping exports. The key, however, is that under normal circumstances, the “demand creating” effects of lower interest rates on domestic consumption and investment tend to be substantial, and the “demand switching” effects of the lower exchange rate in enhancing external demand for the country’s goods are likely to be 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  relatively small. Indeed, one could argue that the spillovers to the rest of the world could be positive on net, as the enhanced domestic demand draws in substantial imports, offsetting the higher exports. Matters are less clear in the circumstances we find ourselves in today, and with the unconventional policies countries are adopting. For instance, if the interest rate sensitive segments of the economy are constrained by existing debt, lower rates may have little effect on enhancing domestic demand, but continue to have demand switching effects through the exchange rate. Similarly, the unconventional “quantitative easing” policy of buying assets such as long term bonds from domestic players may certainly lower long rates but may not have an effect on domestic investment if aggregate capacity utilization is low. Indeed, as argued earlier, savers may respond to the increased distortion in asset prices by saving more. And if certain domestic institutional investors such as pension funds and insurance companies need long term bonds to meet their future claims, they may respond by buying such bonds in less distorted markets abroad. Such a search for yield will depreciate the exchange rate. The primary effect of this policy on domestic demand may be through the “demand switching” effects of a lower exchange rate rather than through a demand creating channel. Of course, if all countries engage in demand switching policies, we could have a race to the bottom, with no one any better off. Nevertheless, countries may find it hard to get out of such policies because the immediate effect for the country that exits might be a serious appreciation of the exchange rate and a fall in domestic activity. The bottom line is that simply because a policy is called monetary, unconventional or otherwise, it may not be beneficial on net for the world. That all monetary policies have external spillovers does not mean that they are all justified. What matters is the net spillovers. One source of spillovers is through the trade channel, the relative magnitude of demand creating versus demand switching effects. Another source of spillovers is through cross border capital flows, and their effect on financial stability elsewhere. Of course, a country’s international responsibilities in this regard are murky, while the central bank’s domestic mandate is explicit. This leads to a possibly serious asymmetry in responsibility. If the central bank is in danger of falling below the lower bound of its inflation mandate, for example, it is required to adopt all possible policies to get inflation back on target, no matter what their external effect. Indeed, it can even intervene directly in the exchange rate in a sustained and unidirectional way, though internationally this could be seen as an abdication of international responsibility according to the old standards. In the current state of affairs, industrial country central banks find all sorts of ways to justify their policies in international fora, without acknowledging the unmentionable – that the exchange rate may be the primary channel of transmission, and that adverse capital flow spillovers may be sizeable. Of course, central banks consider “spillbacks” to their policies from abroad, but these may be a small fraction of overall spillovers. In what follows, I will examine sensible rules of monetary behavior assuming the domestic mandate does not trump international responsibility. Rules of the game What would be the basis for the new rules? As described elsewhere, the state of theoretical models and empirical work do not allow for clear cut identification of spillovers and their consequences.2 Rather than wait for clear identification, which may be a long while coming, perhaps as a start policies could be broadly rated based on analytical inputs and discussion. To use a driving analogy, polices that are generally seen to have few adverse spillovers, and are even to be encouraged by the global community should be rated Green, policies that                                                 2  See Prachi Mishra and Raghuram Rajan, “Rules of the Monetary Game”, 2016, mimeo. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  should be used temporarily and with care could be rated Orange, and policies that should be avoided at all times could be rated Red. To establish such ratings, the effects of any policy have to be seen over time, rather than at a point in time. In general, policies that are likely to have net adverse outside spillovers over time could be rated red and should be avoided. Such policies obviously include those that have small positive effects in the home country (where the policy action originates) combined with large negative effects in the foreign country (where the spillovers occur). For example, if unconventional monetary policy actions lead to small positive effects on exports to emerging economies (EMs) and a feeble recovery in the source country but large capital outflows and asset price bubbles in the EMs, these policies could be rated Red. Global welfare would decrease with this policy. If a policy has positive effects on both home and foreign countries, and therefore on global welfare, it would definitely be rated Green. Conventional monetary policy would typically fall in this category, as it would raise output in the home economy, and create demand for exports from the foreign economy. A Green rating for such policies would, however, assume that the stage of the financial and credit cycle in the home and foreign economies is such that financial stability risks from low interest rates are likely to be limited. A policy could also be rated Green if it acts as a booster shot and can jump-start a large home economy, but creates temporary negative spillovers for the foreign economy. Even if there are temporary adverse spillovers on foreign countries, the policy, through its effect on home economy growth and demand for foreign goods, can eventually provide offsetting large positive spillovers to the rest of the world. Of course, it is important that the home economy, after receiving the booster shot and picking up growth, not follow policies (such as holding down its exchange rate) that minimize positive spillovers to other countries. A policy rated Red on a static basis could thus be deemed Green based on implicit commitments over time. It is possible to visualize other policies that have large positive effects for the originating country (because of the value of the policy or because of the country’s relative size) and sustained small negative effects for the rest of the world. Global welfare, crudely speaking, may go up with the policy, even though welfare outside the originating country goes down. While it is hard to rate such policies without going into specifics, these may correctly belong in the Orange category – permissible for some time but not on a sustained basis. Even conventional monetary policies to raise growth in the home economy could fall in the Orange category if countries are at a stage of financial cycle where low interest rates lead to significant financial stability risks in the home and foreign economies. Clearly, foreign countries may have policy room to respond, and that should be taken into account. Perhaps the right way to measure spillovers to the foreign country is to measure their welfare without the policy under question` and their welfare after the policy is implemented and response initiated. So, for instance, a home country A at the zero lower bound may initiate Quantitative Easing (QE), and a foreign country B may respond by cutting interest rates to avoid capital inflows and exchange rate appreciation. The spillover effects of QE would be based on B’s welfare if QE was not undertaken versus B’s welfare after QE is initiated and it responds. Overall, whether policies are rated Red, Green, or Orange would depend on a number of factors such as the time dimension; stage of the financial and business cycle in the home and foreign countries; whether the policy action constitutes a booster shot to jump start the economy or gives only a mild boost and has to be employed for a sustained period; whether standard transmission channels are clogged to warrant the use of unconventional policies; whether the foreign country has room to adopt buffering policies; whether the spillovers impact poor countries which have weak institutions and less room to respond, etc. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Moving forward The next crucial question is: who should measure and analyze spillovers, what would be an appropriate forum to discuss spillover effects from specific policies, and the ratings of these policies? How should we proceed? International Discussion Given the constraints and political difficulties under which international organizations operate, it may be appropriate to start with a group of eminent academics with reasonable representation across the globe, and have them measure and analyze the spillovers, and grade policies. Perhaps the next step would be an agreement to discuss policies and their international spillover effects at meetings such as those of the IMF Board, the IMFC, the BIS and the G-20. The discussion would be based on background papers, which would be commissioned from both traditional sources like the IMF, as well as non-traditional sources like the group of academics and EM central banks. These papers would attempt to isolate the nature of spillovers as well as their magnitude, and attempt a preliminary classification of policy actions. Almost surely, there will be a lot of fuzziness about which color to attribute to a wide range of recent policies. But discussion can help participants understand both how the policies could be classified if we had better models and data, as well as how the models and data gathering can be improved. Country Responsibilities before Formal Rules When policies are being discussed so as to get better understanding, no policies that affect the international monetary system should be off the table. Importantly, simply denoting a policy with the label “monetary” should not give it an automatic free pass because it falls under the central bank’s domestic mandate. What will be important is neither the policymaker’s mandate, professed intent, or instruments, but actual channels of transmission and outcomes, including spillovers. Policymakers will respond to the background papers by stating and explaining their policy actions, attempting to persuade the international community they fall in the Green and Orange zones. International conference Perhaps free and frank discussion may be enough to get countries to adopt responsible policies. If not, as the international community builds understanding on what constitutes sensible rules of the game, and how to label policies in that context, perhaps an international conference may be warranted to see how the community’s understanding of beneficial rules can be implemented. At that time, a discussion of how a central bank’s international responsibilities fit in with its domestic mandate may be warranted. While recognizing the political difficulty of altering any central bank’s mandate, the conference will have to deliberate on how international responsibilities can be woven into existing mandates. It will also have to decide whether a new international agreement along the lines of Bretton Woods is needed, or whether much can be accomplished by small changes in the International Monetary Fund’s Articles of Agreement. Role of the fund What role would the Fund play? The obligations of members and the authority of the Fund are derived from the Articles of Agreement. Section 1 of Article IV makes clear that IMF members are under general obligation “to collaborate with other members of the Fund to assure orderly exchange arrangements and to promote a stable system of exchange rates”. The meaning of “general obligation” is unclear in the Articles but could be “relied upon as a basis for the Fund 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  to call on its members to take specific actions or to refrain from taking specific actions” (IMF, 2006). Article IV further states that “In particular, each member shall … (iii) avoid manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary system in order to prevent effective balance of payments adjustment or to gain unfair competitive advantage over other members …..”. Further, The Principles for the Guidance of Members’ Exchange Rate Policies (originally 1977, amended in 2007) notes that “ … C. Members should take into account in their intervention policies the interests of other members, including those in whose currency they intervene”. Although the Articles of Agreement or The Principles do not define “manipulation” in any detail, IMF (2007) narrows the scope of manipulation by noting that “manipulation of the exchange rate is only carried through policies that are targeted at – and actually affect – the level of exchange rate. Moreover, manipulation may cause the exchange rate to move or may prevent such movement.” In practice, it may be difficult to determine if a policy is targeted at attaining a level of exchange rate. Direct policy actions such as intervention in the foreign exchange market, or indirect policies such as monetary, fiscal, and trade policies or regulations of capital movements, regardless of the intent or purpose, can affect the level of the exchange rate, and can be interpreted as “manipulation”. The interpretation of the Articles of Agreement could perhaps be broadened in scope to include a wider range of policies, which can primarily have effects on the exchange rates, and therefore beggar-thy-neighbor consequences. While the Articles of Agreement include members’ obligations in relation to exchange rate policies, global financial stability implications of country specific policies are not touched upon anywhere in the Articles. Members’ obligations are considered only in relation to domestic growth objectives. For example, based on the Articles, a country with a weak economy can pursue loose monetary policies to stimulate output and employment. Despite the implications of such policies for financial stability in other countries, the country would argue that its policies are in line with Article IV, Section 1(i) which allows each member to “(i) … direct its economic and financial policies toward the objective of fostering orderly economic growth with reasonable price stability …”. More generally, the Fund’s Articles may need altering based on the discussion of the rules of the game. Moreover, although broader surveillance by the Fund of its members’ exchange rate policies, and other policies with significant financial sector spillovers, and perhaps public statements about such policies can have signaling effects, countries are not obligated to follow Fund advice unless in a program. The more pertinent question, therefore, might be what can the Fund really do once its Executive Board determines that a particular country is in violation of its obligations under the new rules of the game? Hopefully, the clear focus on the downsides of the particular country’s actions for the rest of the world will lead to political and economic pressures from around the world that make the country cease and desist. The clearer the eventual rules of the game, the more likely this outcome. Conclusion Given the importance of spillovers from monetary policies, especially in the face of globally low inflation, it is important we start building a global consensus on how to get better outcomes for the world. Nevertheless, with economic analysis of these issues at an early stage, it is unlikely we will get strong policy prescriptions soon, let alone international agreement on them, especially given that a number of country authorities like central banks have explicit domestic mandates. This paper therefore suggests a period of focused discussion, first outside international meetings, then within international meetings. Such a discussion need not take place in an environment of finger pointing and defensiveness, but as an attempt to understand what can be reasonable, and not overly intrusive, rules of conduct. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  As consensus builds on the rules of conduct, we can contemplate the next step of whether to codify them through international agreement, see how the Articles of multilateral watchdogs like the IMF will have to be altered, and how country authorities will interpret or alter domestic mandates to incorporate international responsibilities. The international community has a choice. We can pretend all is well with the global financial non-system and hope that nothing goes spectacularly wrong. Or we can start building a system for the integrated world of the twenty first century. I do hope we can consider some initial steps. Thank you.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Vítor Constâncio: In defence of monetary policy Opinion piece by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, 11 March 2016. *      *      * This week the ECB adopted new measures to reinforce its monetary policy in the face of recent headwinds. That decision was taken against a backdrop of vocal scepticism in the media and markets. The sceptics’ reasoning is two-pronged. First, that monetary policy is not sufficient to address the present low growth trend; and second, that monetary policy is increasingly ineffective in any case. The notion that monetary policy alone cannot raise trend growth is mostly true but trivial, especially if the challenges of secular stagnation highlighted by Robert Gordon in his brilliant new book are considered. The G20 has appealed for the use of other policies, notably fiscal and structural reforms. While other policies would certainly be welcome, one can have justified doubts about their implementation. For a start, active stabilising fiscal policy is restricted by law in the EU and by politics in the US. More generally, countries that could use fiscal space, won’t; and many that would use it, shouldn’t. That leaves us with structural reforms. Some, like upgrading education and judicial efficiency, are important but take a long time to implement and to produce results. The structural reforms economists often have in mind (i.e. liberalization and deregulation of markets) lead to lower wages and prices in the short-term, which does not help inflation normalisation. And concerning unemployment, higher productivity often initially implies labour saving. Structural reforms are essential for long-term potential growth, but it is difficult to see how they could spur growth significantly in the next two years, especially when the current problem is lack of global demand. And as regards their delivery by governments, we should recall the embarrassing results of the G20 plan agreed in Brisbane to generate an additional 2% in world growth via a long concrete list of reforms put forward by the IMF and the OECD. In fact, the world economy now risks not even attaining what was then considered the baseline scenario. So if these other policies either can’t or won’t contribute to a significant degree, then not only is it wrong to start talking down monetary policy – it’s actually dangerous. The second criticism of monetary policy is mostly based on a crude comparison between where inflation (or growth) is now and where it was at the beginning of the policy. The conclusion: inflation didn’t change much, so the policy isn’t working. However, what is rational and essential is to examine what would have happened had the policy not been adopted in the first place. Using several models, ECB staff estimated that, without our policies, inflation would have been a third of a percent negative in 2015 and would have stayed significantly negative throughout 2016, which would mean that we would have been in permanent deflation since last year. This is a significant result. Recall that the final outcome was affected by the unexpected decline in the price of oil by 30% from September to December. We estimate that two thirds of one percent of the registered growth in the past two years was due to our monetary policy. However, what we achieved in fostering internal demand was undone by the subsequent decrease of net exports in a decelerating world economy. These developments did not make our policy less effective, only ex-post insufficient for the desired outcome. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Naturally, all policies have limits. In the case of the instruments we are now using, this is particularly true of negative interest rates on our deposit facility. The reasons are more fundamental than just the effect on banks1. Despite negative rates throughout last year, the net interest income (NII) of euro area banks increased in percentage of assets, and their return on equity went up from 3.5% in 2014 to 5.7% in 2015 – which corresponds to a real return as inflation was zero. Our policies also produced capital gains for banks, as securities’ prices went up (and yields down), and impairment costs came down as the recovery reduced the amount of NPLs. More broadly, negative deposit facility rates have contributed to negative rates in the money market, reducing funding costs for banks. The whole yield curve has been lowered, which is the sole objective of using this particular monetary policy instrument. To normalise inflation in the euro area we urgently need higher growth that can reduce negative output and unemployment gaps, using all really available policies. If not monetary policy, then what?                                                  1 See Cecchetti & Schoenholtz (2016) How Low Can They Go? 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Koji Ishida: Japan’s economy, price developments and monetary policy Speech by Mr Koji Ishida, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Fukuoka, 18 February 2016. *      *      * I.  Developments in economic activity and prices At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on January 28 and 29, 2016, the Bank of Japan produced the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report) and published its projections for Japan’s economic activity and prices through fiscal 2017. I would like to explain the Bank’s view on economic activity and prices by presenting the main content of the Outlook Report. A.  Overseas economies Overseas economies – mainly advanced economies – have continued to grow at a moderate pace, despite the slowdown in emerging economies. Production and trade in the manufacturing sector had been weak on a global basis in the first half of 2015, but have generally picked up somewhat, albeit with some weakness still seen in emerging economies. In the outlook, the pace of growth in overseas economies is expected to accelerate moderately as the positive effects of the recovery in advanced economies gradually spread to emerging economies. A similar projection is presented in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update released in January by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). However, given the decline in expected growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies and the protracted low commodity prices, the capital stock that accumulated amid the higher expected growth rates and higher commodity prices in the past is likely to continue to be excessive. Thus, firms’ restrained stance toward fixed investment expenditure is likely to be seen globally for some time. Reflecting such circumstances, business sentiment within major economies’ manufacturing sectors has generally deteriorated. Looking at developments by major region, the U.S. economy has continued to steadily recover, reflecting the firmness in household spending. As for the outlook, the economy is expected to continue its firm recovery centered on the private sector, underpinned by accommodative financial conditions. The European economy is projected to continue to see moderate recovery, mainly on the back of improvement in the employment and income situation, as well as accommodative financial conditions. The Chinese economy has continued to be in a state of deceleration due to downward pressure from an overhang of production capacities and inventory adjustments in the manufacturing sector. However, the economy is likely to broadly follow a stable growth path – albeit at a somewhat slower pace, mainly in the manufacturing sector – as authorities proactively carry out policy measures to support economic activity. Overall, emerging economies other than the Chinese economy and commodity-exporting economies also remain in a situation of deceleration, as the effects of the slowdown in the Chinese economy have spread to them and as the decline in commodity prices has been protracted. These economies as a whole are expected to gradually see a rise in their growth rates, due mainly to the effects of the recovery in advanced economies and of economic stimulus measures. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  B.  Japan’s economy and price developments 1.  Current situation Now I would like to discuss developments in economic activity and prices in Japan. Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately, although exports and production have been affected by the slowdown in emerging economies. On the domestic demand side, business fixed investment has been on a moderate increasing trend as corporate profits have continued to improve markedly. According to the December 2015 Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), firms have generally continued to plan to increase fixed investment firmly despite the slowdown in emerging economies. Against the background of steady improvement in the employment and income situation, private consumption has been resilient and housing investment has been picking up. Industrial production has continued to be more or less flat against the background of the prolonged inventory adjustments of small cars with engine sizes of 660cc or less and some capital goods. Exports have been picking up, reflecting the developments in overseas economies that I mentioned earlier, although sluggishness remains in some areas. With regard to prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food has been about 0 percent due to a substantial fall in energy prices, reflecting the decline in crude oil prices. 2.  Outlook Japan’s economy is likely to be on a moderate expanding trend. The improvement in corporate profits is expected to continue as the favorable external environment, owing to the low crude oil prices and the low yen rate, is likely to continue to support the income-generating mechanism, and as overseas economies are expected to see a moderate rise in their growth rates. Employee income is also projected to continue to increase moderately on the back of an improvement in corporate profits and the tightening of labor market conditions. Domestic demand is likely to follow an uptrend against the backdrop of income generated by this virtuous mechanism and of the monetary easing effects. Thus, Japan’s economy is likely to continue growing at a pace above its potential through fiscal 2016. In fiscal 2017, although demand related to hosting the Olympic Games will underpin the economy, the growth rate is expected to slow to around a level somewhat below the potential, mainly because of a fall in household spending due to the consumption tax hike. Looking at the medians of the Policy Board members’ forecasts in the January 2016 Outlook Report, the real GDP growth rate is projected to be 1.1 percent for fiscal 2015, 1.5 percent for fiscal 2016, and 0.3 percent for fiscal 2017. Looking at the outlook in detail by major component, business fixed investment is projected to continue to see a moderate increase on the back of a marked improvement in corporate profits and accommodative financial conditions. Private consumption is projected to generally remain resilient, reflecting the developments in real disposable income. Housing investment is expected to continue picking up, underpinned by the continued steady improvement in the employment and income situation and the low levels of housing loan rates. Industrial production is likely to start picking up as the inventory adjustments progress, and thereafter is likely to follow a moderate increasing trend, supported by an increase in final demand at home and abroad. Exports, which have been picking up, are expected to head toward a moderate increase for the time being since automobile-related exports are likely to continue increasing on the back of firm sales developments in the United States, Europe, and China. However, in the longer run, exports are expected to tend to mark a fall rather than a clear increase, given the decline in expected growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, protracted low commodity prices, and the resulting excess in production capacity related to materials and energy. On the price front, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is likely to be about 0 percent for the time being, due to the effects of the decline in energy prices. Nevertheless, as the underlying trend in prices steadily rises and the effects of the decline in 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  crude oil prices dissipate, the rate is likely to accelerate toward 2 percent – the price stability target. Looking at the medians of the Policy Board members’ forecasts in the January 2016 Outlook Report, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food), excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, is projected to be 0.1 percent for fiscal 2015, 0.8 percent for fiscal 2016, and 1.8 percent for fiscal 2017. Upside and downside risks to the Bank’s baseline scenario regarding economic activity are (1) developments in overseas economies, (2) the effects of the consumption tax hike, (3) firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term growth expectations, and (4) fiscal sustainability in the medium to long term. The risks to the Bank’s baseline scenario regarding prices are (1) developments in firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term inflation expectations, (2) developments in the output gap, (3) responsiveness of inflation to the output gap, and (4) developments in import prices. II.  The bank’s monetary policy Next, I would like to talk about the Bank’s monetary policy. The Bank decided to introduce “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with a Negative Interest Rate” at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on January 28 and 29, 2016. This policy framework is designed to enable the Bank to further pursue monetary easing by making full use of possible measures in terms of three dimensions – quantity, quality, and an interest rate – in which a negative interest rate is added to the existing options of QQE conducted to date. Specifically, on the interest rate side, the Bank will partially apply a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to current accounts that financial institutions hold at the Bank. This will exert further downward pressure on interest rates across the entire yield curve, in combination with the continuation of large-scale purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) conducted in terms of quantity and quality. Under the new scheme introduced in January, the Bank adopted a multiple-tier system in which it applies a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to a marginal increase in current accounts that financial institutions hold at the Bank, while continuing to apply a positive interest rate of 0.1 percent to the average outstanding current account balance that each financial institution held during the past year. The Bank devised the scheme by taking into account the following unique circumstances of Japan: an extremely large outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank and the necessity for the Bank to proceed smoothly with large-scale purchases of assets even under the negative interest rate scheme. As described in the January 2016 Outlook Report, Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately and the underlying trend in prices has been rising steadily. Recently, however, global financial markets have been volatile against the backdrop of the further decline in crude oil prices and uncertainty such as over future developments in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, particularly the Chinese economy. In this situation, the Bank judged that there was an increasing risk that an improvement in the business confidence of Japanese firms and conversion of the deflationary mindset might be delayed and that the underlying trend in prices might be negatively affected. To preempt the manifestation of this risk and to maintain momentum toward achieving the price stability target of 2 percent, the Bank decided to introduce “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” I have explained the outline of the Bank’s assessment presented in the January 2016 Outlook Report and the new monetary policy scheme introduced in January. Next, I would like to touch upon several features of economic and price developments. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  III.  Several features of economic and price developments As I mentioned earlier, global stock markets and foreign exchange markets have been in turmoil recently, especially since the turn of the year, and such volatile movements have started to negatively affect financial markets in Japan. Investors have become increasingly risk averse due to several factors that have been reinforcing each other: (1) the shift toward monetary tightening in the United States, (2) the economic slowdown in China as well as the turmoil in Chinese stocks and the yuan rate, (3) a sharp decline in crude oil prices, and (4) the sluggishness in emerging and commodity-exporting economies. I believe that the recent volatile movements in global financial markets are less likely to induce instability in the global financial system, unlike in the past. Nevertheless, attention should be paid to the possibility that, if volatile movements are protracted, this may affect confidence among individuals and firms and ultimately economic activity. A continuation of monetary tightening in the United States would indicate that economic conditions there are deemed to be favorable. If the momentum of economic activity is judged as weak, the rate rise will be postponed. As for China, there is room for adequate fiscal and monetary measures. I do not expect that these developments will intensify negative impacts on emerging and commodity-exporting economies or on Japan’s economy. In contrast, the substantial decline in crude oil prices has been exerting an extremely large impact on recent developments in the global economy and financial conditions worldwide, regardless of whether such decline was the cause or the consequence of these developments. A.  Decline in crude oil prices The decline in crude oil prices has had a negative influence on a wide range of corporate activities. For example, firms have substantially reduced their fixed investment related to crude oil production, which accounts for a large share of global business fixed investment. Firms that provide oil-related facilities and services have been particularly affected. Furthermore, oil-producing countries, which had been in excess of funds, are now in shortage of funds, and this has caused a reversal in the flow of funds, creating considerable stress not only on the economic activity of these countries but also on global stock markets and foreign exchange markets. As I have described, the substantial decline in crude oil prices has had large negative impacts; however, when viewed in the somewhat longer term, these will be net positive effects on the global economy, because income will be transferred from economies with a low propensity to consume to those with a high propensity to consume, and from capital-intensive industries to more labor-intensive industries. I consider that the overall positive effects on Japan – for which the self-sufficiency rate of crude oil is extremely low – are particularly large, although the magnitude of the effects, both positive and negative, differs by firm and industry. Hikes in crude oil prices have often caused global economic recessions. However, there have never been recessions stemming from a decline in these prices. The immediate negative effects of the decline in these prices – such as those on financial markets – have been more pronounced than the positive effects, which will take time to become apparent, but it is my view that we do not need to be overly concerned about the present situation. B.  Prices A substantial decline in crude oil prices leads to a fall in energy prices, and consequently pushes down the level of overall prices. Some say that developments in individual prices do not affect the level of overall prices, because such developments cause prices of other items to move inversely to these individual prices. For example, even if energy prices decline, real income will increase accordingly, and thus prices other than energy prices will rise through an increase in spending. While this may be true in the long run, such an outcome is unlikely to occur within about two years, the time horizon that central banks typically consider as appropriate in conducting monetary policy. As noted in the January 2016 Outlook Report, the 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  projected timing of the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) reaching the price stability target of 2 percent has been delayed as the overall inflation rate will be pushed down due to the substantial decline in crude oil prices. Nevertheless, a decline in crude oil prices by nature is a considerable positive factor for Japan’s economy, and its effects on overall prices eventually will dissipate. Thus, I consider that the delay itself is acceptable. Also, in terms of monetary policy, I believe that it is appropriate to exclude the effects of energy prices as temporary factors and grasp the underlying trend in prices. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) for December 2015 was 0.1 percent but that for all items less fresh food and energy – which indicates the underlying trend in prices – was 1.3 percent. The Bank projects that, in a situation where Japan’s economy is likely to continue growing at a pace above its potential, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) will likely rise closer to 2 percent through fiscal 2017 when the negative contribution of energy items dissipates. Inflation expectations are referred to as a factor that largely affects the price outlook, but it is difficult to actually assess them. It can be said that the inflation expectations of both firms and consumers have been rising from a somewhat longer-term perspective – as suggested by the recent price-setting behavior of firms and the subsequent purchasing behavior of consumers, or by rises in base salaries for two consecutive years. In addition, I consider that two indicators – the inflation swap rates and break-even inflation (BEI) rates for JGBs, both of which are frequently used to assess inflation expectations and are compiled based on financial market data – have not sufficiently reflected the actual inflation expectations in Japan, unlike in the cases of the United States or Europe, given the size and liquidity of Japanese financial markets. Therefore, these indicators should be regarded only as a reference. Let me note here that prices are normally determined when consumers accept the prices set by firms. Since spring 2015, manufacturers have been raising the wholesale prices of their standard products, due mainly to the rise in costs, and this has led to a rise in sales prices. In addition, prices of general services have been rising due to labor shortages. These factors have been pushing up the underlying trend in prices. It is the second year of such price increases, which raises difficult issues including the following: (1) whether manufacturers can raise the prices of their standard products again; (2) whether manufacturers will implement a de facto price increase by developing new products with value added or those similar to the previous ones; (3) whether manufacturers will raise the prices of goods for which they have postponed increases so far; (4) whether the cost that has been absorbed by the distribution sector will be passed on to sales prices; and (5) whether the services sector can continue to pass the rise in labor costs on to final prices. That being said, many firms are experiencing less room for further cost reductions. In these circumstances, they need to increase sales in order to maintain or raise the level of profits in the face of upward pressure on labor costs. In the current situation of it being difficult to expect an increase in sales volumes as the aging population and declining birthrate have progressed, the only solution is to raise the unit prices of goods and services. As firms start to increase prices, the focus is on whether consumers will accept such increases. In this regard, I consider that the key to a continued steady rise in the underlying trend in prices is whether consumers will be optimistic about future developments in income and wages. C.  Wages Recently, labor market conditions have been extremely tight, and an increasing number of firms are experiencing labor shortages. In textbook theory, wages are determined by the supply-demand balance in the labor market, but statistics show that the pace of increase in wages as a whole has remained only moderate. This is because regular employees’ wages, which account for a major part of total employee income, have been rising only moderately, 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  although the hourly pay of non-regular employees has been rising markedly, reflecting tight labor market conditions. One major cause behind this situation is the framework for regular employees in Japan, although it is gradually changing. It is unique to Japan because of the country’s systems and practices. Let me elaborate on this point. In Japan, where it is difficult to discharge regular employees, excesses and shortages of regular employees are balanced by the number of new graduates to be hired. New graduates go through in-house training so that they become well suited to their individual firms. The salaries and other benefits available to regular employees throughout their careers are significant as long as they are regular employees. These factors lower their labor mobility to move from one firm to another. If regular employees do not change jobs despite some dissatisfaction with their salary levels, employers will have less incentive to raise the levels of salaries to secure suitably qualified employees. Thus, employers take the initiative in setting regular employees’ wages. Even if corporate profits are increasing, employers tend to be reluctant to increase wages, particularly base salaries, given the uncertainty regarding the outlook for profits. They also may be reluctant to allocate profits obtained through overseas operations to an increase in wages in Japan. As has been evident so far, regular employees’ wages do not rise smoothly because each firm negotiates wages with its own union amid the low mobility of regular employees. Although it has been pointed out that an increase in labor productivity is necessary for wages to rise, it is difficult to expect proper operation of the mechanism in which productivity in the economy as a whole increases. This is because, with low labor mobility, wages do not work as the intermediary function to smoothly correct the differences in productivity among firms. In order to increase productivity and the economic growth rate in Japan, a change in the employment framework is necessary so that labor is transferred smoothly – through an increase in wages – from firms with low productivity and profits to those with high productivity and profits. This will take time, but if the economy continues to grow at a pace exceeding its potential, firms may face more acute labor shortages and an immediate issue of securing suitably qualified employees. In addition, the decline in energy prices will underpin corporate profits, including those of small firms. Reflecting such a situation, the wage level can be expected to rise gradually among many firms. The Bank, for its part, will maintain the accommodative financial conditions through the conduct of monetary policy so that the virtuous cycle from corporate profits to wages, and in turn to consumption, operates properly. Given that the effects of tighter labor market conditions are not spreading to wages smoothly, some may voice various opinions about the government’s recent action to encourage wage increases, but I understand that such action is necessary. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Alex Brazier: A macroprudential approach to bank capital – serving the real economy in good times and bad Speech by Mr Alex Brazier, Executive Director for Financial Stability Strategy and Risk of the Bank of England, at the 27th Annual Institute of International Bankers conference, Washington DC, 7 March 2016. *      *      * I am grateful to Rob Edwards, Jas Ellis and Calum Mitchell for their assistance in preparing these remarks. Your industry has known better starts to a year. Bank stocks down, volatility up, earnings disappointing. All ghosts of crises past. But one ghost has not returned to haunt us. Questions about returns haven’t translated as they’ve done before into questions about resilience. Investors may have real questions about whether some banks can generate adequate return on equity in a difficult global economic and trading environment. They may also be more alert to the risks in and appropriate returns to contingent capital instruments. But when UK bank price-to-book ratios were this low in 2009, senior unsecured debt spreads were over 350bps. At the height of the euro crisis in 2011, they were 300bps. Today, they are just 73bps (chart 1). Underlying that is the transformation of bank capital. In the UK, major banks now have core tier 1 equity ratios averaging nearly 13%. Before the financial crisis they had – on Basel III definitions – just 4.5% (chart 2). Those new levels of resilience are seen in the results of stress tests. Last year, the Bank of England subjected UK banks to a sharp slowdown in China, a fall in oil prices and intense market volatility, coupled with stressed estimates of redress costs for past misconduct. Across the system, banks in the test incurred losses of £37bn. That’s over twice the losses of the system in the financial crisis. Back then, losses on that scale would have wiped out almost two thirds of the capital of the entire British banking system. With so much more capital today, the stress test showed those losses could be absorbed, even while the system continued to grow credit to the real economy. Far from sideswiping the real economy under stress, the test showed the banking system could continue to support it.1And yet, there is still, eight long years after the crisis, a lively debate in newspapers, blogs and academia, about whether the capital strength of the banking system should be built up further. 1 Available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/fpc/results011215.pdf. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  About whether authorities should abandon the conclusions of Basel III and of the UK’s post-crisis Independent Commission on Banking and compel banks to go further. A debate like that is all to the good; these are important questions for society. But it has to be balanced against the merits of clarity. Clarity you need to run your businesses effectively. Clarity investors need to allocate and price capital efficiently. Clarity the public, and Parliaments, need to hold policymakers and banks to account. That’s why, in December, the Bank of England gave a clear statement about the appropriate baseline level of capital for the systemic part of the UK banking system.2 Across major UK banks, no less than 3.75% of total assets should be funded with tier 1 capital. If risks were properly measured, this would translate into 11% of risk weighted assets. However, there are shortcomings in existing measures of risk, including banks’ own pension schemes, interest rate risk in banking books and concentrations of exposures. So on current measures, we expect major UK banks to fund no less than 13½% of risk weighted assets with tier 1 equity.3 After a long march to build capital strength, UK banks are within a hair’s breadth of that today. And the rewards of greater resilience are being reaped. Our expectations for capital are founded on the need for a banking system that can serve the real economy, in good times and bad. Our aim is to be prudent and to make macroeconomic sense. Our aim is to be macroprudential. It’s clear why the approach has to be prudent. The wider economic costs of poorly capitalised banks can be immense. The cutbacks of credit, of market making, and of essential payment services under stress can be economically devastating. On average, during the Great Recession, output fell in those countries that experienced financial crises by nearly twice as much as in countries that did not. That gap in performance has persisted since. We estimate the full, net present value, economic costs of typical past financial crises to have been catastrophic – around 75% of GDP and in some cases much more. So nobody should deny the economic case for well capitalised banks. And it was obvious in the aftermath of the crisis where bank capital needed to go. Up. A lot.                                                 2 Available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/fsr/2015/fsrsupp.pdf.  3 Major UK banks are required to hold, on average, additional tier 1 capital of 2.5% of risk weighted assets under “pillar 2a” requirements. These compensate for existing shortcomings in risk measures and lift average capital requirements from 11% to 13.5%. Should the shortcomings in risk measures be corrected, measures of risk weighted assets would increase.But at the same time, our expectation for capital as a share of risk weighted assets would fall back. The two effects can be expected to offset so that no extra capital would be required. Ongoing work in the Basel Committee addressing excessive variability in risk weights should not materially affect overall capital requirements.   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  In fact, with market confidence so low at the time, more capital not only boosted resilience, it was also needed for lending to resume. Capital was good for resilience and good for growth. That’s why countries that recapitalised their banking systems quickly secured earlier and stronger recoveries, with the US leading the way. However, after a point, another unit of capital buys a much smaller fall in the probability of bank failure. There may be seriously diminishing returns. And at the same time it’s possible that ever more bank capital may not best serve the real economy. It may be prudential. But it may not be macroprudential. We have to be alert to the possibility that more bank capital could hold back growth. The costs of higher levels of capital can be overstated, including – let’s face it – by some bank executives who mistake private costs to today’s shareholders for true economic costs. It’s often forgotten that lower leverage makes equity and debt less risky, driving down the cost of both. That isn’t just a textbook result; it’s supported by the data. But the evidence from numerous studies is that this effect is incomplete. Total funding costs do rise as companies – of all sorts, not just banks – swap debt for equity funding. And this effect goes beyond what can be explained by the differential tax treatment of debt and equity.4 The drivers of this are unclear. It’s an area where there is much to learn; where partnership between the industry and academia could be productive in bringing theory and practice closer together.5 In general, it seems that investors’ preferences for different types of assets are affected not just by the risk and return of those assets. Equity investors seem to want higher, more volatile returns. They like their equity to be equity-like. So making it safer doesn’t reduce its cost as much as it should. And for banks, whose short-term debts are the money used by the real economy, the effect is compounded. Depositors want a stable liquid store of value for a rainy day. They don’t want equity. So they understandably take some persuading to swap their rainy day fund into bank equity.6 Regardless of its cause, the evidence that higher capital requirements can push up bank funding costs can’t be ignored. The costs will be borne by real borrowers – in higher cost of funds, and real savers – in lower returns. In theory, monetary policy may be able to offset the overall effect of that on inflation. But it can’t alter the fact that the costs will be higher of matching lenders with borrowers, capital providers with capital seekers, and risk takers with risk hedgers.                                                 4 Miles et al (2012) presents a central estimate that the reduction in the volatility of equity returns and riskiness of debt offsets about half the increase in funding costs that would, other things equal, result from switching debt to more expensive equity funding.  5 Elliott (2013) sets out areas of disagreement in the debate about the economic costs of higher bank capital requirements.  6 The low risk anomaly, whereby lower risk stocks generate no lower and in some cases even higher stock returns than higher risk stocks, is documented for banks by Baker and Wurgler (2013). The impact of depositor liquidity preference is discussed in Kashyap et al (2010).   
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  That’s not just a private cost. It’s a social cost too. At the margin, it will force a change in the mix of economic activity. The ability to turn future cashflows into today’s investments will be curtailed. Spending will replace investment. Investment projects will have lower returns. That holds back future economic potential. Although it’s impossible to be precise, it seems that once a baseline degree of resilience has been established, more capital could actually cost the economy. We estimate that a 100bps increase in capital requirements across a banking system could result in an economic cost with net present value of 0.6% of GDP.7 This all raises an important macroprudential question: how to best protect the real economy without the unnecessary risk of holding it back? Our answer in the UK has three parts. First, to protect the economy from the consequences of bank failure. And to do so at minimal economic cost. Effective bank resolution unlocks this. With minimum disruption to existing funding structures, it opens the door to preserving the functions of failed banks without recourse to the taxpayer. Serious progress has been made in building resolution regimes. An EU-wide legal framework is now in place. Cross-border arrangements have been stepped up. Agreements have been reached on temporary stays to closing out contracts in resolution. And the G20 agreement on Total Loss Absorbing Capacity (TLAC) standards for global systemic banks has a game-changing principle at its heart. Systemic banks must have the capacity to replenish capital, up to minimum regulatory standards, even if all capital – of all tiers – has been completely burned through.8 It’s a game changer because it hardwires the recapitalisation of failing banks. Bailed-in debt holders become, very quickly, the proud new owners of the bank. Case study evidence is striking. Rapid recapitalisation of failed banks speeds economic recovery. It cuts the long-term costs of systemic bank failure in half. But resolution through bail-in is more than a fire extinguisher. It’s a non-flammable coating of the banking system too. It helps to prevent bank failures in the first place. Unsurprisingly, the evidence is that when debt holders face the consequences of failure, banks take fewer risks. International estimates suggest that the removal of the heads-I-win-tails-you-lose ‘too big to fail’ subsidy cuts the risk of failure by a third. As you know, the removal of that subsidy isn’t a pipedream. Rating agencies are already removing “state support” uplifts from bank debt ratings.9 And yes, it will raise                                                 7 This is very similar to estimates of Miles et al (2012), who find the effect of increasing capital from 3% of total assets to 6% of total assets to be around 6% of GDP.  8 The Bank of England, as UK resolution authority, is now consulting on proposals to implement that principle in the UK for all systemic banks, as it must do under the European Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive.  9 Moody’s and S&P have removed or reduced government support from the ratings of some UK and US banks. Fitch has revised the support assumptions for UK and US banks to remove the ‘Support Rating Floors’ that capture government support assumptions.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  the cost of banking services and reduce return on equity. But those costs are the flipside of the removal of a subsidy – they are not wider social costs. It is essential that efforts to ensure even the largest banks can be resolved remain on track. In the UK, that includes the ringfencing of entities taking core deposits. Impediments to resolvability must continue to be addressed. If those efforts hit obstacles, higher equity requirements will be needed to achieve the same ends. The necessary protections for the real economy have to be bought. The only question is at what price. But even with an effective resolution backstop in place, the costs of systemic bank failure are far from insignificant. So the second part of our macroprudential approach is a baseline capital standard that makes economic disruption caused by a weak banking system extremely rare. But not more so. Our baseline – tier 1 capital of 13.5% of risk weighted assets, or around 3.75% of total assets – aims to do this. The dual key approach – risk-weighted capital and leverage – recognises the imperfections in risk weight models and guards against them. On past loss performance, this standard reduces the probability of failure to extremely low levels, and the probability of simultaneous failures that drive crises to even lower levels. And that past performance includes the global financial crisis. In the UK, even the two biggest failures of the crisis – Royal Bank of Scotland and Halifax Bank of Scotland – suffered losses comfortably within these baseline standards. Using Basel III definitions, both suffered losses – even over three years – of around 5% of risk weighted assets.10 So going further could have a sharply diminishing further effect on the probability of banking failure. And it could run the risk of economic cost. Our standard recognises those risks. By not taking it higher, we are seeking to strike a balance; to be macroprudential. That balance is also served by the make-up of the requirements. Hard floor capital requirements don’t help the real economy. They simply move the point of failure and distress of banks to a higher level of capital. They may make banks more resilient, but they don’t make credit supply and essential service provision more resilient. So a large slice of bank capital should take the form of a useable buffer: a cushion that sits on top of minimum capital requirements that can be run down and built up gradually afterwards. The emphasis is on useable.                                                 10 Over the three year period 2008–2010, HBoS incurred losses of £25bn. This amounted to around 5% of its 2008 risk weighted assets (£536bn on a Basel III basis). In the same period, RBS incurred losses on trading activities and impairments on all assets totalling £40bn, or 5% risk weighted assets (£783bn on Basel III basis). These banks failed because they entered the crisis with very low capital strength. On a Basel III basis, RBS is estimated to have had a CET1 ratio of just 1.97% at end 2007. HBoS had 4.1%. See FSA (2011) and Bank of England/FCA (2015).  
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  That’s why, although they are well meaning, mandatory restrictions on distributions of dividends, coupons and pay when capital buffers are used can have a perverse effect. They create incentives to avoid dipping into capital buffers by taking actions that have broader economic effects.11 Our baseline standards mean the biggest banks will be subject to a baseline capital buffer of nearly 5% of risk weighted assets, sitting on top of an 8.5% hard floor for tier 1 capital (see table 1).12 A buffer of 5% goes beyond agreed international standards. Basel III sets a minimum buffer of 2.5% for all banks (the conservation buffer) and supplements it only for banks of global importance. We are intending to go further for big banks of domestic importance, just as the United States is going further on capital buffers for its largest banks.13 A buffer of 5% gives room for systemic banks to absorb losses without being forced to close their doors and cease their service to the economy. It achieves not just greater bank resilience, but greater resilience of service to the macro economy. It’s macroprudential. Stress tests tell us that this capital buffer would be big enough to absorb a deep UK recession with sharply rising interest rates and falls in property prices, or a deep global recession, centred on China and emerging markets, with associated global deflation. But it would be a mistake to think that a 5% capital buffer is always and everywhere the right one. So the third part of our approach is flexibility. Flexibility to raise capital buffers if the threat of future losses grows, and cut them again if those threats materialise or recede. That flexibility avoids what might otherwise be a need to capitalise the system for the very riskiest times, all the time. It avoids taking unnecessary risks of holding the real economy back. There will be times when risks are heightened and so to protect the economy, banks should have bigger capital buffers. Broadly, we are seeking to match the size of those buffers – the strength of defence – to the threat of future losses as they change over time.14 But how will we know the threat level has changed?                                                 11 The Bank of England has called on the European Commission to revisit such rules in the European Capital Requirements Directive IV. The Bank’s response to the Commission’s call for evidence is available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/regframework/detailed answers010216.pdf 12 The 8.5% minimum is composed of 6% common international standard agreed under Basel III plus the 2.5% pillar 2a requirement that reflects shortcomings in risk measures.  See footnote 3.  13 We plan only for only the systemic part of the banking system to have a 5% buffer. In line with Basel standards, smaller banks will be subject to a buffer only half the size. That reflects the difference in economic costs between a big – systemic – bank coming close to or actually failing and a small bank doing so.  14 This will take effect by supplementing baseline capital requirements with the countercyclical capital buffer rate on UK exposures.   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  We’ll be looking for the evidence that borrowers might have overstretched; that asset prices could be vulnerable to reversal; and that economic imbalances exist that could correct. Assessing risks isn’t the same as “calling the cycle”. We shouldn’t be asking whether a downturn or a bad event is destined to happen. We are not looking for irrefutable proof. Capital buffers should be based on whether the evidence says there is a threat that could materialise in future, not whether it is going to. The most interesting thing I heard a senior policymaker say about the financial crisis, not a Bank of England policymaker, was that we spent far too long thinking about whether there was a housing bubble and not enough time thinking about what if there is a housing bubble. The consequences for banks will be informed by our annual stress test. With the stress scenario varying systematically with our assessment of the risks, the test will guide us as to how – given banks’ exposures – our judgement about the risks should be reflected in capital buffers. In addition, we’ll have a bias to acting early and gradually – to raising countercyclical capital buffers before the threat level is seen to be heightened. The Bank of England expects to be adding around 1% to the capital buffer on UK exposures of all banks, even before the overall threat of future losses looks high. That bias reflects the time lags in implementation and in the cost of time-varying buffers lagging behind the threats. As well, there is clear evidence that sudden, sharp increases in capital requirements can have a material effect on credit supply and economic activity. Acting earlier allows us to take smaller steps. With this approach, the UK’s systemic banks will, except in post-crisis repair, be required to run with capital buffers a little above our baseline standard. Leverage requirements will also be scaled up, with banks typically being required to fund no less than 4% of total assets with tier 1 capital. Should the threat level rise above normal, so too will capital buffers. They’ll go as far as needed to ensure banks’ defences keep up with threats if they grow. And importantly, if threats materialise, or shrink, we’ll reduce our expectation for capital buffers back towards the baseline level. In doing this, we’re aiming to turn what’s happened in the past on its head. Bank capital buffers have been too small in the good times and needed to be built up in the bad. They were pro-cyclical and amplified the bad times. Now, we’re making them countercyclical. Buffers will built up from their base level as the risks grow, so they can be drawn down, if and when the risks materialise. In the bad times, banks will be able to absorb losses and move on to continue to serve the real economy. Our flexibility extends beyond moving capital buffers up and down. With higher baseline capital and leverage requirements now being reached, we are learning about the effects of those requirements on the provision of services to the real economy. Some of those effects have come into sharper focus in recent months. Sovereign repo markets have shown signs of reduced liquidity, for example. And there are also signs of reduced market-making activity in sovereign and corporate bond markets. None of these developments should make us rush to amend capital standards that have been put in place to protect the real economy. After all, the levels of dealer 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  activity and of market liquidity in the run-up to the crisis were ephemeral. They did not serve the real economy. It is important that other parts of the financial system, such as asset managers, adapt to the new environment and manage liquidity positions prudently. But these developments should, and they are, prompting us to assess whether targeted amendments to the design of regulations could benefit the real economy, without exposing it to more risk. The design of new requirements was macroprudential. So must be their implementation. The system has come a long way on the march to more capital and greater resilience. The benefits of that are being seen today. Lending to real economies is growing again. Resilience is more insulated from questions about returns. With resolution regimes well advanced and game-changing bail-in principles established, the upward march to higher capital levels can soon reach the new baseline. A baseline that, on what we know today, protects the real economy without unnecessary risk of holding it back. And with the flexibility to adapt and continually align resilience with threats, we have a compelling answer to the question of how to marry prudence with macroeconomic sense. So that you can protect and serve the real economy in good times and bad. Thank you.   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  Chart 1  Major UK bank price to book ratios and  wholesale funding spreads  Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations. (a) Constant-maturity unweighted average of secondary market spreads to mid-swaps for the major UK lenders’ five-year euro senior unsecured bonds or a suitable proxy when unavailable.   0501001502002503003504000.00.51.01.52.02.5200720082009201020112012201320142015Price to book ratio (RHS)Senior unsecured bond spread (LHS)(a)PercentagepointsRatio
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Chart 2  Major UK banks’ approximated CET1 capital ratio  Sources: PRA regulatory returns and Bank calculations. (a) Major UK banks’ estimated common equity Tier 1 capital as a percentage of their risk-weighted assets. Calculated as aggregate peer group common equity Tier 1 levels over aggregate risk-weighted assets, according to the CRD IV definition as implemented in the UK. Major UK banks are Barclays, Co-operative Bank, HSBC, LBG, Nationwide, RBS and Santander UK. (b) From 2006, the chart shows Bank calculations approximating common equity Tier 1 capital ratios. (c) From 2014 , the chart shows common equity Tier 1 capital ratios as reported by banks. Table 1  Average Tier 1 capital requirements across  UK systemic banks Tier 1 Capital Requirements  %RWA % Total Assets (leverage)  Minimum requirements (no less than 75% CET1)  8.5% 3%  Pillar 1  6%   Pillar 2a (reflecting shortcomings in risk measures)  2.5%     Baseline capital buffers (CET1) 5% 0.75%  Capital conservation buffer  2.5%  Additional buffers for systemic importance  2.5%   Total Tier 1 baseline requirements 13.5% 3.75%  + UK countercyclical buffer rate at standard risk level   1%  0.35% 4681012140607080910111213141516Interquartile rangeWeighted averagePer cent
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11  References Baker, M and Wurgler, J (2013), ‘Do strict capital requirements raise the cost of capital? Bank regulation and the low risk anomaly’, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 19018, May. Bank of England (2015), ‘Supplement to the December 2015 Financial Stability Report: The framework of capital requirements for UK banks’, available at  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/fsr/2015/fsrsupp.pdf Bank of England (2015), ‘Stress testing the UK banking system: 2015 results’ available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/ speech883.pdf. Bank of England Prudential Regulation Authority and Financial Conduct Authority, ‘The Failure of HBoS plc’ http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Documents/ publications/reports/hbos.pdf. Bank of England (2016), ‘Bank of England response to the European Commission Call for Evidence on the EU Regulatory Framework for Financial Services’, available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/regframework/detail edanswers010216.pdf. Brooke, M, et al (2015), ‘Measuring the macroeconomic costs and benefits of higher UK bank capital requirements’, available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ financialstability/Documents/fpc/fspapers/fs_paper35.pdf. Elliott, D (2013), ‘Higher bank capital requirements would come at a price’, The Brookings Institution, February, available at http://www.brookings.edu/research/ papers/2013/02/20-bank-capital-requirements-elliott. FSA (2011), ‘The Failure of the Royal Bank of Scotland’, Financial Services Authority Board Report http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/other/rbs.pdf. Kashyap, A, Stein, J and Hanson, S (2010), ‘An analysis of the impact of substantially heightened capital requirements’, Mimeo, May, available at http://chifl.shufe.edu.cn/upload/htmleditor/File/120919100455.pdf. Miles, D, Yang, J and Marcheggiano, G (2013), ‘Optimal bank capital’, Economic Journal, Vol. 123, pages 1–37. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Turalay Kenç: Stocktaking of international financial architecture Remarks by Mr Turalay Kenç, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the “Stocktaking of International Financial Architecture” Conference, organized by the Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee (RBWC), Shanghai Development Research Foundation (SDRF), Research Institute for Banking and Finance, China (PBOC) and Korea Institute for International Economic Policy (KIEP), Shanghai, 26 February 2016. *      *      * Over the last two decades the world has witnessed substantial increases in the trade volume to global GDP ratio, sharply grown international investment positions and significantly deepened production supply chains in the most part of the globe. As a result, monetary and financial policies across countries have become much more correlated. The conference organizers rightly asked the most crucial question whether the international monetary system (IMS) is still sufficiently stable in this current environment with a growing interconnectedness.  In addition to this heightened interconnectedness, the global economy and financial markets face the challenges of the unconventional and unusual monetary policies in the advanced economies as well as diverging monetary policies of these countries, uncertainty in commodity prices, the risk of China’s economic hard-landing and the unintended market liquidity consequences of the recent financial sector reforms across the world.  Large asset purchasing programs of the major central banks have depressed global bond markets with decreasing long-term yields as well as short-term yields and their negative nominal policy rates further destabilized bond markets and in general financial markets. Heightened volatility in global financial markets can be associated with the presence of very low and even negative rates rather than the underlying macroeconomic and external imbalances. In these circumstances, any change in interest rate differential across countries is likely to create greater impacts than otherwise. If this interest rate change takes place in the largest and the most significant economy in the world, then the impact will expectedly be further magnified. The Fed’s start of interest rate normalization has demonstrated that its impact on the global economy and financial markets indeed has been large, giving rise to significant capital outflows from emerging market (EM) economies, large adjustments and volatility in exchange rates as well as widened EM spreads and interest rates. The adverse effects of the Fed’s interest rate normalization has been on average larger than those occurred in previous two financial turmoil episodes, namely the Eurozone sovereign debt crisis and the US tapering tantrum. However, the disparity between the effected countries has been large too. The plummeted commodity prices as well as other factors led to this outcome as commodity exporters suffered from both the lower commodity revenues and the tightening global financial conditions. Financial markets also differentiated EM countries by policy frameworks and prudent policies. Those having rich and better policy frameworks and prudent policies have withstood the recent global financial turmoil better than the others.  With lessons learned from previous episodes and improvements over the years, emerging market economies on average are better positioned to withstand financial turbulences, both now and in the future, than in the past. They embarked on extensive structural reforms aimed at overhauling financial regulatory and supervisory systems, strengthening public finances and fiscal discipline, granting central banks independence and adopting flexible exchange rate systems. These reforms enabled them to implement more prudent and countercyclical policies. EM economies supported their post crisis reforms by accumulating adequate foreign exchange reserves as an alternative to the IMF provided financing, which carries strong conditionality, as well as by further deepening and broadening their domestic financial markets. As a result, stock and flow balances, policy frameworks, and levels of economic confidence and market development in EM economies have strengthened substantially and radically. Deepened and 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  broadened domestic financial markets have alleviated the so called original sin problem. It is fair to say that they now look strong enough to render the adverse effects of external financial shocks manageable. Given the current IMS what EM economies can most rely on are their prudent policies, better policy frameworks, foreign exchange reserves and flexible exchange rates. As for the IMS related questions of the session namely  • “Do floating exchange rates along with largely unrestricted capital flows play their role of shock absorber? Are we going to witness a return of currency crises of the 1990’s? • What does China economic slowdown and its current adjustment means for capital markets and for the quest of renminbi internationalization? • Should and can the systematically important countries “internalize” their spillovers effects to mitigate negative external impacts?” I organize my points around the three functions of an IMS – liquidity, confidence and adjustment. On liquidity function, there are two areas that we require significant improvement on the current IMS. The first is related to excessive liquidity during normal times. What are the appropriate policies to curb excessive capital flows? The IMF’s approach advocates that recipient countries should implement the capital flow management measures and use macro-prudential tools. Hence, there is an asymmetric treatment of countries as source countries are not expected to do much if not at all. There is of course room for a symmetric treatment. The Holy Grail may exist in the IMF’s articles of agreement as it states in Section 1 that “each member shall seek to promote stability… by fostering a monetary system that does not tend to produce erratic disruptions”.  The second is about the existence of safety nets providing liquidity during financial stress times.  Again, the optimal provision of liquidity is the main issue. To what extent it should be divided among global, regional and local sources. It is a classic efficiency versus moral hazard problem. Changes in governance structure of the global safety net providing IOs have a potential to alleviate this problem. The 2010 IMF quota and governance reforms are a significant development as they give greater voice to EM countries on governing the IMF policies and procedures. This development together with increasing awareness of sufficient global safety nets would strengthen IMF recourses and reduce their stigma effect. Again, there is a symmetry issue in the provision of liquidity during financial stress times – whether there should be internationally designed mechanisms enforcing countries that supplied excessive liquidity in the first place also to provide liquidity to all recipient countries during financial stress times such as through currency swap arrangements. The confidence function of the IMS highlights the fact that all stakeholders including financial markets have greatest confidence in the functioning, resources and governance of the system. Strengthening its recourses, improving its governance and advancing its functions will crucially bolster all stakeholders’ confidence in the system. What have been done recently along the lines of the 2010 IMF quota and governance reform, the inclusion of the renminbi in the SDR system and the recent increases in the IMF resources greatly improved confidence in the IMS.  The adjustment mechanism of an IMS is mostly related to its sustainability but also affects its confidence function. The IMS requires a symmetric and fair adjustment mechanism. The G20 plays a central role in the adjustment mechanism of the IMS through fostering international policy coordination and cooperation. The IOs, especially the IMF, largely execute this G20 objective through bilateral surveillance and multilateral surveillance or oversight of the world economy. Since the global financial crisis (GFC) giant steps have been taken at the G20 to strengthen international policy coordination and cooperation. Overall there are two opposing 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  developments affecting the IMS. On the one hand, the significant reforms since the GFC have strengthened the IMS. But on the other hand, growing interconnectedness especially through increased international investment positions together with unconventional monetary policies pose challenges to the IMS.   In these global circumstances, having faced the deterioration in inflation and its outlook reflecting the pass-through from the TL depreciation and domestic factors and elevated volatility in capital flows together with tightening global financial conditions the Central Bank of Turkey has been following a tight monetary policy to fight inflation, taking liquidity stabilizing measures for the foreign currency market and ensuring the stability of the financial system.  This policy framework was announced as a “road map” document back in August 2015 outlining monetary policy, foreign currency liquidity and financial stability related measures and aimed at alleviating policy tradeoffs.  The key idea is to provide market making facilities to the local banks when they face financial stresses in the global markets. They are then allowed to borrow in foreign currencies from the central bank and use their all liquid assets irrespective of their denominations i.e., local currency and foreign currency denominated assets as collateral when they borrow from the central bank in any currency.    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Philip Lowe: Resilience and ongoing challenges Keynote address by Mr Philip Lowe, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the UDIA National Congress 2016, Adelaide, 8 March 2016. *      *      * Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. I would like to thank Craig Evans for assistance in the preparation of this talk.  It is a real pleasure for me to be back in Adelaide today. I would like to thank the Urban Development Institute of Australia (UDIA) for the invitation to be part of your National Congress in this beautiful city.  I previously spoke at a UDIA National Congress in 2010. That year it was held in Sydney. On that occasion, I spoke about how and why the Australian economy had come through the severe global downturn in much better shape than most other countries. I spoke about the expected upswing in mining investment and the positive effect that it was likely to have on our economy over the next few years. And I spoke about three specific challenges: the need to expand the supply side of the economy; the need to get a better balance between supply and demand in the housing market; and the need to ensure that inflation remained low and stable.  In the six years since then, a lot of water has flowed under the bridge. The global economy has had a recovery of sorts, although the average growth rate is still below what it was before the crisis. In Australia, the expected boom in mining investment did take place, leading to a large increase in our production capacity. For a time, this did result in the economy growing at an above-average pace, but this has been followed by a few years where growth has averaged below trend as mining investment returned to more normal levels. In terms of the challenges that I spoke about six years ago, the issue of expanding the supply side of the economy and boosting productivity growth is just as pressing as it was then. A bit more positively, in the housing market we now appear to have a better balance between supply and demand. And in terms of inflation, the outcomes in Australia – and almost everywhere around the world – have been lower than was earlier expected.  Today, I thought it might be useful to again touch on these broad themes – the resilience of our own economy, the productivity challenge, the balance in the housing market and the inflation outlook.   The resilience of the Australian economy So first to the Australian economy. Here, the main point to emphasise is the resilience of our economy and its ability to adjust.  A few years back when we were looking down from the peak in the mining boom, there was considerable trepidation in some quarters about how Australia would manage over coming years. With commodity prices already declining and talk of an upcoming mining investment cliff, there were concerns about where the growth in output and, more importantly, the growth in jobs would come from.  As things have turned out, though, we have managed pretty well so far, despite what has been a fairly difficult environment. Over the past two years, the prices of our commodity exports have declined by 40 per cent (Graph 1). Mining investment has also declined by almost 40 per cent, which is the equivalent of nearly 3 per cent of GDP. Yet over these two years, our economy has continued to expand at a reasonable pace, with growth over 2015 having been a bit stronger than was earlier expected and not too different from the long-term average.  Importantly, there has also been sufficient growth in aggregate demand over recent times to keep the unemployment rate broadly steady and to accommodate a rise in the participation rate (Graph 2). Again, taking the past two years together, annual employment growth has 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches averaged almost 2 per cent, which again is not too different from its long-term average. It is also a bit above population growth, so the share of the working-age population that is employed has also risen by around ½ percentage point over the past two years.  The job creation has been particularly strong in a range of household services (Graph 3). Health care has been a stand-out, with annual growth in jobs averaging about 4½ per cent over the past two years. There has also been strong growth in jobs in business services, following a period of weakness a few years ago when exploration activity and pre-construction work in the resources sector were being scaled back. In contrast, there has been little job creation in the goods-related industries over recent years.  This picture of our economy adjusting reasonably well to the changed circumstances is also evident in a number of other indicators. Over recent times, most business surveys have suggested that conditions have been around, or a little above, average. Business credit growth has picked up after having been subdued for quite a while. And last week's national accounts confirmed that growth in household spending has also picked up.  While none of these indicators suggests that we are on the cusp of a return to the type of growth rates we saw before 2008, they do suggest that the economy is successfully rebalancing following the mining investment boom.  This resilience reflects, in part, the flexibility of three key prices: the exchange rate, the price of money (or interest rates), and the price of labour.  The effect of the exchange rate depreciation is evident in the improved conditions and prospects for a number of industries, including tourism, education, agriculture and parts of manufacturing. Just as the earlier appreciation helped the economy avoid overheating during the resources boom, the depreciation is now helping the economy adjust to lower commodity prices and lower investment in the resources sector.  The effect of low interest rates is most clearly evident in residential construction activity, which increased by 10 per cent over 2015. This strong growth is having positive spillovers to other parts of the economy. Over coming quarters, we can expect a further increase in residential construction, although at a slower rate than seen recently.  Finally, the low wage growth is one of the factors that has underpinned the reasonably positive employment outcomes. Over the past year, the Wage Price Index (WPI) has risen by just 2¼ per cent, the lowest outcome in the 17-year history of this series (Graph 4). Lower still is the growth rate in average hourly earnings measured by the national accounts. This measure, which takes into account compositional and other effects that are not captured by the WPI, is unchanged over the past year. These types of wage outcomes are much lower than what most people had become used to and lower than suggested by the historical relationship between wages growth and unemployment. While this low wage growth is one factor constraining consumption growth for many individual households, importantly, it means that more people have jobs and this is clearly a positive for both aggregate household spending and the broader society.  So the flexibility in these key prices – the exchange rate, interest rates, and wages – has served us well.  Our central scenario remains for growth in output to be a bit below trend over 2016, but then gradually to strengthen as the drag from lower commodity prices and mining investment wanes, and more of the increased capacity in the LNG sector comes on line.  The main risks to this central scenario still seem to lie in the international sphere.  The first couple of months of 2016 have been volatile ones in bond, equity and commodity markets. Our largest trading partner, China, is going through a difficult transition to a more consumption-led and service-based economy and is dealing with high levels of corporate debt and the complications of opening its capital account. On the monetary front, interest rates in the United States were recently increased for the first time in nine years, while the Bank of 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Japan unexpectedly moved one of its key interest rates into negative territory. In doing so, it joined the European Central Bank, the Swiss National Bank, the Swedish Riksbank and the Danish central bank with negative rates. And in a number of countries, there is an expectation that yet further monetary easing will take place.  It remains to be seen what all this means for us. The recent international data have been mixed but, at this stage, do not suggest that momentum in the global economy has been lost. The monetary easing abroad is a complication for us, as it tends to put downward pressure on the currencies where the easing is taking place and thus upward pressure on the Australian dollar. More positively, lower oil prices – which primarily reflect increased supply capacity – are mostly good for global growth: they lower the cost of production for almost every firm in the global economy and put more money in the hands of consumers. The lower oil prices do, however, create financial strains for some economies and for some companies.  So there are lot of cross-currents here that we are watching very carefully at the moment.  I now want to move to the three challenges that I spoke about in 2010.  Expanding the supply side – productivity The first of these was expanding the supply side of the economy – or lifting our productivity.  Six years ago, the focus was on ensuring that the economy had sufficient productive capacity to avoid overheating during a period of strong demand flowing from the resources boom.  Today, the focus is a little different. While we have done a pretty good job of adjusting to our changed circumstances, the not-so-good news is that growth in real income per capita in Australia has stalled (Graph 5). Indeed, average real income is no higher today than it was in 2008. This follows a 17-year period in which growth averaged a remarkable 3.1 per cent per year. During this earlier period, we benefited from: (i) strong productivity growth in the 1990s; (ii) a very large rise in our terms of trade; and (iii) favourable demographics, which helped increase the share of the population in paid employment.  In all three of these areas, recent outcomes have not been as kind. It is more than coincidental that the timing of this change in our fortunes broadly coincides with the timing of increasing pressure on the federal budget, an increase in the general sense of economic uncertainty, slower gains in some asset prices and slower growth in wages and profits. Inevitably, when income growth is weak the effects are felt broadly through the community.  Looking ahead, we should be able to look forward to somewhat better outcomes than over the recent past. We could expect that the drag on our national income from falling commodity prices will eventually lessen. And if current trends in employment continue, we could look forward to some further increase in the share of the population in paid employment. Both of these would be positive for real income growth. Australia's fundamentals also remain sound. We have a tremendous base of natural resources, a talented, diverse and growing workforce, a stable political and legal system, a highly regarded university system, and we are well placed to benefit from the increasing demand for services from Asia.  But there is no escaping the fact that future growth in the average income of Australians relies largely on our ability to lift our productivity. While the rebalancing and resilience of our economy is certainly something to welcome, the longer-term challenge is to lift our living standards through finding new things to do and better ways of doing what we currently do. The need for this is made more pressing by the fact that the growth momentum in the global economy is less than it once was.  Ultimately, productivity growth is heavily reliant on decisions made by businesses. But policy decisions can also make a difference. Here, there is no shortage of ideas. They cover strengthened competition policy, better provision and pricing of transportation infrastructure, developing a strong innovation culture, creating strong incentives for entrepreneurship and hard work, and investing in high-quality education. The task we collectively face, then, is to 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches identify the right specific policies in each of these areas and then find ways of implementing them. Clearly, this is not an easy task, but neither is it an impossible one.  Housing I would now like to turn to the second issue – the balance in the housing market.  Again, when I spoke six years ago, the focus was on the pressures in the housing market arising from the rather unusual situation of having the growth rate of the population exceed that in the number of dwellings by a substantial margin (Graph 6). Since then, population growth has slowed, and the rate of growth in the dwelling stock has increased so that it now once again exceeds that of the population. Reflecting this increase, the share of GDP accounted for by the building of new dwellings has risen significantly and is now close to the various peaks reached over the past 50 years (Graph 7). Notwithstanding this, with spending on alterations and additions being relatively subdued, overall investment on residential construction remains some way below the previous peaks.  This increase in the supply of dwellings has come on the back of a large run-up in housing prices in Australia's two largest cities. But the increase in supply now looks to be contributing to some moderation in the rate of increase in housing prices in these cities. It is also putting downward pressure on rents, with the CPI measure of rent inflation running at just 1.2 per cent in 2015, the lowest for 20 years (Graph 8). Whether or not these trends are maintained remains to be seen, and so we continue to watch developments in the housing market very closely. However, the overall picture does appear to be one of a better balance between supply and demand than was the case in 2010.  As I noted earlier, the lift in residential construction has been an important element in the cyclical rebalancing of the economy. In the period ahead, we can expect a further increase in residential construction, although at a slower rate than took place last year. While this more modest increase will mean a more modest boost to overall GDP growth from home-building, it should assist with the sustainability of the current boom in residential construction. It is unlikely to be in our collective interest to have a further surge in the construction of new dwellings, as a share of the economy, then to be followed by what would surely be a larger and more prolonged decline later on. Overall, the recent data on building approvals suggest that we are on a reasonable path here.  From a longer-term perspective, the challenge of providing an adequate supply of reasonably priced housing for an increasing population rests largely on the flexibility of land supply and, in particular, the supply of well-located land. This is because high housing costs largely reflect high land prices, not high construction costs. Here, it is zoning regulations and the transportation infrastructure that can make a material difference. In both areas, progress has been made since 2010, but there is more to be done.  Inflation The final issue is the inflation outlook.  Six years ago, inflation rates in almost all advanced economies were below the midpoint of central bank targets. This remains the case today (Graph 9). The average core inflation rate across the advanced economies is very similar to that in 2010, and headline inflation rates are lower than they were then, because of the decline in oil prices over the past year.  Six years ago, Australia was one of the few advanced economies in which inflation was not below the midpoint of the target (in our case, 2½ per cent) (Graph 10). This was, perhaps, not surprising given the mining investment boom that was then taking place. But today, as in many other countries, we too find ourselves below the midpoint of the target, although by only a relatively small margin. Importantly, unlike most of these other countries, inflation in Australia does remain consistent with the medium-term target.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 It would appear that in many advanced economies the inflation dynamics are a little different from those in the past. In earlier decades, it was very rare for central banks to worry that inflation and inflation expectations were too low. Yet today, we hear this concern quite often, and the ‘unconventional’ has almost become conventional.  One factor that has contributed to the low inflation outcomes is the fall in oil prices. But a more fundamental influence has been the low wage increases in most advanced economies. In a number of these economies, including the United States, Japan, Germany and the United Kingdom, the low wage increases have coexisted with fairly strong employment growth and not-so-strong output growth. This is evident in Graph 11. The left hand panel shows, for each country, average employment growth over the past two years relative to the long-term average. Similarly, the right hand panel shows recent GDP growth rates relative to the long-term averages. The pattern is reasonably clear: employment growth has been quite strong relative to historical trends, but output growth has not. It is also worth noting that each of these four countries is at, or near, conventional estimates of full employment.  The commonality of this experience of low wage outcomes, strong employment gains and relatively subdued output growth suggests that some global influence may be at work. One possibility is that workers in the advanced countries perceive that they have less bargaining power than they had before, either as an after-effect of the financial crisis and/or the incremental globalisation of many service industries. Another possibility is that it is a reflection of the subdued growth in the global production of goods and the relatively strong growth in services, where output is more difficult to measure.  Whatever the reason, the dynamics of labour markets are critical to the future path of inflation. It is possible that wage outcomes will remain very subdued even in countries with strong labour markets. If this turns out to be the case, then it is likely that inflation rates will also continue to be very low and monetary policy very accommodative. Alternatively, what we might be witnessing is just a slightly longer lag in the normal relationship between employment growth and wages. If this is the case, a pick-up in wage growth and inflation may not be too far away. Here, the United States is a test case of sorts given that its recovery is most advanced. Recently, there have been some signs of a pick-up in inflation there and it will be worth watching what happens quite closely over the next few months.  For us, here in Australia, the continuing low wages growth means that CPI inflation is also likely to remain relatively low. While there is some upward pressure on the retail prices of imported goods as a result of the depreciation, this pressure is being muted by stronger competition following the entry of a number of overseas-based retailers into the Australian market.  As the Reserve Bank has indicated for some time, this low inflation outlook provides scope for easier monetary policy should that be appropriate in supporting demand growth in the economy. An important factor here will be whether the growth in aggregate demand continues to be sufficient to accommodate the growth in our labour force.  So, this brings me to the end of my remarks. I wish you the best of success for your National Congress. I hope that in another six years' time we can still be talking with some satisfaction about the resilience and growth in the Australian economy. And I suspect that the issues of productivity growth, the balance in the housing market and the inflation dynamics will be just as relevant as they are today, and as they were in 2010.  Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions.    
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches Graph 1   Graph 2  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 Graph 3   Graph 4  
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches Graph 5   Graph 6  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 Graph 7   Graph 8  
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches Graph 9   Graph 10  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11 Graph 11  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Lael Brainard: An update on the outlook, liquidity and resilience Speech by Ms Lael Brainard, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Institute of International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington DC, 7 March 2016. *      *      * These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. This is a fitting moment to take stock of economic and financial developments, following a volatile start to the year. I will begin by reviewing the outlook, then provide a brief recap of how financial market liquidity has fared, and finish by commenting on the resilience and resolvability of the large interconnected banks.  Outlook for the United States I am heartened by the continued strong progress on employment and the resilience of American consumers, which stand out against a considerably more challenging global backdrop. I am pleased with the continued strength in the U.S. labor market, which is drawing people back into the labor force. In February, the unemployment rate was 4.9 percent – a level that is one-half its peak during the depths of the recession in 2009. Last Friday, we learned that employment growth has averaged 223,000 per month over the past 12 months. And there likely is some room to go: The prime-age employment-to-population ratio remains 1 3/4 percentage points below levels prevailing prior to the financial crisis, while a relatively large share of employees who are working part time would prefer to work full time. In addition, wage growth remains relatively slow. Domestic activity continues to grow at a moderate pace. The pace of consumer spending, after slowing some at the end of last year, looks to have picked up in January, and auto sales remained strong in February. Over the past two years, consumption has increased at about a 3 percent pace, on average, and I expect to see growth to continue at close to this pace based on solid job and income growth – together with elevated readings on consumer confidence and the boost to household purchasing power from persistent declines in energy prices. The housing sector has also contributed steadily to growth over the past year. With housing activity well below pre-recession norms, it appears there is still scope for continued growth in construction activity. In contrast, sectors of the economy that are sensitive to energy prices or international demand have been a drag. In response to the plunge in oil prices, investment in drilling and mining structures fell 50 percent last year, and continued reductions in the number of drilling rigs this year suggest that further declines are likely.1 At the same time, firms and workers in the energy sector have experienced extreme financial difficulties and severe job losses. Although the euro area and Japan are recovering, their demand growth remains very low, despite extraordinary monetary accommodation. In emerging market economies growth last year came in at only one-half the average rate from 2009 to 2013. Because China has accounted for one-third of the growth in world Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and trade, the recent slippage in Chinese economic growth is having an important effect globally. Even if Chinese growth does not slide further, the changing composition of its growth toward consumption and services and away from resource-intensive manufacturing and investment                                                 1  Despite the drop-off in drilling investment, oil production has been surprisingly resilient, as producers have increased the productivity of established wells. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  will pose important challenges to commodity exporters and other emerging economies, especially since China had previously accounted for upwards of one-half of global imports of many base metals. Weak foreign demand relative to the United States has pushed down net exports and contributed to a nearly 20 percent strengthening of the real trade-weighted dollar since mid-2014. As a result, net exports subtracted a little more than 1/2 percentage point from GDP growth in 2014 and 2015, and econometric models suggest that past appreciation will lead to close to another 1 percentage point subtraction this year.2 These effects are especially prominent in the U.S. manufacturing sector, where output is sluggish, and the agricultural sector has also been hit hard by the rise in the value of the dollar. In addition, with profits at many firms adversely affected by the rise in the dollar and weak demand abroad, business fixed investment increased only 1-1/2 percent last year after contributing significantly to growth earlier in the recovery. On balance, in recent months, financial conditions have tightened somewhat with equity prices moving lower and corporate risk spreads widening, although conditions have improved in recent weeks. In addition, progress on inflation has been slow. Prices for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) have increased 1.3 percent over the 12 months through January, well below the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) 2 percent target. Reductions in energy prices are, in part, responsible for this low rate, and if energy prices stabilize, top-line inflation should move higher. Still, a stabilization in energy prices is not assured. Market participants have been repeatedly surprised by the depth and persistence of oil price declines: Both spot and far futures oil prices, for example, have fallen in five out of the past six quarters since mid-2014. But even after discounting the influence of energy prices, core PCE inflation has been stubbornly stuck in the vicinity of 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent since 2012.3 Most recently, the dollar has played an important role in holding down non-oil import prices, which fell 3-1/2 percent last year and subtracted an estimated 1/2 percentage point from core inflation.4 Should the dollar stabilize, the downward influence on inflation should dissipate. But, as with oil prices, the movement in the value of the dollar has been more persistent than markets and many observers expected, with increases in every quarter since mid-2014. If the labor market continues to improve, higher resource utilization should also put some upward pressure on inflation going forward. However, the effect of resource utilization on inflation is estimated to be much lower today than in past decades.5 An important concern about persistently low inflation is that it can lead to a fall in longer-term inflation expectations, making it much more difficult to achieve our inflation target. For the most part, longer-term inflation expectations appear to have remained reasonably stable, though there are some concerning signs. Longer-term inflation expectations of professional forecasters and primary dealers have held quite steady in recent years at levels consistent with the FOMC’s target. However, households’ inflation expectations appear to have moved down somewhat recently. Five-to-10-year inflation expectations in the University of Michigan                                                 2  See Gruber, McCallum, and Vigfusson (2016). 3  Core consumer price index (CPI) inflation has been 1/2 percentage point higher than core PCE inflation over the 12 months through January. Over the past 15 years, core CPI inflation has averaged about 1/4 percentage point more than core PCE inflation. Much of the recent larger gap is due to differences in the coverage of health-care services and to differences in the weight accorded to housing services and health-care services. The CPI only covers out-of-pocket expenditures for health-care services, while the PCE index covers a much broader range of spending. Expenditures on housing are a larger share of the CPI than of the PCE index, and prices for housing services have increased at an above-average pace recently. 4  See pp. 8–9 of the February 2016 Monetary Policy Report (Board of Governors, 2016). 5  See Blanchard (2016); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Kiley (2015b). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Surveys of Consumers have edged lower over the past year or two with the level in February nearly 1/2 percentage point below the 10-year average. Three-year inflation expectations in the New York Federal Reserve’s Survey of Consumer Expectations have also moved steadily lower over the past two years, though the recent decline in energy prices may explain much of this drift. Notably, market-based measures of inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) and nominal Treasury yields are at historically low levels. At the five-year, five-year-ahead horizon, inflation compensation is 1 percentage point lower than mid-2014 levels. Declines in swap-based measures of inflation compensation have been similar. However, these declines appear correlated with oil prices, and it is not clear to what extent these declines reflect a change in inflation expectations, changes in investor demand for TIPS versus nominal Treasury securities, or an improvement in the risk characteristics of nominal Treasury securities versus other assets. Over the next couple of years, there are reasons to expect energy prices and the dollar to eventually stabilize, output to increase at around the moderate pace it has averaged over the recovery thus far, foreign growth to recover somewhat, the U.S. labor market to improve further, and inflation to move toward our 2 percent target. However, there are risks around this baseline forecast, the most prominent of which lie to the downside. For example, China faces risks as it navigates a sharp slowing in its goods sector, a large buildup in corporate debt, and an apparent surge in demand for foreign assets, although China possesses resources to deal with these challenges. More broadly, sources of robust demand around the globe are few, and sources of weakness relatively greater, as evidenced by persistently below target inflation in all of the major advanced economies. Monetary policy In today’s circumstances, policy could usefully follow two simple guidelines. First, we should not take the strength in the U.S. labor market and consumption for granted. Given weak and decelerating foreign demand, it is critical to carefully protect and preserve the progress we have made here at home through prudent adjustments to the policy path. Tighter financial conditions and softer inflation expectations may pose risks to the downside for inflation and domestic activity. From a risk-management perspective, this argues for patience as the outlook becomes clearer.6 7 Second, we should put a high premium on clear evidence that inflation is moving toward our 2 percent target. Inflation has persistently underperformed relative to our target. Moreover, measures of inflation compensation and some survey-based measures of inflation expectations suggest that inflation expectations may have edged lower. Given the currently weak relationship between economic slack and inflation and the persistent, depressing effects of energy price declines and exchange rate increases, we should be cautious in assessing that a tightening labor market will soon move inflation back to 2 percent. We should verify that this is, in fact, taking place. In this regard, core PCE inflation increased 1.7 percent over the 12 months ending in January, a noticeable step-up from an increase of 1.3 percent over the preceding 12 months.7                                                  6  To the extent that the neutral rate of interest – the rate that keeps output at its potential level and inflation at its target – has fallen in the United States and is low around the world, this may weigh on the policy path. See Laubach and Williams (2015), Hamilton and others (2015), Kiley (2015a), Johannsen and Mertens (2016), Del Negro and others (2015), Brainard (2015), and chapter 3 of World Economic Outlook (International Monetary Fund, 2014). 7  Because the most recent 12-month change in core PCE prices includes several relatively large monthly increases in core PCE prices in the first part of 2015, it is possible that 12-month core PCE inflation will move lower in coming months as these relatively large monthly increases drop out of the 12-month window. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Liquidity In addition to raising uncertainty around the outlook, the recent financial market volatility has underscored the importance of ongoing attention to the resilience of market liquidity. Although it is fair to say that the recent uptick in volatility has in part reduced earlier concerns about prolonged low volatility and associated reach-for-yield behavior, it has placed added focus on the resilience of liquidity, particularly in markets, such as the market for corporate bonds, that may be prone to gapping between liquidity demand and supply in stressed conditions. The Federal Reserve’s surveillance of liquidity conditions in financial markets has broadened and deepened considerably since the “taper tantrum” in mid-2013 and the events of October 2014 in the Treasury market. The analysis so far suggests a few preliminary observations. While it does not appear that day-to-day liquidity has declined notably, some characteristics of liquidity provision are changing. Broadly, traditional price-based measures of liquidity such as bid-asked spreads and the price effect of a given trade size generally remain in line with pre-crisis norms in most markets. In contrast, both anecdotes from market participants and the declining size of trades in some markets suggest it may have become more expensive to conduct, and may take more time to implement, large trades.8  Moreover, there may be some deterioration in the resilience of liquidity at times of stress, along with a greater incidence of outsized intraday price movements. Relatedly, liquidity appears to be more segmented based on the characteristics of the securities being traded and the underlying structure of the markets in which they are traded. Based on granular disaggregation of the traded securities, liquidity appears little changed in secondary markets that have traditionally been highly liquid, such as on-the-run Treasury bonds and highly rated corporate bonds. By contrast, there has been some reduction in liquidity in the segments of these markets that have historically been less liquid.9  The move toward somewhat greater segmentation of liquidity, in conjunction with ongoing electronification and acceleration of trade execution, might be contributing to increased linkages across markets. Anecdotally, it appears market participants may be using relatively more liquid instruments to hedge exposures in other less liquid market segments, perhaps unintentionally contributing to increased correlation across markets.10  From a broader financial stability perspective, the possible deterioration in the resilience of liquidity suggests a special focus on segments where price gaps are most likely to arise at times of stress between holders of relatively illiquid or thinly traded securities that want to sell and dealers with an apparently reduced willingness to take the other side of the trade, as indicated, for example, by leaner dealer inventory holdings.11 Mutual funds holding relatively less liquid assets is one area of focus. Despite having share prices that move with market prices, these funds can give rise to first-mover advantages for redeeming shareholders and create the potential for destabilizing waves of redemptions and asset fire sales if liquidity buffers and other tools to manage liquidity risk prove insufficient.12 In this regard, our surveillance has been closely monitoring for any signs of liquidity strains associated with the recent increases in spreads for high-yield corporate bonds, as well as for idiosyncratic events                                                 8  See Adrian, Fleming, Shachar, and Vogt (2015); and Adrian, Fleming, Vogt, and Wojtowicz (2016b). 9  See Adrian, Fleming, Vogt, and Wojtowicz (2016a); and Fleming (2016). 10  See Dobrev and Schaumburg (2016). 11  See Bank for International Settlements (2016). 12  In particular, research has suggested that corporate bond funds exhibit herding behavior – that is, a tendency for waves of sales or purchases of common securities across funds. This herding appears more significant for less liquid bonds, which could exacerbate the concerns noted above. See Cai and others (2015). Also, see Cetorelli, Duarte, and Eisenbach (2016) for estimates of the effects of asset fire sales. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  affecting particular funds in this segment, such as the events surrounding the abrupt closing of Third Avenue Management’s Focused Credit Fund last December. More broadly, the regulatory agencies in the United States and the Financial Stability Board internationally have work under way focusing on possible fire-sale risk associated with the growing share of less liquid bonds held in asset management portfolios on behalf of investors who may be counting on same-day redemption when valuations fall. The recent proposal by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to ensure mutual funds have ample liquidity buffers under stressed scenarios and undertake measures to address the risk of heavy redemptions and fire sales is notable in this regard. Our surveillance will continue to undertake more granular analysis of liquidity resilience and associated risks. Across financial markets, it is difficult to disentangle the effects on liquidity of changes in technology and market structure and changes in broker-dealer risk-management practices in the wake of the crisis on the one hand and enhanced regulation on the other. While the leverage ratio and other Dodd-Frank Act requirements likely are encouraging broker-dealers to be more rigorous about risk management in allocating balance sheet capacity to certain trading activities, the growing presence of proprietary firms using algorithmic trading in many of these markets, which predated the crisis, is also influencing trading dynamics in important ways.13 The Request for Information issued by the U.S. Treasury and the recent proposals from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the SEC will be important in deepening our understanding. While acknowledging the role of regulation as a possible contributor, it is important to recognize that this regulation was designed to reduce the concentration of liquidity risk on the balance sheets of the large, interconnected banking organizations that proved to be a major amplifier of financial instability at the height of the crisis. Resilience and resolvability This brings me to the last item on my agenda: an update on efforts to strengthen the resilience and resolvability of these systemic banking organizations. With recent and upcoming proposals, much of the new regulatory architecture will be in the process of implementation or in train. Even so, I would expect the rules and their application to continue to be strengthened and modified as financial risks evolve, just as I would expect these rules to be increasingly tailored over time to better reflect risk profiles. As a result of the capital and liquidity regulations already in place as well as the associated stress tests, the eight most systemic U.S. banking organizations are now holding $800 billion more in high-quality liquid assets than they were in 2011 and $500 billion more in common equity capital than they were in 2008. These liquidity and capital buffers are designed to strengthen the going-concern resilience of systemic banking organizations during periods of market volatility and financial stress. In addition, we recently released our proposed framework for determining the application of an additional countercyclical buffer to our large banking firms and made the first determination under the rule. On top of this, the capital surcharge we have proposed, which is designed to ensure the largest, most systemic banking organizations internalize the risk they pose to the system, is estimated to range from 1.0 to 4.5 percent of risk-weighted assets, based on 2013 data, over and above the 7 percent minimum and capital conservation buffers under Basel III. Indeed, it appears that some institutions may have already reduced their systemic footprint in anticipation of these additional charges. Of course, the crisis starkly illustrated that what seem like thick capital cushions in good times can become uncomfortably thin in the face of financial stress. Our Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) stress-testing framework is arguably our most powerful tool for                                                 13  See Adrian, Fleming, Stackman, and Vogt (2015). 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  ensuring that these capital buffers remain robust to a variety of possible shocks to the trading and banking book exposures of the large, interconnected banking organizations. Therefore, as we work to fine-tune and strengthen this framework, I would hope to see the capital surcharge for systemic banking organizations integrated into CCAR to ensure robustness, even as adjustments might be made on other parameters of the framework. Although today’s greatly enhanced common equity capital requirements should materially reduce the probability that a large bank might fail in response to a severe economic downturn or financial stress, it is not enough to reduce the risks of failure. In parallel, our supervisory and regulatory efforts are raising the bar on ensuring that the large, interconnected banking organizations have in place credible plans and preparations as well as properly calibrated and positioned liquidity and loss absorbing capacity to ensure failure can take place in an orderly manner. To that end, we have proposed a Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity rule that contains a long-term debt requirement that is critical to the feasibility of bankruptcy for the systemic banking organizations. It is a necessary counterpart to the Dodd-Frank Act requirement that large banking organizations have credible resolution plans and undertake preparations to make those plans operationally feasible. In particular it requires the top-tier holding companies of systemic banking organizations to maintain a sufficiently large buffer of long-term debt that can be converted into equity and used to fully recapitalize their important operating subsidiaries in the event of bankruptcy. The proposed levels of long-term debt are calibrated to the specific riskiness and scale of each institution’s activities, taking into account the likely shrinkage of the operations of their subsidiaries in resolution. The requirement is designed to mitigate contagion, fire-sale, and run risks by providing comfort to depositors, short-term debt holders, and counterparties of the operating subsidiaries of the firm, since the long-term unsecured debt issued by the top-tier holding company would be structurally subordinated to the claims on the operating subsidiaries. The presence of long-term debt holders that will be bailed in ensures that taxpayer resources will not be used and should provide incentives to preserve the firm’s value as it approaches insolvency, thus aligning the firm’s interests with the public’s broader interest in financial stability. The Board has received many detailed comments on the proposed long-term debt rule. Some have commented on the existing stock of outstanding long-term debt with acceleration clauses that might not qualify under the rule’s criteria and have proposed grandfathering as a possible solution. Others have raised questions about whether the leverage ratio or the risk-based capital framework provides the more appropriate calibration benchmark for the minimum long-term debt requirement. Comments from foreign banks have also addressed our proposal to impose internal long-term debt requirements on the U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign banks and have asked, among other things, whether the proposed requirement should vary more depending on the resolution strategy of the parent foreign bank. We are currently carefully reviewing these comments. One thing is clear: the long-term debt requirement is a critical component in ending too big to fail. The long-term debt requirement together with rigorous resolution plans and operational preparedness, the capital surcharges along with the capital stress tests, and the availability of sufficient amounts of high-quality liquidity where it is most likely to be needed will all substantially decrease the risk that a large financial institution’s distress could pose to the broader financial system and help ensure that no banking institution is too large and too complex to fail. They will move us closer to our goal of a safer, more responsible, and more resilient financial system. References Adrian, Tobias, Michael Fleming, Or Shachar, and Erik Vogt (2015). “Has U.S. Corporate Bond Market Liquidity Deteriorated?“ Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), October 5. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  Adrian, Tobias, Michael Fleming, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt (2015). “What’s Driving Dealer Balance Sheet Stagnation?“ Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), August 21. Adrian, Tobias, Michael Fleming, Erik Vogt, and Zachary Wojtowicz (2016a), “Corporate Bond Market Liquidity Redux: More Price-Based Evidence,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), February 9. --------- (2016b), “Further Analysis of Corporate Bond Market Liquidity,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), February 10. Bank for International Settlements, Committee on the Global Financial System (2016). “Fixed Income Market Liquidity (PDF),” CGFS Papers, no. 55. Basel, Switzerland: BIS, January. Blanchard, Olivier (2016). “The U.S. Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s? (PDF)“ Policy Brief PB16-1. Washington: Peterson Institute of International Economics, January. Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). “Inflation and Activity – Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF),” NBER Working Paper Series 21726. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). Monetary Policy Report (PDF). Washington: Board of Governors, February. Brainard, Lael (2015). “Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low,” speech delivered at Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1. Cai, Fang, Song Han, Dan Li, and Yi Li (2015). “Institutional Herding in the Corporate Bond Market,” working paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December, available at the Social Science Research Network. Cetorelli, Nicola, Fernando Duarte, and Thomas Eisenbach (2016). “Are Asset Managers Vulnerable to Fire Sales?“ Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), February 18. Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni, Matthew Cocci, Sara Shahanaghi, and Micah Smith (2015). “Why Are Interest Rates So Low?“ Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), May 20. Dobrev, Dobrislav, and Ernst Schaumburg (2016). “High-Frequency Cross-Market Trading and Market Volatility,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), February 17. Fleming, Michael (2016). “Is Treasury Market Liquidity Becoming More Concentrated?“ Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), February 11. Gruber, Joseph, Andrew McCallum, and Robert Vigfusson (2016). “The Dollar in the U.S. International Transactions (USIT) Model,” IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 8. Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). “The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF),” NBER Working Paper Series 21476. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. International Monetary Fund (2014). “Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates,” chapter 3 in World Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven. Washington: IMF, April, pp. 81-112. Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). “The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound,” FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Kiley, Michael T. (2015a). “What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)“ Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. --------- (2015b). “Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research,” FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2015). “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux (PDF),” Working Paper Series 2015-16. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Haruhiko Kuroda: Answers to Frequently Asked Questions on “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with a Negative Interest Rate” Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting held by the Yomiuri International Economic Society, Tokyo, 7 March 2016. *      *      * Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. Introduction It is a great honor to be invited to this meeting hosted by the Yomiuri International Economic Society today. At the end of January, the Bank of Japan decided to introduce “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with a Negative Interest Rate,” which added the new dimension of “a negative interest rate” to the existing policy of QQE. Specifically, the Bank applies a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to current accounts that financial institutions hold at the Bank. This measure enables the Bank to now pursue additional monetary easing by providing the new option of “a negative interest rate” in addition to the “quantitative” and “qualitative” measures used so far. Some market participants had voiced doubts that a further expansion of QQE would be possible, arguing that QQE had reached its limit, but I think such views have been completely dispelled. “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” will have an impact on financial institutions, financial markets, and, more broadly, people’s lives in general. Moreover, as the term itself, “negative interest rate,” sounds somewhat shocking, the measure has been the focus of attention in the newspapers and on TV day after day. Given the wide impact – on financial markets, the management of financial institutions, and people’s everyday lives – it will have, the measure has given rise to a variety of questions and concerns. Today, I would like to explain the Bank’s thinking with regard to this policy and respond to frequently asked questions. I. Benefits for households and firms Are there benefits for households and firms? To start with, I would like to explain the benefits of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” for households and firms. The media has been reporting that while interest rates on housing loans have declined, deposit interest rates have also declined, asking whether the net impact of the policy for households is negative or positive. The answer is very clear. Individuals and firms as a whole will definitely benefit from this policy (Chart 1). Deposit interest rates are declining, but the extent of the decline is minimal, since rates already were close to 0 percent. For example, interest rates on deposits in ordinary accounts (the Japanese equivalent to checking accounts for retail customers) at mega-banks decreased from two-hundredths of a percent to a thousandth of a percent. In other words, the interest earned on depositing 1 million yen for a year declines by 190 yen – from 200 yen to 10 yen. On the other hand, the extent of the decline in lending rates is much larger. Lending rates for 10-year fixed-rate housing loans provided by mega-banks have declined by 0.25 percentage point, and the Tokyo Inter-Bank Offered Rate (TIBOR), a benchmark rate for lending to firms, has also fallen, with the 3-month TIBOR, for example, declining by slightly less than 0.1 percentage point. While it is true that the interest earned from depositing 1 million yen will be only 10 yen, we need to consider since when and why deposit interest rates have become so low. The first 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  time interest rates on deposits in ordinary accounts fell to units of hundredths of a percent was in 1999, when Japan was falling into deflation. Under deflation, prices decline across the board and nominal interest rates fall accordingly. This situation persisted in Japan for a prolonged period. In order to increase deposit interest rates, we have to revitalize the economy and overcome deflation. Another concern is that the Bank’s negative interest rate policy will have a negative impact on financial institutions’ business, making them more reluctant to lend or leading them to demand higher lending rates. It is certainly the case that in the prolonged environment of extremely low interest rates, financial institutions’ net interest income from their core business of taking deposits and making loans has been on a declining trend. Under these circumstances there is a strong concern that the introduction of a negative interest rate will make the situation even worse. From a theoretical perspective, financial institutions may not tolerate the costs imposed by a negative interest rate and instead pass on these costs through an increase in lending rates. In Europe, where negative interest rate policies were adopted before Japan, it has been debated whether such policies are having a negative effect on financial institutions’ business and the stability of financial system, and whether such negative effects might put a limit on negative interest rate policies. However, the situation in Japan is quite different from that in Europe. First, Japan’s financial institutions have a sufficient capital buffer and remain very sound, since they were not severely affected by the subprime mortgage problems in the United States and the global financial crisis. Second, even though their net interest income has fallen, the profits of financial institutions in Japan have remained high due mainly to lower credit costs reflecting Japan’s economic recovery. In fact, in fiscal 2014, major and regional banks’ net income reached about 3.3 trillion yen – close to a record high. Therefore, it is entirely inconceivable that in Japan the functioning of financial intermediation will weaken due to strains by negative interest rates on financial institutions’ business. In fact, given the fierce competition in Japan’s lending market, banks are unlikely to increase lending rates to offset the rise in costs through the negative interest rate policy. Instead, financial institutions should consider why they cannot make sufficient profit from their core business – taking deposits and making loans. The reason is deflation. Under deflation, the difference between deposit rates and short-term money market rates (deposit spreads) as well as the gap between long- and short-term interest rates have been shrinking. This means that the only way to drastically improve financial institutions’ profit is to revitalize the economy and overcome deflation. “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” aims at overcoming deflation completely and achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. Let me explain how the policy seeks to achieve this. II. Background to the introduction of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” Why was the policy implemented? To begin, I would like to touch on the background to the introduction of the negative interest rate policy. Since the turn of the year, global financial markets have been volatile against the backdrop of the further decline in crude oil prices and uncertainty such as over future developments in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, particularly the Chinese economy (Chart 2). Crude oil prices have dropped to around 30 U.S. dollars. The drop is positive for Japan, which is an importer of crude oil, but has a negative impact on commodity-exporting economies including Russia, Brazil, and countries in the Middle East, creating uncertainty for the global economy. Furthermore, Chinese stock prices have declined considerably, resuming the slide that started last summer. However, although the Chinese economy has embarked on a process of deceleration, it has not deteriorated suddenly. The reasons for the slowdown in the Chinese economy appear to be the adjustment of excess investment by manufacturers and restraint in public investment by municipal governments under the tightening of discipline. As 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  a result, fixed asset investment decelerated but has now leveled off as municipal governments have resumed with public construction orders from the second half of 2015. In contrast, private consumption and automobile sales have remained firm, reflecting progress in the transformation of China’s economic structure from one centered on manufacturing to one centered on nonmanufacturing. Instead of signaling a sudden deterioration in China’s fundamentals, the decline in stock prices can be seen as the correction of a bubble as well as a reaction to movements in the exchange rate of the yuan. The yuan is being sold on speculation of a devaluation, resulting in a decline in China’s foreign currency reserves. This has led to instability in markets. Consequently, stock prices have declined globally and markets have become more pessimistic, with investors switching to a risk-off mode. In the foreign exchange markets, demand for the yen, which is regarded as a safe haven currency, has increased, leading to an appreciation of the yen. Although markets have become more volatile, Japan’s economic fundamentals remain sound (Chart 3). Japan’s economy has improved significantly from three years ago. Corporate profits are at historically high levels and the unemployment rate is 3.2 percent, which essentially represents full employment. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index excluding fresh food and energy has increased from minus 0.8 percent in March 2013 to above 1 percent most recently. Japan’s economy is likely to grow moderately and inflation is likely to increase toward 2 percent. This baseline scenario remains unaffected by the recent volatility. Nevertheless, in light of their record profits, firms’ investment in physical and human capital has remained rather subdued. Under these circumstances, the volatility in global markets entails the risk that it may lead to a deterioration in firms’ sentiment and a setback in the conversion of people’s deflationary mindset, which had been underway. In fact, price perceptions by firms have recently deteriorated. Thus, the reason why the Bank introduced “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” is that it judged it necessary in order to preempt the manifestation of these risks and to maintain the momentum toward achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. III. Effects of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” What effects will the negative interest rate policy have? Next, I would like to explain the effects the policy will have. The key aim of this policy is to drive down real interest rates, which is the main transmission channel of QQE. The fact that over the past three years Japan’s economy has significantly improved and we are no longer in deflationary situation is proof that a fall in real interest rates has a positive impact on the economy and inflation. Let me explain the transmission mechanisms of QQE in more detail. First, QQE raises inflation expectations through the Bank’s strong and clear commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time and through large-scale monetary easing to underpin the commitment. Second, QQE puts strong downward pressure on nominal interest rates across the entire yield curve through massive purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs). These two channels result in a decline in real interest rates. The decline in real interest rates boosts business fixed investment and housing investment through a decline in interest rates on business and housing loans. In financial markets, QQE underpins stock prices and helps to weaken the yen, which in turn pushes up corporate profits, thereby improving employment and wages. The boost in economic activity improves the output gap – that is, the balance of aggregate supply and demand – which together with rising inflation expectations, lifts prices. Developments since the introduction of QQE exactly conform to the anticipated transmission mechanisms. “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” represent a framework in which these transmission channels are further enhanced. The negative interest rate lowers short-term interest rates, 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  while the massive purchases of long-term JGBs lower long-term yields. These two elements together exert strong downward pressure on interest rates across the entire yield curve. The important aspect here is that the effect on the yield curve is stronger when the two elements are implemented in tandem than when carried out independently. The introduction of the negative interest rate on current accounts that financial institutions hold at the Bank reduces their incentive to sell JGBs in exchange for current accounts at the Bank. The reason is that JGBs with a positive interest rate become more valuable for financial institutions that attach great importance to interest income. As a result, purchases of long-term JGBs by the Bank will have stronger effects. Under normal circumstances, when short-term yields are lowered, long-term interest rates do not decline to the same extent. However, with the Bank’s introduction of the negative interest rate, a large part of the yield curve has declined by about 0.2 percentage points, which is close to the decline in short-term yields, or more (Chart 4). This means that the extent of the decline in interest rates brought about by the negative interest rate policy is quite substantial. Going forward, the Bank will assess how the effects of the decline in interest rates permeate and spread through the real economy. Doubt over firms’ willingness to invest even with a decline in interest rates Some argue that a decline in real interest rates will not produce the intended effects if firms are unwilling to borrow and invest. This is possible in the short term, while people are pessimistic. Over a longer period of time, however, the decline in real interest rates will surely boost economic activity and inflation through the impact on financial institutions’ behavior and financial markets. In fact, bank lending, which had been declining, has increased over the past three years at an annual rate of about 2 percent (Chart 5). Stock prices have risen as well, and the excessive appreciation of the yen has been corrected. Against the backdrop of such improvement in capital markets, economic growth and the underlying trend in inflation have increased. A decline in real interest rates will have no effect only when the expected growth rate, or natural rate of interest, is at such a low level that the central bank cannot produce a real interest rate that is lower than that. While this extreme case cannot be ruled out as a theoretical possibility, I am convinced it does not apply to Japan. Let me point out a couple of reasons. First, in the past three years, the decline in real interest rates has, as I just mentioned, produced actual effects. And second, looking at Japan’s economy and Japanese firms, I do not think the situation is as dire as that, given Japan’s economic strengths such as its technological prowess and the skill-level of the labor force. It is implausible that the natural interest rate is so low that monetary policy would be ineffective. Does volatility in global financial markets render monetary policy ineffective? The volatility recently observed in global financial markets certainly makes it more difficult to clearly see the effects of the negative interest rate policy. Immediately after the introduction of the negative interest rate policy, stock prices rose, with the Nikkei index adding 800 points in two days, while the yen fell to 121 yen against the U.S. dollar. Since then, however, the global decline in stock prices and the appreciation of the yen have continued, triggered by pessimistic views on the U.S. economy and concern about the stability of the financial system in Europe. These developments have led to newspaper headlines claiming that the effects of the negative interest rate policy have been cancelled out. This is not an accurate assessment. Since the introduction of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” interest rates across the board have clearly declined. This is exactly what we intended. The decline in yen interest rates and the fact that further monetary easing is possible – all else being equal – have a positive impact on asset prices. In other words, the policy works in the direction of raising stock prices and lowering the value of the yen. At the moment, these effects are being outweighed by the excessive risk aversion among investors around the globe. However, given that the fundamentals of Japan’s economy and Japanese 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  firms remain strong and that the negative interest rate policy will have powerful effect, financial markets will turn positive as investor confidence returns. IV. Adverse effects on financial institutions’ earnings and financial markets Next, I would like to discuss possible costs associated with the negative interest rate policy. Any policy comes with costs. In other words, there is no such thing as a free lunch. In deciding on policy action, it is essential to weigh its expected costs against the need for such policy action and to try to reduce costs wherever possible. How to mitigate the adverse effect on financial institutions’ earnings Regarding the negative interest rate policy, the potential adverse effects on financial institutions’ earnings and their functioning as financial intermediaries are of utmost importance. For example, financial institutions might pass on the costs resulting from the negative interest rate policy to borrowers by raising lending rates for firms and homeowners. In order to avoid such unintended consequences, the Bank has adopted a multi-tier system in which current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank are divided into three separate tiers. Multi-tier systems have been in place for some time in European countries. Under the multi-tier system in Japan, a zero interest rate and a positive interest rate apply to financial institutions’ current account balances at the Bank of Japan up to certain thresholds (Chart 6). Let me explain how the Bank’s three-tier system works. First, the same interest rate as before – a positive rate of 0.1 percent – is applied to financial institutions’ current account balances already held at the time of the introduction of the negative interest rate policy. Specifically, such balances are calculated as the average amount outstanding on financial institutions’ current account during 2015 – which are referred to as financial institutions’ “Basic Balances” – minus required reserves. The total of “Basic Balances” minus required reserves for all financial institutions that have a current account at the Bank is about 210 trillion yen or about 80 percent of the aggregate amount outstanding of financial institutions’ current accounts. Second, a zero interest rate continues to be applied to the required reserves held by financial institutions subject to the Reserve Requirement System; a zero interest rate is also applied to the amount of current account balances that corresponds to the outstanding amount of borrowing from the Bank of Japan through the special facilities (the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility, the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, and the Funds-Supplying Operation to Support Financial Institutions in Disaster Areas affected by the Great East Japan Earthquake). The sum of these items is called financial institutions’ “Macro Add-on Balance.” The sum of such “Macro Add-on Balances” of all financial institutions at the start of the negative interest rate policy amounted to about 40 trillion yen. And third, financial institutions’ remaining current account balance is called the “Policy-Rate Balance,” to which the negative interest rate is applied. At the start of the negative interest rate policy, the aggregate amount of “Policy-Rate Balances” for all financial institutions that have a current account at the Bank was about 10 trillion yen on a net basis. Since the Bank will continue to purchase JGBs at an annual rate of about 80 trillion yen and the proceeds of such purchases will be paid into financial institutions’ current account at the Bank, financial institutions’ current account balances will increase. Therefore, if the thresholds remain unchanged, the balances to which the negative interest rate is applied will increase over time. In light of this, the Bank will raise the amount of current account balances to which a zero interest rate is applied (“Macro Add-on Balances”) at certain intervals – for example, once every three months – in an incremental manner in order to keep the amount of current account balances to which a negative interest rate is applied (“Policy-Rate Balances”) more or less unchanged. By doing so, the amount of current account balances on which financial institutions incur negative interest will be kept to the minimum necessary to achieve the objectives of the negative interest rate policy. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Given that a negative interest rate applies to only part of financial institutions’ current account balances, you may wonder whether the negative interest rate policy will fully exert its intended effects. We believe it will. Let me give you an example. If one bank sells JGBs to another, the proceeds will be transferred into the selling banks’ current account with the Bank of Japan. This transaction will lead to an increase in the selling banks’ current account balance, raising the amount on which the negative interest rate is imposed. This means that prices in financial markets – such as interest rates, stock prices, and exchange rates – will be determined under the premise that a negative interest rate is applied to a marginal increase in financial institutions’ current account balances. As the proverb says, seeing is believing. All you have to do is look at changes in the yield curve. Interest rates have indeed clearly dropped across all maturities since the introduction of the negative interest rate policy (Chart 4). Japan’s three-tier system is designed to minimize the direct impact on financial institutions’ earnings while maximizing the positive effects of the negative interest rate policy. The system works as intended. Despite the carefully calibrated design of the multi-tier system, the decline in market interest rates will inevitably have adverse effects on financial institutions’ profits. For example, it is virtually impossible for banks to cut interest rates on their customers’ deposits into negative territory, because they want to maintain their long-term relationships with customers. In addition, if a negative interest rate is imposed on customers’ deposit, this would prompt their customers to withdraw cash from bank accounts and hoard cash in vaults. In fact, financial institutions’ retail deposit interest rates have never turned negative even in European countries where the central bank has cut its deposit rate to as low as minus 1 percent. On the other hand, banks’ interest income will decrease reflecting the decline in JGB yields. Moreover, lending rates on housing and corporate loans will decline to some extent. As a result, banks’ earnings will be negatively affected. However, it should be noted that monetary easing has been pursued with a view to exerting positive effects on the economic activities of firms and households – both of which are financial institutions’ customers. These positive effects on the economy and the negative impact on financial institutions’ profits are two sides of the same coin. As mentioned before, the decline in the yield curve itself is the starting point of the transmission of policy effects. Reducing the impact of this is not something that can be achieved by changing the design of the policy. It is more productive to consider why this adverse interest rate environment, which is responsible for the decline in financial institutions’ profits from their core business – taking deposits and making loans – has been so protracted. As I mentioned earlier, the improvements in Japan’s economic activity and prices have had a positive impact on financial institutions’ business, for example through the reduction in credit costs. Moreover, bank lending has been increasing, albeit moderately. However, as financial institutions’ profit margin has not improved, financial institutions’ profits remain under strong downward pressure. The fundamental cause is the protracted deflation in Japan. In an environment of deflation and low interest rates in which short-term interest rates are close to zero, profits from deposit spreads disappear, while those from maturity transformation shrink because of the narrower differential between long- and short-term interest rates due to the flattening of the yield curve. In addition, since Japanese firms have restrained fixed investment and have instead hoarded cash and deposits, banks’ loan-to-deposit ratios have substantially declined. Further, reflecting severe competition among banks, lending margins continue to narrow. In order for Japan’s economy to escape from this trap, the economy needs to overcome deflation completely. If deflation was to return to Japan and the low interest-rate environment to continue, this would cause more serious problems for banks’ profitability. Once deflation is overcome completely, firms will become more proactive in making investments, which will lead to an increase in loan demand. Under these circumstances, as short-term interest rates become positive, banks will be able to profit again from deposit spreads. As the yield curve 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  become steeper, interest-rate margins will improve due to a larger interest-rate differential between long- and short-term rates. Therefore, overcoming deflation is essential not only for the recovery of Japan’s economy but also for the full-fledged recovery of financial institutions’ profitability through an improvement in their profit margins. How to mitigate any adverse effects on financial markets Another important point that we had to take into consideration when introducing negative interest rates is the potential adverse effect on the functioning of financial markets. Another purpose of the three-tier system therefore is to ensure that transactions continue to take place in the short-term money market. Under the three-tier system, some financial institutions will hold current account balances to which the negative interest rate is applied, while other financial institutions will have unused allowances in tiers to which a zero or positive interest rate is applied. I mentioned earlier that the aggregate amount of policy-rate balances to which the negative interest rate is applied was initially about 10 trillion yen on a net basis for all financial institutions that hold a current account at the Bank. In fact, looking at the January 2016 reserve maintenance period, if we sum up the amounts outstanding of policy-rate balances of financial institutions that have a positive policy-rate balance, the sum was about 20 trillion yen. However, given that some financial institutions have unused allowances in tiers to which a zero or positive interest rate is applied, these financial institutions can raise funds from financial institutions that have a positive policy-rate balance at a rate that is still negative but higher (i.e., less negative) than minus 0.1 percent. These transactions will be profitable for both sides. If these arbitrage transactions take place in full, the net amount of negative-rate balances will be about 10 trillion yen. In other words, this suggests that there are incentives for financial institutions to engage in transactions in the interbank money market. In Switzerland, money-market transactions are taking place at negative rates. In these cases, private banks, which have large negative-rate balances, are lenders, and major banks, which have unused zero interest rate tier allowances, are borrowers. Going forward, we expect that these arbitrage transactions in the money market will gradually increase in Japan as well. Looking at developments in the money market since February 16, when the negative interest rate started to be applied, although there were no transactions with a negative uncollateralized overnight call rate on that day, there have been uncollateralized overnight call transactions with a negative interest rate since February 17, and the weighted average rate has been negative. Meanwhile, the volume of transactions in call markets decreased from the previous reserve maintenance period. Nevertheless, I believe that as financial institutions proceed with updating their computer systems and operations, and as markets become more accustomed to negative interest rates, transactions in call markets will increase. In fact, as mentioned, in Switzerland and Denmark, which adopted negative interest rates earlier, transactions between financial institutions with negative rate balances – which have become lenders – and those with unused zero or positive interest rate tier allowances – which have become borrowers – have taken place at negative interest rates. The volume of money market transactions in the two countries is quite substantial. The Bank will continue to carefully monitor developments in the money market, including how financial institutions adjust their computer systems and operations to cope with negative interest rate transactions. Concluding remarks We cannot deny that “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” has an adverse effect on financial institutions’ earnings. That said, let me reiterate that the aim of the policy is to benefit households and firms and ultimately to fully overcome deflation. The policy seeks to further reduce real interest rates and strengthen the effects of QQE, which has proven to be effective over the past three years. By making full use of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” the Bank will achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Deflation will not return to Japan. Price stability with 2 percent inflation will definitely be achieved. Thank you.   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9   
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Hiroshi Nakaso: Japan’s economy and monetary policy Speech by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Okinawa, 3 March 2016. *      *      * Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. Introduction It is my pleasure to have the opportunity today to exchange views with administrative, financial, and business leaders in Okinawa Prefecture. I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan’s Naha Branch. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held at the end of January 2016, the Bank decided to introduce “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with a Negative Interest Rate.” Today, before exchanging views with you, I would first like to explain the Bank’s view on the recent developments in and outlook for economic activity and prices. I will then move on to its recent conduct of monetary policy while elaborating on “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” that the Bank has decided to introduce. I. Recent developments in and outlook for economic activity and prices at home and abroad Current situation of Japan’s economic activity and the bank’s projection in the January 2016 outlook report To start with, let me talk about economic developments in Japan. Although global financial markets have been volatile since the turn of the year, I believe there is no need to be too pessimistic as the fundamentals of Japan’s economy have been firm. With regard to Japan’s recent economic activity, domestic demand has followed an uptrend, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending being maintained in both the household and corporate sectors. In the corporate sector, profits clearly have continued to improve, reaching a record high, with support from an improvement in the real economy as well as the low crude oil prices and the correction of the yen’s appreciation (Chart 1). Against this background, business fixed investment has been on a moderate increasing trend. In the household sector, labor market conditions have continued to tighten. The active job openings-to-applicants ratio and the diffusion index for employment conditions in the December 2015 Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan (Tankan) have improved to almost the same levels as around the first half of 1992. Moreover, the unemployment rate has been declining and in the range of 3.0–3.5 percent for the first time since 1997. The labor market is in a situation close to “full employment,” where unemployment is due solely to mismatches between job openings and job applicants (Chart 2). Reflecting the tightening of labor market conditions, employee income has been increasing moderately. Under such steady improvement in the employment and income situation, private consumption has been resilient. Looking ahead, domestic demand is likely to follow an uptrend, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending being maintained in both the household and corporate sectors. Exports are expected to increase moderately on the back of emerging economies moving out of their deceleration phase. Against this backdrop, Japan’s economy is likely to be on a moderate expanding trend. As in the January 2016 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report), it is estimated that the economy will continue growing at a pace above its potential through fiscal 2016. In fiscal 2017, it is projected to maintain positive growth, although with a 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  slowing in its pace to around a level somewhat below the potential growth rate, reflecting the effects of a front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the consumption tax hike, as well as the cyclical developments in the economy. The medians of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for the real GDP growth rates are also indicated in the January Outlook Report, and those for fiscal 2015, 2016, and 2017 are 1.1 percent, 1.5 percent, and 0.3 percent, respectively (Chart 3). Price developments in Japan and the outlook Let me now turn to price developments in Japan. Ａsignificant change in price developments has been observed after the introduction of QQE. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food), which had been minus 0.5 percent before the introduction of QQE, improved to as high as 1.5 percent in April 2014, excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike (Chart 4). Thereafter, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI has declined, marking about 0 percent recently, but this was largely attributable to a substantial fall in crude oil prices since summer 2014. As for the underlying trend in inflation, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding fresh food and energy – both of which are with large fluctuations – had been negative before the introduction of QQE, but turned positive in October 2013. Since then, it has remained positive for 28 consecutive months and increased to 1.1 percent recently. The share of price-increasing items minus the share of price-decreasing items in the CPI has been increasing clearly, suggesting that price rises have been observed in a wide range of goods and services (Chart 5). In brief, the forecasts of the CPI (all items less fresh food) are obtained by adding the underlying trend in inflation to the contribution of energy items to the CPI. The January Outlook Report assumes that Dubai crude oil prices will rise moderately from the recent 35 U.S. dollars per barrel to the range of 45–50 dollars per barrel toward the end of fiscal 2017, which marks the end of the projection period. The contribution of energy items to the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is estimated to be slightly more than minus 1 percentage point and is at its highest level recently. However, under the aforementioned assumption of crude oil prices, the contribution is projected to decrease. Meanwhile, since the underlying trend in inflation is likely to rise steadily, this is likely to be seen clearly in the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. Therefore, the underlying trend in inflation has been improving steadily and the baseline scenario would be as follows: the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to accelerate toward the price stability target of 2 percent as the economy is likely to be on a moderate expanding trend. Taking these factors into account, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is projected to reach around 2 percent – the price stability target – around the first half of fiscal 2017. Global financial markets and overseas economies On the other hand, global financial markets have been nervous since the turn of the year; the yen has appreciated as investors sought a safe haven due to elevated risk aversion against the backdrop of declining global stock prices resulting from the further decline in crude oil prices and looming uncertainty such as over future developments in the Chinese economy. Next, I would like to explain the current situation of and outlook for overseas economies that are creating turmoil in global financial markets. To give an overview of the recent developments, overseas economies – mainly advanced economies – have continued to grow at a moderate pace on the whole, despite the slowdown in emerging economies. By region, the U.S. economy has continued to steadily recover, reflecting the firmness in household spending. Some market participants are holding a cautious view toward developments in the U.S. economy, but no new concerns are being observed, and therefore I suppose their view is too pessimistic. The European economy also has continued to recover moderately (Chart 6). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  It is true that the Chinese economy, which has been attracting the world’s attention, has continued to be in a state of deceleration due to downward pressure from an overhang of production capacities and inventory adjustments in the manufacturing sector (Chart 7). Other emerging economies and commodity-exporting economies as a whole also remain in a situation of deceleration, as the effects of the slowdown in the Chinese economy have spread to them and as the decline in commodity prices has been protracted. Some economies in Asia, however, have seen a pick-up in IT-related demand. Looking ahead, the Chinese economy is likely to broadly follow a stable growth path, albeit at a somewhat slower pace mainly in the manufacturing sector, as authorities proactively carry out policy measures to support economic activity. Other emerging economies and commodity-exporting economies as a whole are expected to gradually increase their growth rates, due mainly to the effects of the recovery in advanced economies and of economic stimulus measures, although some commodity-exporting economies are likely to remain in a situation of deceleration for the time being. II. The bank’s Monetary Policy Management Basic mechanism of monetary easing However, after the turn of the year, the global financial markets have continued to be volatile, as I have mentioned earlier. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held at the end of January 2016, many Policy Board members pointed out that there is an increasing risk that such volatility in global financial markets might delay an improvement in business confidence of Japanese firms and conversion of the deflationary mindset, and might also negatively affect the underlying trend in inflation. To preempt the manifestation of this risk and to maintain momentum toward achieving the price stability target of 2 percent, the Bank decided to introduce “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” Now, I would like to focus on the Bank’s monetary policy management. To begin with, let me review the basic transmission mechanism of monetary easing that the Bank had pursued, and then talk about the newly introduced “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” Generally speaking, the main transmission channel of monetary easing would be as follows: it will cut the real interest rate – that is, interest rate adjusted by inflation expectations – and stimulate economic activities such as business fixed investment and housing investment. Inflation expectations are taken into account because, if prices are expected to rise, corporate profits and wages also are likely to increase, and thus the real interest rate, which means the real cost of borrowing, will become lower than the nominal interest rate. When deciding to what extent the real interest rate should be lowered, policymakers can focus on the natural rate of interest as a reference level. Every country has its own natural rate of interest, which is neutral to economic activity in that it will neither accelerate nor decelerate the economy. The effects of monetary easing will be produced by reducing the real interest rate to a lower level compared to the natural rate of interest. In general, the natural rate of interest will be determined largely by the potential growth rate, which represents the economy’s growth potential. In Japan, the potential growth rate was in the range of 3–4 percent during the 1980s but declined significantly after the turn of the 1990s. Recently, it is estimated to be around 0.5 percent or lower. Bearing these factors in mind, monetary policy since the 1990s can be summarized as follows. With the aim of taking measures to bring about recovery following the economic recession after the burst of the bubble, the Bank gradually cut the policy interest rates. As a result, short-term interest rates reached approximately 0 percent at the end of the 1990s. However, at the same time, the potential growth rate became low, and accordingly the natural rate of interest declined. Even though the Bank had lowered the nominal short-term interest rate to 0 percent, it was unable to reduce the real interest rate to a level significantly 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  below the natural rate of interest due to the widely spread deflationary sentiment among the public. In order to make a breakthrough in this situation, the Bank introduced QQE in April 2013. This policy measure aimed at lowering the real interest rate by two means (Chart 8). The first is to raise inflation expectations through the Bank’s strong commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. The second is to make use of the room for lowering the nominal interest rate. Although short-term interest rates already had declined to as low as 0 percent, long-term interest rates still had room to fall. Therefore, the Bank decided to massively purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs), thereby putting downward pressure across the entire yield curve; i.e., not only short-term interest rates but also long-term interest rates including 10-year JGBs, as well as super-long-term interest rates of JGBs with maturities of 20 years or longer. By referring to some specific data, let me briefly explain how the intended effects have been spreading so far. Yields on 10-year JGBs already had been lowered to a record low level before the Bank decided to introduce “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” and thus the entire yield curve has been pushed down to an extremely low level (Chart 9). At the same time, inflation expectations have been rising on the whole from a somewhat longer-term perspective. According to various survey-based indicators, inflation expectations generally have been raised by about 0.5 percentage point under QQE (Chart 10). The decline in the nominal interest rate and the rise in inflation expectations suggest that the real interest rate has been largely pushed down. In fact, after the introduction of QQE, the real interest rate has remained in negative territory. Thus, as I have mentioned, the real interest rate, having declined to the record low level, stimulated domestic demand, resulting in a moderate recovery in Japan’s economy and an improvement in the underlying trend in inflation. Zero lower bound of interest rates and framework for “QQE with a negative interest rate” The newly introduced “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” maintains and reinforces the basic mechanism of QQE, which has produced its intended effects. For a long period of time, a common understanding has made us believe that the nominal interest rate cannot fall below the zero lower bound. However, at present, some central banks in Europe, including the European Central Bank (ECB), are in fact implementing negative interest rate policies. The following two points were considered to be reasons why the nominal interest rate cannot turn negative. First, financial institutions’ profits would be squeezed if a negative interest rate were applied to their current accounts at the central bank. If a negative interest rate were to massively squeeze financial institutions’ profits – which I would view as an extreme case – functioning of financial intermediation could be hampered and, as a result, the intended effects of monetary easing would wane. Second, a larger negative interest rate would incentivize financial institutions to withdraw more cash from their current accounts at the central bank in an attempt to avoid a negative interest rate being applied. Since financial institutions, by holding a large amount of cash, have to suffer various costs including that of delivery and storage, as well as run new risks such as theft, it is unlikely that they will largely replace their current account balances with cash holdings as soon as the interest rate on current accounts becomes negative. This implies, however, that there could be a certain limit to the depth of the negative interest rate. In other words, if these two concerns were dispelled, negative short-term interest rates could be formed by applying a negative interest rate to current accounts at the central bank, thereby pushing down the short end of the yield curve. The Bank came up with a solution to the challenges regarding a negative interest rate. This is “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” through which the outstanding balance of each financial institution’s current account at the Bank will be divided into three tiers and a negative interest rate will only be applied to a certain tier. The three-tier system has been adopted partly in consideration of the impact on financial institutions’ profits as well 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  (Chart 11). The outstanding balance of current accounts is divided into three tiers, and a positive interest rate of 0.1 percent will continue to be applied to a vast majority of an existing balance. Practically, as the “first floor” of the three-tier system, the “Basic Balance” is defined as the average outstanding balance of current accounts in January through December 2015. In the “Basic Balance,” the 0.1 percent positive interest rate continues to be applied to about 210 trillion yen; in other words, the amount outstanding exceeding the required reserves, to which a zero interest rate had been applied under the old scheme. Next, a zero interest rate will be applied to the “second floor.” For the most part, the second floor is intended to keep the amount to which a negative interest rate is applied from building up over time. Therefore, the balance of the “second floor” will be adjusted at an appropriate timing in the future. Some lending programs by the Bank, such as the Loan Support Program and the funds-supplying operation to support financial institutions in disaster areas, will be implemented at a zero lending rate from now on. A zero interest rate will be applied to the amounts outstanding of these facilities so that a negative margin incurred between lending rates and the interest rate applied to the corresponding balance of current accounts at the Bank would not disincentivize financial institutions from using the facilities. In a similar vein, the interest rates applied to the required reserves will continue to be zero. A negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent will be applied only to a portion of current account balances exceeding the amounts outstanding of the “first” and “second” floors. This is the “third floor” of the three-tier system and is called the “Policy-Rate Balance” as a negative interest rate is applied in the course of monetary policy. Admittedly, it is true that an interest rate of minus 0.1 percent is applied to current account balances at the Bank, but in practice, as I just explained, a negative interest rate is applied only to the “Policy-Rate Balance.” At the start of the negative interest rate policy, the balance amounts to about 10 trillion yen, consisting of a small portion of the total current accounts outstanding of about 260 trillion yen. Therefore, an adverse impact on financial institutions’ profits will be largely mitigated while the negative interest rate policy will powerfully produce its intended effects of pushing down the short end of the yield curve. This is because prices of any new financial transactions such as JGB transactions are determined based on a “marginal” cost, as economic jargon puts it. Consequently, a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent applied to a marginal increase in the current account balances at the Bank will define the short end of the yield curve. Besides the costs incurred by holding current account deposits at the Bank, the downward shift of the entire yield curve itself admittedly can have a negative impact on financial institutions’ profits. It should be noted that this is always the case with monetary easing in general and there is nothing special with a negative interest policy in this regard: the gist is that it is a mere reflection of monetary easing effects. Looking ahead, as the negative interest rate policy will exert its intended effects, private demand such as business fixed investment and housing investment is expected to increase. In that sense, the negative interest rate policy will accelerate the process of overcoming deflation. This could be a quicker way to get out of the low interest rate quagmire as well as bring about favorable business conditions for financial institutions. Financial institutions may want to properly consider this point, and we do hope that they will proactively explore potential borrowing needs, thereby creating new business opportunities. Spillover effects of “QQE with a negative interest rate” In addition to the transmission mechanism for QQE, which intends to push down long-term interest rates through massive purchases of JGBs, “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” aims to lower the short end of the yield curve by applying a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to a certain tier of current accounts at the Bank, thereby exerting further downward pressure on interest rates across the entire yield curve. “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” already has brought tangible effects. The JGB yield curve has been declining 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  further; yields on shorter-than-around 10-year JGBs have been negative (Chart 9). Reflecting the declines in JGB yields, financial institutions’ benchmark lending rate and housing loan interest rates also have been declining clearly. Looking ahead, I am confident that the effects of the declines in these interest rates will steadily spread to the real economy and prices. Some may have concern that financial institutions’ retail deposit interest rates also might turn negative. Admittedly, each financial institution makes its own decision on interest rates for their depositors. In the meantime, I would like to emphasize that negative retail deposit interest rates are hardly seen even in some European countries, where a negative interest rate policy has already been adopted with much lower rates compared to Japan – minus 0.75 percent in Switzerland, for example. Given those European experiences, I am sure that there are no grounds for retail deposit interest rates turning negative in Japan (Chart 12). Under a negative interest rate policy, there is no doubt that a wide range of interest rates will decline. However, this does not mean that deposit interest rates will turn negative owing to the monetary policy. Rather, this policy will bring about positive effects on borrowers through a declining cost of borrowing. In the wake of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” housing loan interest rates, for example, have declined more significantly than deposit interest rates, which already had been extremely low. The decline in housing loan interest rates will spur housing investment and lead to economic expansion. The unquestionable fact is that, not just a negative interest rate policy, but any kind of monetary easing reduces interest rates. The changes in interest rates could have different effects across individual entities in the short term; however, looking at the economy as a whole, a decline in interest rates brought about by monetary easing would likely stimulate domestic demand and expand the economy. The bank’s determined commitment toward overcoming deflation and sustainable economic growth Japan has been mired in deflation for more than 15 years. For Japan to achieve sustainable economic growth in the future, the utmost priority is to overcome deflation at the earliest possible time. In order to indicate its unwavering will to attain this target, the Bank decided to introduce “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” Japan’s economy has steadily progressed toward overcoming deflation for the past three years after the introduction of QQE, but we are only halfway to achieving the price stability target. Meanwhile, the Bank has devised the framework of monetary policy in various ways so as to adjust to economic and financial developments. Related to this point, I will touch on the supplementary measures decided at the Monetary Policy Meeting in December 2015 to facilitate smooth implementation of QQE. Specifically, we took the measures of (1) expanding eligible collateral for the Bank’s provision of credit and (2) extending the average remaining maturity of JGB purchases. As for the expansion of eligible collateral, as the Bank continues its massive purchases of JGBs, the amount of eligible collateral of private financial institutions has been on the decrease. Expanding the range of eligible collateral will contribute to smooth asset purchases in the future. As for the extension of the average remaining maturity of JGB purchases, it aims at more flexible and smooth asset purchases while assuring liquidity in the JGB markets. As is indicated by these measures, not only “a negative interest rate” but additional monetary easing in terms of “quantity” and “quality” dimensions will naturally remain a policy option. I am convinced that this new policy framework will be a drastic measure to fulfill the Bank’s responsibility to overcome deflation. Raising growth potential of Japan’s economy and monetary policy In order to achieve sustainable economic growth, Japan’s economy inevitably should tackle the challenges to raising medium-term growth potential, on top of overcoming deflation. As I have noted, the potential growth rate in Japan is estimated to have declined to around 0.5 percent or lower. Taking a shrinking population as a given, an overall increase in labor productivity will be a key to raising the potential growth rate. In this sense, looking ahead, a 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  structural reform needs to be promoted not only in an economic context but also in a social context, and should focus on developing a productivity-enhancing mechanism and environment. I strongly expect the government to continue committing to such a structural reform without loosening the reins. The Bank also can contribute to raising the growth potential because powerful monetary easing will dispel people’s deflationary mindset and provide a favorable environment for firms to make investment proactively and take actions to improve productivity. Furthermore, while the Bank has been purchasing exchange-traded funds (ETFs) at an annual pace of about 3 trillion yen under QQE, it additionally has established a new program for purchasing ETFs at an annual pace of about 300 billion yen, composed of stocks issued by firms proactively investing in physical and human capital. This program will be enacted next month. We already have received various encouraging opinions and comments from market participants in the run-up to the start-up of the new program on which we place our hope for enhancing growth potential. With such encouragement, we are working diligently on setting eligible criteria and the operational framework for purchases. As I have noted so far, I believe that monetary policy to overcome deflation and the structural reform to raise the potential growth rate must be pursued in tandem to bring Japan’s economy back on track toward sustained growth. Now that the Bank of Japan has taken monetary easing one step further by introducing “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” I expect the original third arrow of Abenomics, the growth strategy, to fly higher and faster. Moreover, I hope that households and firms will take bold steps towards economic prosperity, making full use of the current financial environment, which is more accommodative than ever. Conclusion In concluding, let me touch on the economy of Okinawa Prefecture. The economy has continued to expand on the whole. This is attributable to a high level of public investment and to an increase in tourism demand mainly supported by the weaker yen, an increase in the volume of international flights, and the easing of visa requirements. The buoyant construction and tourism sectors have been leading the expansion of corporate activity, which has steadily improved the employment and income situation. In terms of private consumption recently, more consumers are inclined to purchase high-end products. These developments point to a virtuous cycle from income to spending being in operation. This is evidenced in the Naha Branch’s September and December Tankan last year, in which business sentiment registered a new record high for two consecutive quarters. Let me focus on buoyant tourism demand. Led by a significant increase in tourists from China and other foreign regions, the number of tourists to Okinawa Prefecture in 2015 increased by 0.7 million from a year earlier and registered a new record high, marking 7.76 million in total. Even after the turn of the year, its increasing trend has continued, and the effects of the slowdown in the Chinese economy have not been observed thus far. As tourism demand increases, hotel occupancy rates and spending per tourist have been rising. I have heard that, due to an increase in tourists from overseas, many domestic tourists even had to give up visiting the prefecture during the high season last year. This uptrend in tourism demand is likely to continue on the back of the overseas travel boom seen in neighboring economies and an expansion of the runways at the Naha Airport. Okinawa Prefecture has been assigned as the National Strategic Special Zone for international tourism, leading to an increase in domestic fixed investment, such as construction of hotels. Increasing demand for duty free goods and souvenirs is reflected in favorable corporate profits in the retail and wholesale sectors. With regard to the outlook for the tourism industry, the major industry in Okinawa Prefecture, the prefecture aims at achieving 1 trillion yen in tourism revenue and 10 million tourist arrivals. With the aim of attaining these targets, it plans to develop the world’s highest quality 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  resort area in an attempt to attract high-end inbound tourists. To realize this goal, it is vital to make the best use of its nature-rich environment as well as historical and cultural properties that have been inherited from the Ryukyu Kingdom dating back to the 15th century, while further upgrading the tourism industry. In terms of efforts to make use of its geographical characteristics, on the logistics front, the setting up of the Okinawa international logistics hub that aims to enable high-speed transportation to major Asian cities has been progressing steadily. The decision has been made to build a new international convention facility, with an expectation that this will encourage demand for MICE (i.e., meeting, incentive, convention, and exhibition/event) and promote business matching. The creation and improvement of infrastructures are likely to largely contribute to further development of Okinawa Prefecture in line with economic growth in neighboring economies. There is an old phrase in Okinawa Prefecture: bankoku shinryo (i.e., bridge between nations). I heard that the origin of this phrase goes back to the 15th century, when the Ryukyu Kingdom – which was in close proximity to Japan, China, Korea, and Southeast Asian regions – prospered as a transit trade country. Bankoku shinryo expresses that the Ryukyu Kingdom will serve as a bridge that connects the entire world through its trading vessels, making use of geographical advantages. This phrase fits today’s Okinawa Prefecture even better, since it provides bridges between countries all over the world in terms of not only a gateway of international logistics but also a tourism site. The Bank, centering on its Naha Branch, hopes to contribute as much as possible to further development that takes full advantage of the economic features of the prefecture. In closing, I wish all the best for the further development of the economy of Okinawa Prefecture. Thank you.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9    
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11    
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 13    
   14 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Benoît Cœuré: A budgetary capacity for the euro area Introductory remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at a public hearing at the European Parliament, Brussels, 2 March 2016. *      *      * Madam Chair, Mr Chair, Honourable Members of the European Parliament, Ladies and gentlemen, I am grateful to the two rapporteurs and to the two committee chairs for holding this hearing today to advance the public debate on a fiscal capacity for the euro area. We are all well aware that political attention is largely focused elsewhere, but we should not lose sight of the objective of completing Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), securing its capacity to absorb economic shocks and creating confidence today in its future economic performance. As I have said elsewhere, if downside risks to the recovery were to materialise, this would not make it easier to respond to the refugee crisis or to counter terrorism.1 A quick glance at fiscal policies today should further convince us of the importance of this discussion:  • The recovery in the euro area is proceeding at a sedate pace; it is mainly supported by our monetary policy measures and by the low price of energy. At the same time, the global economy is overshadowed by renewed uncertainty and broader geopolitical risks.  • Public finances in many euro area countries are still in a fragile condition. After the past significant progress in fiscal consolidation, fiscal policy is at present mildly expansionary on average in the euro area. In many Member States, even though quality improvements by changing the composition of fiscal spending are still possible, high debt levels leave no room for fiscal manoeuvre. Only very few countries currently have fiscal space available. Rigidities in the economic structure of several Member States, although being addressed, are still significant.  This situation casts doubt on the euro area’s capacity to face future economic shocks. A key policy challenge is therefore how to dispel these doubts today and to make sure that the euro area is well-prepared for downturns.  As one of two central bankers on this podium, it is not my role to explain to you which specific design of a fiscal capacity would be the right choice for the euro area. This is a political choice and should be the outcome of a political discussion.2 What I can offer you today is my assessment, as an economist, as to why we need a fiscal capacity for the euro area, why it cannot be the silver bullet that will make EMU work better, and under what conditions it could function well. Fiscal policies in EMU The role of fiscal policies in EMU has been at the core of the policy debate for some time now. Fiscal policies span a broad range of issues, ranging from public investment and collective                                                 1  See Cœuré, B., “Time for a new Lamfalussy moment”, speech at the Professor Lamfalussy Commemorative Conference, Budapest, 1 February 2016. 2  See Cœuré, B., “Towards a political convergence process in the euro area”, speech at the Interparliamentary Conference “Towards a Progressive Europe”, Berlin, 16 October 2015. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  goods – allocative functions that would also include the EU budget – to tools for macroeconomic stabilisation. Today, rather than discussing what, broadly speaking, fiscal policy could do to support growth at the current juncture, I will focus on how well-designed fiscal policies in an economic and monetary union – where monetary policy is exercised at the European level – could act as an instrument for stabilisation.  Let me start by clarifying that the euro area today is not at a crossroads between two starkly different routes, namely, responsible national fiscal policies on the one hand and a common fiscal capacity or a euro area budget on the other, with the choice between the routes being based on political or philosophical priors. From an economic standpoint, these are complementary. And in fact, we already have elements of both. First, a precondition for fiscal policies to be able to contribute effectively to macroeconomic stabilisation is to ensure that markets have faith in the sustainability of public finances. And that is why adherence to, and the full and consistent implementation of, the Stability and Growth Pact and Fiscal Compact is so important. As I have said before, this is not a matter of theology; it is a political and economic imperative. Markets need to trust the capability of our governance framework to effectively coordinate fiscal policies in EMU, and citizens need to be confident that common rules are being respected. Let me add that any common fiscal capacity will be financed by current or future taxes on the same taxpayers and companies which already fund their national budgets. We cannot add to this edifice if its foundations are shaky, that is, if national budgets are not clearly sustainable. In concrete terms, this means that Member States should rebuild fiscal buffers into their national budgets to be able to weather future economic shocks, while at the same time adjusting the composition of their fiscal policies to optimally support the recovery. Once these buffers are available, the Stability and Growth Pact provides ample flexibility to adjust fiscal requirements to enable the functioning of automatic stabilisers on a national level and to react to a severe downturn in the euro area as a whole if need be. Whether the Stability and Growth Pact should be further reviewed or complemented with new features, such as sovereign debt restructuring mechanisms, to improve ownership and set the right incentives is an open question, with ramifications which go far beyond our discussion today. But in any case, trust will not be rebuilt if we start by unravelling the existing rules. Second, we have seen during the crisis that, without monetary policy instruments at the national level, fiscal policies can become overwhelmed if country-specific shocks are very large and not well catered for by the shock-absorbing capacity of the economy and the financial sector. Action can and should be taken to reduce the probability and size of such large shocks. The banking union, with its Single Supervisory Mechanism, Single Resolution Mechanism and the new bail-in rules, goes a long way in this direction, provided that all these elements are implemented in a resolute and consistent way. But we cannot responsibly assume that the euro area will from now on be immune to crises. The Five Presidents’ Report therefore calls for the creation of a shock-absorption capacity at the euro area level to complement the automatic stabilisers of Member States.  And last but not least, there is ample scope for euro area countries to better absorb shocks internally, by having suitably resilient economies. Additionally, we need to improve and strengthen labour mobility and risk-sharing via financial markets. This is another reason why completing the banking union, and why complementing it with a capital markets union with substantial cross-border equity links, is so important. And this also reminds us of the importance of preserving labour mobility from the temptation of raising new fences. A fiscal capacity for the euro area There are many ways a euro area fiscal capacity could be implemented, ranging from simple macro insurance or an unemployment benefit scheme to a fully-fledged euro area budget that could include the provision of public goods. Each of these options entails its own technical and political challenges and opportunities. In the end, the choice as to which option or combination 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  of options should be adopted will need to be a political one. This is in fact an opportunity to have a debate about Europe’s collective goals; such a debate is more necessary than ever and goes beyond the economic sphere alone.3  From the perspective of the economist and of the central banker who has a keen interest in making EMU as a whole work better, the crucial question behind the discussion about a fiscal capacity for the euro area is how to maximise its positive effects on the functioning of EMU, while at the same time preserving incentives for sound fiscal policy-making and addressing structural weaknesses at the national level. To start with, we should all be able to agree that the objective of the fiscal capacity should be to make EMU more resilient by increasing the capacity for automatic stabilisation in the euro area. The aim should not be to actively fine-tune national economic cycles or to equalise revenues. This is in line with the design principles described in the Five Presidents’ Report, which notably insists that a fiscal capacity should not entail permanent transfers in one direction. A fiscal capacity in this sense would also be distinct in nature from more allocative tools such as those provided for by the EU budget. To be able to reach this objective, and based on my introductory remarks, I believe we need to see significant further progress along the following three dimensions:  First, a pooling of fiscal resources, whatever their nature and size might be, only works if solidarity goes hand in hand with shared responsibility. A move towards more fiscal risk-sharing in EMU would therefore require a commensurate shift towards increased joint decision-making within strong common institutions. In any case, access to a joint euro area fiscal capacity should be made conditional on compliance with the fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact. Second, we should aim at containing the burden that falls on fiscal policies by strengthening market-based adjustment. As Ludwig Erhard famously said, we need “as much market as possible, as much state as needed”. This means structural reform at the national level. But it also means completing banking union and supplementing it with a comprehensive capital markets union at the European level. In addition, this calls again for completing the Single Market more broadly, including in the services sector.  Third, it lies at the very heart of all insurance that risks are distributed equally ex ante. When it comes to mutual insurance against asymmetric shocks, it is clear that fiscal risks do not always stem from fiscal action, but from unsustainable economic and financial policies elsewhere. Therefore, any move in this direction should be accompanied by a new convergence process towards more resilient economic structures. Such a process would allow us to advance together towards a better-equipped EMU, outlining a clear path of reform and a commitment to a fiscal capacity. Political convergence is needed to kick off such a process, as any new convergence process can only be as effective as the legitimacy underpinning it.  Conclusion Let me conclude by saying that protection against moral hazard is of course very important. At the same time, it should not be used as a strategy to relegate the move towards a fiscal capacity for the euro area to never-never land. The move towards a fiscal capacity could take the form of a gradual and conditional process that allows us to move in parallel towards restored fiscal buffers at the national level, convergence in the capacity to absorb shocks at the national level and a strengthening of institutions at the euro area level, while moving, equally gradually, towards more central fiscal stabilisation.                                                  3  See Cœuré, B.: “Drawing lessons from the crisis for the future of the euro area” speech at “Ambassadors Week”, Paris, 27 August 2015. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  I think we should be more ambitious in that respect. In fact, I would even argue that there is an urgent need to accelerate our efforts to complete the EMU architecture with a fiscal capacity. Although we should acknowledge that this will take time, and that getting it right will require effort and precision, we should act without delay and speed up our work.  Thank you for your attention 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Fernando Restoy: European banking sector – situation and challenges Speech by Mr Fernando Restoy, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Spain, based on the address delivered at the UIMP seminar “¿Qué hemos aprendido de la crisis?” (“What have we learned from the crisis?”), organised by the APIE (Association of Economics Journalists), Madrid, 17 June 2016. *      *      * Thank you, Miguel Ángel, for your introduction. As you know, it is a pleasure to be here once again in Santander, participating in the closure of the seminar organised by the APIE (Association of Economics Journalists) at the Menéndez Pelayo International University (UIMP). As always, I greatly appreciate having been invited to what has become a traditional event on the calendar. Some days back in the course of a meeting, a renowned economics practitioner told me how complex it can be for interested citizens to obtain a well-founded view of the situation of the Spanish banking system. This struck me as a very appropriate remark. Despite the extensive work by the Banco de España and other public and private agencies to compile and disseminate information and analysis on banks, it is not always easy to gain proper insight into the sector as a whole. That is why I would like to take the opportunity today to offer an in-depth analysis of the situation and outlook for Spanish and European financial institutions in the context of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). In this connection, I shall first briefly review the situation of the banking sector, focusing thereafter on the challenges banks will have to face in the short and medium term. I shall conclude with some brief thoughts on the ECB’s new supervisory framework. 1. Recent developments in the banking sector In recent years, and in response to the financial crisis, banks have substantially improved their solvency levels, largely as a result of the new regulatory and supervisory requirements. At SSM-supervised banks, in the last year alone their highest-quality (i.e. CET1) capital increased on average by 70 bp, from 12.7% in 2014 to 13.4% in 20151. In the case of Spanish banks, whose starting levels were somewhat lower, the increase exceeded 80 bp, making for an average of 12.5% of CET1 at end-2015. The profitability of the banking business, however, remains at low levels and, in any event, far off the double-digit figures seen before the crisis. Among SSM banks as a whole, the return on equity (ROE) in 2015 was slightly below 5%, whereas in Spain, in consolidated terms, it was scarcely 5.6%. Admittedly, it is unusual for the return on capital to stand in most euro area countries at levels below the average cost of capital, on estimates made by the Banco de España. In the case of Spanish banks, estimates of the cost of capital stood at 6.8% in December 2015, drawing close to levels of 8% in early 2016, as a result of the period of instability observed in financial markets. We are thus in an environment in which the return demanded by investors is, in general, lower than that obtained by banks at present. And this despite the fact that the risk that the acquisition of bank shares entails should have lessened as a consequence of the reduction in banks’ leverage.                                                  1  Average of SSM institutions according to Banco de España calculations. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches Naturally, the disappointing performance of bank profits is one of the factors behind the decline in banks’ share prices in recent months which, across the board, stand significantly below their book value, as can be seen in Chart 1. This decline has been somewhat greater in the case of Spanish banks, although these continue to evidence a higher ratio than that of the main euro area banking systems.  Chart 1   2. Challenges for the banking sector Several factors account for the low profitability of the banking business in Europe. 2.1 Low interest rates One of the main factors is the maintenance of interest rates at low levels which, along with the low level of economic activity, exerts downward pressure on banks’ net interest income. The pressure exerted by low interest rates does not only affect Spanish banks but is common to most European entities, albeit with differing intensity depending on balance sheet structure and the predominant type of banking business. Hence, the adverse effect on profitability of interest rates holding at low levels is all the greater the higher the percentage of loans extended at a floating interest rate, the lower the percentage of assets recorded at fair value or the greater the proportion accounted for by deposits in the bank’s financing structure. That is to say, the current environment of low rates particularly affects the traditional banking business of financial intermediation, namely that which prevails in Spain. Additionally, it should be borne in mind that the impact of changes in interest rates on bank profitability is not linear. Any reduction in interest rates, in what is an environment with already very low levels, affects bank margins with particular intensity. Indeed, the work performed at the Banco de España shows (see Chart 2) that, for high levels of interest rates, a moderate reduction in the Euribor exerts a positive impact on net interest income, since the stimulus effect (quantity effect) exerted by lower rates on the demand for credit offsets the reduction in the unit return on the loans (price effect). However, when interest rates are SOURCE: Datastream.0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2June 2015May 2016SPAINITALYFRANCEGERMANYEURO AREAEUROPEPRICE TO BOOK VALUE RATIO OF THE BANKING SECTOR
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 already very low, a decline in the Euribor is associated with a reduction in the interest margin (the price effect exceeds the quantity effect) as banks have less capacity to pass through the reduction in interest rates to retail deposits owing to their proximity to the zero-rate level. It is possible that these non-linearities may be exacerbated when interest rates move into negative territory.  Chart 2                  That said, there are also factors that mitigate the impact of low interest rates on results. In particular, low interest rate levels contribute to reducing loan loss provisions, insofar as they are conducive to a decline in non-performing loans. This mitigating effect is particularly significant in Spain, owing to the prevalence of assets with floating rates on bank balance sheets. 2.2 Non-performing loans The second factor weighing down on bank profitability is the still-high level of non-productive assets on the balance sheets of banks located in specific countries, despite the continuing downtrend we have observed for some time. As can be seen in Chart 3, in some instances the NPL ratio exceeded levels of 15% in mid-2015. With its ratio at approximately 7%2, Spain stands only slightly above the euro area average, thanks to the reduction witnessed in the past two years. Nonetheless, the NPL ratio can be an imperfect indicator of the effect that non-productive or problem assets may have on a bank’s solvency, since it does not take into account the asset collateral or the provisions set aside. The so-called Texas ratio, an approximation to which is                                                  2 According to data for Spain from the EBA 2015 transparency exercise (consolidated data, significant institutions). With data for business in Spain, drawn from individual financial statements, the related ratio for the resident private sector in Spain stood at 10.4% in December 2015. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches illustrated in Chart 4, offers a much broader view in that it also includes in its calculation the provisions and capital available to the bank.   Chart 3 Chart 4   In any event, ensuring a suitable level of provisioning for problem assets is key to properly identifying impairments and correctly measuring the bank’s solvency. Moreover, a rigorous provisioning review policy provides banks with the right incentives for the management of their non-productive assets, since it reduces the book losses that the disposal of such assets may generate. This is only achieved with stringent accounting regulations and strict supervision of asset valuation on the bank’s balance sheet which, as you are aware, has been a key element in the Banco de España’s supervisory strategy. Indeed, we have recently amended the accounting Circular to which banks must conform in order, among other purposes, to fine-tune the accounting criteria in respect of provisioning credit risk losses. Further, for some time we have been actively contributing within the SSM to developing a common methodology in this field encompassing best practices and ensuring their uniform application across all countries. 2.3 Regulatory reform The ongoing and still incomplete reform of the regulatory framework is another factor of uncertainty that has affected banks’ share prices. With regard to the Basel Committee’s agenda, major headway has been made in reforming prudential standards and, in particular, in the treatment of credit, market and operational risks. One of the most relevant areas of work under way seeks to correct the excessive variability of risk-weighted assets (the denominator of the capital ratio) prompted by the use of insufficiently homogeneous internal models. Such heterogeneity leads to inadequate risk measurement and generates competitive distortions, harming those institutions subject to more demanding regimes of model supervision. The current challenge is to come up with a parameterisation of the new requirements that enables risk measurement to be enhanced without significantly increasing capital requirements for the system as a whole, as this is one of the commitments announced by 051015202530UKDEFREU Avrg.SSM Avrg. (a)ESPTITIEDECEMBER 2014JUNE 2015NPL RATIO%SOURCE:European Banking Authority.Transparency Exercise 2015 (104 institutions).a. The SSM average includesdata on 15 of the 19 euro area countries. No data for Greece, Slovakia, Estonia or Lithuania.0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.6UKDEFREU Avrg.ESSSM Avrg.PTITIEDECEMBER 2014JUNE 2015TEXAS RATIO PROXY (a)SOURCE:European Banking Authority. Transparency Exercise 2015 (104 institutions).a.TheratiohasbeencalculateddividingNPLbythesumofprovisionsandcapital(includingequityinstrumentseligibleasCET1andreserves).
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5 global supervisory authorities, in order to hold prudential requirements at levels compatible with the pursuit of banking activity on a proper footing. Banks must also meet the requirements stemming from the new resolution regulations, which seek to minimise the need to use public funds to manage bank crises. In particular, under the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), significant institutions shall, in addition to meeting the established capital requirements, have a minimum volume of liabilities enabling losses to be absorbed should it be necessary. That is to say, they shall have debt instruments at hand that may be converted into capital if they experience problems of viability. These requirements will likely prove a binding restriction for some financial institutions. The issuance of these instruments may pose a challenge, especially for unlisted banks with little experience in the issuance of convertible instruments or of subordinated debt. This concerns a quite substantial segment of the European banking sector. Consider that almost 70% of banks supervised by the SSM have not issued listed shares, 59% have not issued convertible bonds and 18% do not have subordinated debt on their balance sheets (see Chart 5). Many of these banks will foreseeably have to make adjustments to their business model, to align it to the change in size and composition of bank balance sheets required under the new regulations. Chart 5                 3. Possible responses by the banking sector Macroeconomic and regulatory developments support the increasingly widespread perception that there is excess capacity in the European banking industry that will heighten competition and jeopardise the viability of those institutions least able to adapt to the new environment. OTHERNON-SSM PARENTSTATE OWNEDCOOP. and SAV.BANKSLISTED0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%SSM SIGNIFICANT INSTITUTIONS BY OWNERSHIP STRUCTURESOURCE:Banco de España• 59% havenot issued any AT1 instrument (e.g. convertible bonds)• 18% have not issued any T2 instrument(e.g. subordinated debt)
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches 3.1 Efficiency Naturally, credit institutions’ first line of defence is to gain in efficiency. In recent years, as observed in Chart 6, cost-to-income ratios across the European industry have not appreciably improved in the different banking systems and they remain significantly heterogeneous. That suggests there is considerable room for improvement. Spanish banks, for their part, are in a relatively good position compared with their European counterparts, with a relatively high and growing degree of efficiency. In any event, it is also true that office density, despite falling in recent years, remains high, especially when compared with that of other European countries (see Chart 7). In this area, new technological developments should allow further gains in efficiency by providing for proximity to customers and for the marketing of products via means other than face-to-face contact.  Chart 6 Chart 7   3.2 New products and services The second foreseeable response by the industry to the narrowing of financial margins is the search for income supplementing that from the traditional commercial banking business. Net fee income relating to services (management or transactional), as a proportion of total operating income, has been on a slightly rising trend in most countries. In the current setting, it appears this trend is reflecting a lesser propensity of banks to subsidise certain transactional services with a charge to net interest income. That said, fee-generating business is subject to growing competition owing to the emergence of new unlicensed bank competitors, which have demonstrated ample ability to harness the new technologies (the so-called fintech companies). These new competitors specialise in specific segments of the services value chain, services that in the past were exclusively provided by banks, without being subject to banking regulation requirements. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7 Unquestionably, this scenario of new technologies and new emerging competitors poses a challenge to the traditional banking business. However, technical progress is also an opportunity for the more dynamic banks to generate efficiency and to extend the services provided to their customers. For instance, banks are proving very adept at developing instant payment services. And some of them might be well-positioned to develop direct lending facilities (P2P) competing with the new non-bank operators (e.g. crowdfunding). Banks retain advantages in terms of experience, market roots and the ability to offer a full range of transactional and intermediation services which should help them face competition which, nonetheless, will be increasingly intense. In our capacity as regulators and supervisors, we should seek to strike a balance between facilitating technical progress, supporting the development of new products and services, and properly safeguarding customers and financial stability. 3.3 Consolidation Finally, orderly correction of the excess capacity in the banking industry will foreseeably require greater consolidation in the sector. I spoke to you about this exactly a year ago in this same forum and I believe that since then the view that such a process is becoming increasingly likely has become widespread. Ideally, consolidation should take place at the European level, in order to overcome the strictly domestic vocation of the overwhelming majority of banks. The existence of more banks with a pan-European outlook would amount to a private national risk pooling mechanism that would help weaken the link between the macroeconomic risks existing in each country and the stability of its banking system, adding robustness to the monetary and banking union. It is therefore important to identify and attempt to eliminate those obstacles that continue to hinder such banking consolidation in Europe, in spite of the establishment of the banking union. In particular, we must consider whether regulation and supervisory practices tend to unduly penalise geographical diversification of a bank’s business. It would also be desirable to ascertain whether the current structure of the industry in various countries, characterised by the existence of numerous banks that are not listed public companies and that maintain strong links with national business sectors, hampers the participation of foreign competitors, whether directly or through acquisitions. All told, in the short or medium term it is likely that the need to continue reducing costs will encourage bank mergers and acquisitions within each country in order to harness potential economies of scale. In the largest European countries, there would seem to be room for more consolidation. In fact, in many countries the level of concentration in the industry, as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman index, is below that which might be considered to pose a possible threat to competition (see Chart 8).   
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches Chart 8   Accordingly, the European banking industry is facing important challenges arising from the new macroeconomic environment, which is not conducive to income generation, and from regulatory reform which, in order to protect financial stability, is introducing new rules and safeguards that restrict the risk transformation business. As a result, there is a need for banks to adapt their business models and corporate strategies, and this will undoubtedly affect the structure of the sector. The role of the supervisor is not, generally, to impose specific strategic action, which should be determined by the banks themselves. Rather it is a matter of facilitating the process maintaining the required supervisory standards and, thereby, offering incentives so that the right decisions are made at the right time and in an orderly fashion, always for the benefit of the shareholders, which almost always contributes to the sector’s stability. Allow me to conclude by briefly mentioning the banking union. 4. The Single Supervisory Mechanism The supervisory framework in Europe has been significantly strengthened by the setting up of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). Barely a year and a half after it started to function, it has succeeded in putting into operation a supervisory model consistent with the most demanding standards. As the result of the action taken following the analysis of the banking sector conducted in 2014, the SSM has led to an appreciable increase in the sector’s capital and has prompted the most vulnerable banks to start cleaning up their balance sheets. The SSM has also shown itself capable of participating effectively in the resolution of crisis episodes, like the one involving Greek banks. Moreover, the SSM has managed to eliminate many of the national regulatory particularities, has created a common methodology for the supervisory review of all banks and has made 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9 significant progress in harmonising inspection practices by drafting and developing a manual of common procedures. At the operational level, in record time, joint supervisory teams have been put in place for each significant institution and an ambitious programme of on-site inspections has been developed. All these actions have been carried out within a framework of cooperation between national authorities and the European Central Bank which is, generally, functioning appropriately. Naturally, the fact that almost 100 employees of the Banco de España have been recruited to the ECB’s supervisory arm, making it the national authority that the ECB has most relied on to cover its supervisory staff requirements, is something to be proud of, although it is also an organisational challenge. Given the complexity of the project, which includes coordinating the staff of 19 national supervisors plus the ECB, and the short time that the SSM has existed, there is obviously still room for improvement. That said, there is also palpable determination on the part of those responsible for the SSM and its Supervisory Board (on which we participate) to continuously review the arrangements and processes used in order to promote its improvement when needed, counting on the conscientious contribution of all supervisory staff. In sum, as a national supervisory authority, we can only congratulate ourselves on the impetus the banking union is giving to the institutional strengthening of the euro area and on its role in preserving financial stability. We also positively value our contribution (through our staff and experience) to the effective operation of the SSM and ongoing improvement in its procedures and supervisory arrangements.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Yves Mersch: Opening remarks at the Academy of European Law Opening remarks by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the Academy of European Law, Luxembourg, 29 June 2016. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, For over 20 years the Academy of European Law (ERA) has provided a forum for law practitioners to debate European legal issues. And the need for such a forum remains strong today – maybe stronger than ever. Shakespeare’s character Tranio in Taming of the Shrew exhorts us to “do as adversaries do in law – strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends”. This is an appropriate sentiment for tonight’s event: the ERA is providing food and drink and has invited me to give you all something to argue about. This is a critical juncture for the European Union (EU). A number of states have re-imposed border controls to stop the inflow of refugees, anti-EU parties are gaining popularity in many member states and one of the largest members has just voted in a referendum to leave the Union. These factors provide a challenge to our institutions and legal frameworks at EU and at national level – a challenge that also legal professionals across Europe need to engage with. I believe there are many reasons why the vision of a united Europe is worth fighting for. Let me mention just four: 1. to preserve peace;  2. to improve economic prospects;  3. to defend our values; and  4. to increase personal options continent-wide. The founding fathers of the EU were willing to make political sacrifices to end bloodshed in Europe, following two devastating wars just decades apart. Let us not forget that we are here in a former prison in which every respected Luxembourg family had relatives who stood up for these values. After 70 years of peace in western Europe it is easy to be complacent that war will not happen again. Yet the current situation in Syria, Iraq, Ukraine and that of the Balkans in the 1990s shows that peace is vulnerable, even on our doorstep. But defence and security have to be understood as a common endeavour. The economic benefits of the Union are well documented: free trade, the removal of non-tariff barriers, the elimination of transactions costs of foreign exchange payments and the introduction of a single yield curve across the euro area to name but a few. These measures have reduced costs for businesses and households, and in turn generated higher income and created jobs. Looking ahead, also the recovery is on track to overcome the crisis. Europeans, for all our differences, have many values that we share more closely than even close allies such as the United States. Our social model ensures adequate healthcare and workers’ rights that are absent elsewhere. We value highly human and civil rights ranging from gender equality, data protection, to the condemnation of torture, including the rejection of capital punishment. The protection of these values and rights relies on the vigilance of the legal professionals here in this room and elsewhere. This is even more important vis-à-vis a reality of extreme and obsessive forms of nationalism. The EU has also increased personal choices. The ability to travel, work and live across borders has been enhanced. The European Health Insurance Card permits European citizens to obtain healthcare wherever they are. 1.5 million people, perhaps including some of you here today, 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  have completed part of their studies in another member state as part of the Erasmus programme. More than 15 million EU citizens have moved to other EU countries to work or to enjoy their retirement. This wider range of options increases people’s wellbeing. These reasons, and the other positive aspects of membership, have been drowned out in debate by concerns over migration and the large wave of refugees from troubles in the Middle East and elsewhere, the impact of the crisis, disaffection with high levels of unemployment – especially youth unemployment, and a perceived lack of accountability and legitimacy of the EU institutions. I fully recognise that Europe in its current state is not perfect. The crisis has shown that Economic and Monetary Union is incomplete, and further work is required, particularly in the areas of banking and credit markets. In order to function democracy requires that citizens can hold decision-making accountable at the level at which these are taken. But today we can only elect and sanction at the national level, while decision making is widely done at the European level. Therefore, we have to enhance the decision-making process at the European level through appropriate democratic control measures and more direct election and sanctioning features. The solutions to these issues are not simple, and reasonable people may well disagree on their form. This forum is an ideal place to debate what laws, rules and institutions we need to put in place to strengthen the integrity of the Union. I promised earlier that I would give you something to argue about tonight! I believe the vision of a united Europe is worth striving for. To make this vision come true, we also need to understand the forces behind the populist dissatisfaction with the Union, and not dismiss them. The referendum debate in the United Kingdom has been acrimonious. In striving to deliver a united Europe, we need to be united in ourselves and build a shared EU-wide identity that delivers the necessary democratic legitimacy to the institutions.  Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mario Draghi: The international dimension of monetary policy Introductory speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, 28 June 2016. *      *      * In recent years central banks across advanced economies have been engaged in the same task, namely raising inflation and inflation expectations back to levels consistent with price stability. Each has faced conditions particular to its own jurisdiction. Each has deployed measures appropriate to its own context. And each has acted to fulfil the mandate laid down in its own constitution. And yet, the fact that all central banks have faced a common challenge of low inflation is not coincidental. There are global factors at play. And this begs the question, what is the best way for us to deal with them? At one extreme, central banks can take global conditions as entirely exogenous and set their policies accordingly. At the other extreme is explicit coordination of monetary policies. In between is a range of informal solutions. Whatever one’s views on these options, what is clear is that the question of the international dimension of monetary policy is becoming more pertinent, since the common factors affecting central banks are increasing. The global drivers of inflation Indeed, a growing literature suggests that globalisation has created a common factor in inflation developments, which goes beyond fluctuations in energy or commodity prices. Higher import volumes have increased the importance of international prices and wages relative to domestic ones, making the global output gap more relevant.1 In that context there are two types of factors that are significant for the global low inflation environment we face today: more cyclical factors that have put downward pressure on prices; and more structural factors that have lowered the equilibrium real rate and slowed down the response of the economy to monetary policy. The first type of factors includes the large negative output gaps generated by the financial crisis and its aftermath, which still average 1% among G7 economies today.2 This global slack has dampened in particular import and producer price inflation, both of which have been weak for several years among advanced economies. Prices set by producers in the euro area and those set by producers in trading partner countries are indeed highly correlated.3 Also depressing global inflation has been the slump in demand for energy and commodities linked to the slowdown in emerging markets. This has fed not just into lower headline                                                 1 Inflation as a global phenomenon has been documented e.g. by M. Ciccarelli and B. Mojon (2010), “Global Inflation”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92:524–535. Measures of global economic slack are good predictors of national inflation in advanced countries, as shown empirically e.g. by C. Borio and A. Filardo (2007), “Globalisation and inflation: New cross-country evidence on the global determinants of domestic inflation” BIS WP no. 227; and in New Keynesian open economy models e.g. by R. Clarida, J. Gali, and M. Gertler, (2002) “A Simple Framework for International Monetary Policy Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49: 879–904. 2 IMF estimates. 3 See ECB (2015), “The impact of oil prices on euro area inflation”, Box 3, Annual Report 2014. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  inflation, but also into lower underlying inflation through its effect on costs and imported prices. Indeed, if one decomposes inflation for the average advanced economy, one finds that since mid-2014 there has been a notable rise in the global component, linked largely to oil and commodity price falls.4 These various factors may originate only in parts of the global economy – some originate more in advanced economies, other more in emerging markets – but in an integrated world they have global effects. Cyclical weakness has spilled over through various channels into a similar challenge for all. The second type of factors is more structural in nature. They concern the global forces that have led to very low real equilibrium interest rates across advanced economies, and hence made it more complicated for monetary policy everywhere to provide the appropriate boost to global demand given an effective lower bound on nominal interest rates. In particular, this has led many central banks in the advanced economies to engage in large-scale unconventional policies. That low interest rate environment is a consequence of a global excess of desired saving over planned investment, which results from rising net savings as populations plan for retirement; from increased demand for and lower supply of safe assets; from relatively less public capital expenditure in a context of slowing population growth in advanced economies; from the secular shift from industries intensive in physical capital to those more intensive in human capital; and from a slowdown in productivity growth that reduces returns on investment.5 Again, those factors may not be distributed homogenously across economies, but their effects are global because they propagate through global financial markets. With internationally mobile capital, the clearing interest rate that balances saving and investment is more a global concept than a local one. And accordingly, estimates of the equilibrium interest rate suggest that it is very low, possibly even negative, in the euro area, the US and other advanced economies.6 None of this means that central banks should give up on pursuing their domestic price stability mandates. We have demonstrated with our unconventional tools that it is possible to engineer accommodative financial conditions even when the equilibrium interest rate is low. And we have shown that this can be effective in supporting domestic demand and stoking domestic price pressures even when disinflationary headwinds are blowing from the global economy. But the global nature of low inflation does have two important implications. Coping with monetary policy spillovers The first is that operating against persistent headwinds arising from abroad has forced central banks to deploy monetary policy with more intensity to deliver their mandates, and that in turn results in higher financial stability risks and spillovers to economic and financial conditions in other jurisdictions.                                                 4 See Draghi, M. (2015), “Global and domestic inflation”, speech at the Economic Club of New York, 4 December 2015. 5 See Constâncio, V. (2016), “The challenge of low real interest rates for monetary policy”, speech at the Utrecht School of Economics, 15 June 2016. 6 See Holston, K., Laubach, T. and Williams, J. (2016), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper Series, Working Paper 2016–11. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Such spillovers are not necessarily all negative for the global economy. On the contrary, by securing economic and financial stability in their own jurisdictions, advanced economies also help stabilise other economies through trade and financial linkages. The empirical evidence suggests that the net spillover effect of the measures taken during the crisis has been positive, especially at times – such as after the Lehman crash – when countries have faced common global shocks.7 At the same time, monetary policy has inevitably created destabilising spillovers as well, especially when business cycles have been less aligned. The large exchange rates fluctuations between major currencies, and the pressures some emerging economies have experienced from capital flows, are testament to that. This is not so much a result of the measures central banks have employed8, but rather of the intensity with which they have had to be used. These negative spillovers have led to a revival of interest in the topic of monetary policy coordination.9 But formal monetary policy coordination is complex, for well-known reasons.10 Central banks have national mandates, not global ones, and are accountable to their domestic parliament. This does not mean, however, that we cannot achieve a better global solution than we have today. We have seen, for instance, how divergent monetary policies among major central banks can create uncertainty about future policy intentions, which in turn leads to higher exchange rate volatility and risk premia. That then has to be countered with more expansionary monetary policy, increasing spillover effects for others. We also know that competitive devaluations are lose-lose for the global economy, since they lead only to greater market volatility, to which other central banks are then forced to react to defend their domestic mandates. So we would all clearly benefit from enhanced understanding among central banks on the relative paths of monetary policy. That comes down, above all, to improving communication over our reaction functions and policy frameworks. The global economy could also benefit from cooperation among spillover-initiating and spillover-receiving economies on how to mitigate unwanted side effects. One aspect that we need to understand better is how domestic monetary regimes affect the transmission of foreign monetary policy shocks. There has been a debate in recent years as to whether the famous “trilemma” of international macro has collapsed into a “dilemma”, whereby floating exchange rates no longer guarantee autonomy for domestic monetary policy, and policy independence is only possible if capital flows are in fact managed.11 But                                                 7 See Ammer et al. (2016), “International Spillovers of Monetary Policy” IFDP Notes. See Georgiadis (in press), “Determinants of global spillovers from US monetary policy”, Journal of International Money and Finance; Feldkircher and Huber (2015), “The International Transmission of U.S. Structural Shocks – Evidence from Global Vector Autoregressions”, European Economic Review, vol. 81(C), pages 167–188; Kim (2001), “International transmission of U.S. monetary policy shocks: Evidence from VARs”, Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 48(2), pp. 339–372. 8 See Ammer et al. (2016, op cit.). 9 See Rajan (2016), “Towards rules of the monetary game”, Speech at at the IMF/Government of India Conference on Advancing Asia: Investing for the Future, New Delhi, 12 March 2016. 10 For a fuller discussion see Cœuré, B. (2014), “Policy coordination in a multipolar world”, speech at the 5th annual Cusco conference organised by the Central Reserve Bank of Peru and the Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee: “70 years after Bretton Woods: Managing the interconnectedness of the world economy”, Cusco, 22 July 2014. 11 See Rey (2015), “Dilemma not Trilemma: The global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence”, NBER Working Papers, no. 21162; Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015), ”World Asset Markets and the Global Financial Cycle”, NBER Working Papers, no. 21722. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  there is also evidence that exchange rate regimes still matter. Various recent studies support the traditional view that exchange rate flexibility affords at least some degree of insulation from global shocks.12 Another aspect is understanding the role of domestic policies more broadly in mitigating negative spillovers. A large body of empirical work in recent years has shown that fiscal, macro-prudential, regulatory and supervisory policies can help mitigate the adverse effects of foreign monetary policy on domestic financial stability.13 Indeed, the experience with the taper tantrum in 2013 showed how differences in domestic policy frameworks shaped how severely different economies were affected by financial spillovers.14 In other words, it has become clearer since the crisis that the famous “Tinbergen principle” which we apply at the domestic level also needs to be applied at the global level. Policymakers need to have sufficient instruments to deliver on their objectives. And when they do have them, they must use them. The need for policy alignment The second implication of the global nature of low inflation is that there is a common responsibility for addressing its sources, whatever and wherever their origin. Indeed, to the extent that the environment in which we operate is more affected by the global output gap, and the global savings-investment balance, the speed with which monetary policy can achieve domestic goals inevitably becomes more dependent on others – on the success of authorities in other jurisdictions to also close their domestic output gaps; and on our collective ability to tackle the secular drivers of global saving and investment imbalances. In a recent speech in Brussels I made a similar point regarding the interaction between monetary policy and other policies at the domestic level, such as fiscal and structural policies.15 I maintained that central bank independence could best be described as independence in interdependence, since monetary policy can always achieve its objective eventually, but it will do so faster, and with less collateral effects, if the overall policy mix is consistent. What I am saying here is that the same applies at the global level. We may not need formal coordination of policies. But we can benefit from alignment of policies. What I mean by alignment is a shared diagnosis of the root causes of the challenges that affect us all; and a shared commitment to found our domestic policies on that diagnosis. Today, for instance, the way in which domestic policies respond to a shortage of demand globally will vary: in some cases, the emphasis may be on increasing public investment; in                                                 12 For a review see Frankel (2016), “International Coordination,” presented at the 2015 Asia Economic Policy Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. 13 See, for example, Blanchard et al. (2015), “Can Foreign Exchange Intervention Stem Exchange Rate Pressures from Global Capital Flow Shocks?”, NBER Working Papers, no. 21427; Forbes et al. (2015), “Capital flow management measures: What are they good for?,” Journal of International Economics, vol. 96(S1), pp. S76-S97; Afanasieff et al. (2015), “Implementing loan-to-value ratios: the case of auto loans in Brazil (2010–11),” Central Bank of Brazil Working Paper Series, no. 380; Wong et al. (2015), “Using macro-prudential tools to address systemic risks in the property sector in Singapore”, SEACEN Financial Stability Journal, vol 4, pp. 27–41; Ostry et al. (2012), “Tools for managing financial-stability risks from capital inflows”, Journal of International Economics, vol. 88(2), pp. 407–421; Habermeier et al. (2011), “The effectiveness of capital controls and prudential policies in managing large inflows”, IMF Staff Discussion Note, SDN/11/14 ;Lim et al. (2011), “Macro-prudential policy: What instruments and how to use them? Lessons from country experiences”, IMF Working Paper WP/11/238. 14 See Eichengreen and Gupta (2013), “Fed tapering and emerging markets”, VOXeu.org. 15 See Draghi, M. (2016), “On the importance of policy alignment to fulfil our economic potential”, 5th Annual Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa Lecture at the Brussels Economic Forum 2016, Brussels, 9 June 2016. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  others, on supporting private demand through more growth-friendly tax and regulatory policy, and of course through monetary policy. The relative stance of stabilisation policies will differ across countries depending on cyclical positions. But the sign of the effect on global demand needs to be positive. Similarly, structural policies that aim at raising participation and productivity may take different forms in different places, but they need to achieve the same outcome, which is to increase long-term growth rates and raise equilibrium interest rates.16 Here fora such as the G-20 can play an essential role in bringing about the appropriate alignment of policies. It is key that what is agreed in those fora is translated in the concrete policy actions. The disappointing outcome of the G-20 commitment to raise global growth by 2% with structural measures is one example of how intentions and actions can diverge. It contrasts with the more successful example that was provided by coordinated global fiscal expansion in 2008–09. Such fora of course cannot bind countries into specific actions. But mutual recognition of their common interest can act as a form of coordination device. That common interest today is a faster closing of the global output gap, more stable global inflation, higher long-term global growth and greater global financial stability. And such an improved policy mix would help reduce unwanted side effects of monetary policy, since the burden of stabilisation would be better shared across policies. For instance, in the current environment of global slack, the international spillovers from growth-friendly fiscal policies are likely to be wholly positive, since they primarily boost domestic demand in the home country. That is also true within regions, such as the euro area, where there are different local output gaps. The upshot is that, in a globalised world, the global policy mix matters – and will likely matter more as our economies become more integrated. So we have to think not just about whether our domestic monetary policies are appropriate, but whether they are properly aligned across jurisdictions. We have to think not just about the composition of policies within our jurisdictions, but about the global composition that can maximise the effects of monetary policy so that our respective mandates can best be delivered without overburdening further monetary policy, and so as to limit any destabilising spillovers. This is not a preference or a choice. It is simply the new reality we face.                                                  16 For a discussion on the interaction between demand- and supply-side policies at the global level see Cœuré, B. (2015), “Paradigm lost: Rethinking international adjustments”, Egon and Joan von Kashnitz Lecture, Clausen Center for International Business and Policy, Berkeley, 21 November 2015. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mugur Isărescu: Transition – how to secure a stronger economic future for the constituency? Speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, in the panel on “Transition: How to Secure a Stronger Economic Future for the Constituency?”, during the annual meeting of the IMF and World Bank Constituency, Kyiv, Ukraine, 4 June 2016. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, In my address I would like to focus on the challenges in conducting monetary policy in a way that will contribute to securing a stronger economic future for countries in our constituency. Obviously, my account is shaped by Romania’s experience, but I hope it will still keep you interested, as it may be relevant for other small to medium-sized emerging economies. 1. Brief account of monetary policy regimes in Romania At the time when the National Bank of Romania had to choose a strategy for conducting its monetary policy, i.e. in the early nineties, monetary targeting was actually the only feasible option. Not only did the low forex reserves preclude a fixed exchange rate arrangement, but, even if possible, the alternative was not suitable given the widening external imbalance. However, by the end of the decade, monetary targeting had reached its operational limits given the break in the relation between monetary aggregates and inflation, a phenomenon which matched developments elsewhere in the world. At that point, we took into account pegging the exchange rate, but neither the hard nor the soft version was deemed appropriate. On one hand, a crawling peg helps control inflation when it is brought down from 30%–40%, but it is less useful when a lower level is envisaged, since the crawl incorporates inflation expectations. On the other hand, exchange rate flexibility was seen as an asset for an economy as big and rigid as Romania was at the time, especially given the upcoming stages of capital flow liberalisation. Against this background, Romania opted for inflation targeting as early as 2002, even though it took several years of preparations until the actual adoption, in August 2005. The NBR chose the “light” version of the strategy, which meant retaining the managed float feature of the exchange rate regime. The actual form that inflation targeting took in Romania matched the “managed-floating plus” concept, considered the most suitable choice for an emerging-market economy involved in the global capital market. This concept, introduced by Goldstein in 2002, combines the managed float part, allowing for FX market interventions in order to smooth out excessive volatility, with inflation targeting as a monetary policy strategy and an active pursuit of measures to limit the degree of currency mismatches in the economy. As a matter of fact, in an IMF paper published in 2003, the light version of inflation targeting is found to be widely spread among emerging economies, where fiscal dominance continues to weigh and monetary policy cannot set aside concerns over financial stability and external equilibria. 2. Light inflation targeting in Romania Drawing the line after more than a decade of inflation targeting, I would say that we have managed to deliver steady disinflation and anchor expectations, even though the frequent occurrence of exogenous shocks led to high volatility in inflation and the occasional missing of annual targets. All central banks are familiar with supply-side shocks related to a surge or fall in commodity prices, but in Romania we have also had to deal with large (and not necessarily predictable) adjustments in administered prices and frequent changes in indirect taxation. Some of the latter were inherent to EU membership (i.e. alignment of some excise 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  duties), but others were related to an erratic tax legislation. In such an environment, two features of the inflation targeting framework as implemented in Romania appear as particularly relevant: • First, the focus on the medium-term achievement of the inflation objective, rather than hitting the target all the time. This approach allows for sustainable price stability without incurring the cost of excessive volatility in output and employment. • Second, the ex-ante definition of a set of escape clauses that limit the central bank’s responsibility in attaining the annual target: 1. Marked increases/decreases in commodity prices 2. Natural disasters and other similar exceptional events that induce cost-push or demand-pull inflationary effects 3. Large fluctuations of the exchange rate of the leu that are decoupled from domestic economic fundamentals, as well as from the monetary policy pursued by the National Bank of Romania 4. Major deviations from the administered price adjustment programme announced by the Government, in terms of both magnitude and proposed calendar 5. Divergence of the fiscal and income policies, in terms of implementation and outcomes, from the programmed coordinates 3. Case in point: monetary policy under a string of VAT changes To give you a flavour of the environment the monetary policy has had to operate in lately, we had three VAT rate cuts from 2013 to 2016, after a hike in 2010, and another cut is scheduled for 2017. Currently, the annual inflation rate stands at –3.25 percent, the most negative value in the EU. Excluding the first-round effects of the VAT cuts in mid-2015 and early 2016, headline inflation would have hovered around +1 percent. Consequently, the negative inflation we are dealing with now is not at all a condition brought about by a persistent lack of demand, as economic activity, employment and wages are actually buoyant. This is just a transitory development, induced by the aforementioned indirect tax cuts. The textbook policy choice would be to accommodate the temporary deviation from the inflation target and focus on the VAT-adjusted inflation developments – especially since the latter paint a quite different picture. If I may be allowed a short digression, the very recourse to a VAT-adjusted inflation measure in our analysis and communication came under fire. This is by no means different in nature than the Eurostat’s HICP at constant taxes – just more refined, in the sense that we take into account the fact that the pass-through of a VAT change is below 100% for most CPI items. Coming back to the current economic context, it should be pointed out that behind the “perfect storm” of deflationary exogenous shocks (low energy, food and metal prices, successive VAT rate cuts), demand-side inflationary pressures are looming: a positive output gap is emerging, unit labour cost pressures are building up, fiscal policy is taking a strongly expansionary turn. As such, while medium-term prospects appear to call for a tightening bias of monetary policy, the short-term context of deeply negative inflation makes communication with the public rather challenging. Specifically, we have to contend with the idea that the central bank should lower interest rates in response to VAT rate cuts. It proves more difficult than we thought to make people understand that the current negative readings in inflation are just transitory and reflect neither postponed consumption, nor sluggish wage growth one would associate with 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  negative inflation expectations – these actually remained anchored to the target. Therefore, none of the ingredients which make for a scary deflationary trap are present. Frankly, I understand that the general public is not familiar with concepts like overheating or positive output gap, but I believe that annual growth rates to the tune of 20% for retail sales and in excess of 10% for wages are more than self-explanatory. Still, with all the obvious signs – even for non-economists – that the economy is growing fast, we are criticised for not fighting deflation. The recent experience has made us painfully aware that – despite the large amount of information provided through a wide range of communication vehicles – our messages get through to a much lesser extent than we had thought. Therefore, we should enhance our efforts in escaping the professional jargon and trying to be as accessible as possible when explaining to the public the rationale behind our monetary policy decisions. If I were to conclude on Romania’s experience with inflation targeting, I would say that it worked quite well, even though the concept of inflation targeting has not been immune to criticism, especially in the post-crisis period. I would mention here Axel Weber, who suggested in 2015 that inflation targeting is a simplistic framework that could not stabilise the value of money in a complex and constantly evolving economic environment. However, his opinion is not shared by other well-known economists. For instance, in 2013 Charles Wyplosz stressed that even though there are times when inflation targeting seems inconvenient and possibly counter-productive, the alternatives – monetary targeting, nominal-GDP targeting or no explicit strategy at all – would probably not have done a better job. Along the same lines, Lucrezia Reichlin and Richard Baldwin concluded that inflation targeting should continue to be refined, not replaced. Of course, since I come from a central bank practicing inflation targeting, I tend to agree with the latter line of thought, as I believe that, whatever its faults, the strategy has enough intrinsic flexibility to enable it to address them. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Raghuram Rajan: The fight against inflation – a measure of our institutional development Text of the Foundation Day Lecture by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, 20 June 2016. *      *      * I thank the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research for inviting me to give this Foundation Day lecture. I have always seen TIFR with awe from afar. Some explanation is in order. My roommate in my first year at MIT was Dr. Renganathan Iyer, who is one of the smartest mathematicians I know – he used to help me understand my tutorials in real analysis. And he never missed an occasion to tell me how much smarter everyone else at TIFR was. Perhaps Renga was being modest, but I half expected on coming here today to see everyone with gigantic heads housing enormous brains. It is a relief to find that, outwardly, you all look normal. Seriously, however, I think the continuing success of TIFR suggests to us that when India wants to set up world class institutions, it can. While the Institute was fortunate to have a visionary like Dr. Homi Bhabha as its founding director, the institution has been built by the collective efforts of dedicated researchers like you all. Congratulations on a job well done! In my speech today, I thought I would describe our efforts to build a different kind of institution, not one that delves into the deepest realms of outer space or into the tiniest constituents of an atom, but one that attempts to control something that affects your daily life; inflation. There are parallels between the institution building you have done, and what we are setting up to control inflation, though clearly our efforts are much less tied to investigating the very fabric of the universe and more towards influencing human behavior. Ultimately, both require a fundamental change in mindset. The costs of inflation High inflation has been with us in India for the last four decades. Most recently, we have experienced an average of more than 9 percent inflation between 2006 and 2013. What are the costs of having high inflation? Clearly, everyone understands the costs of hyper-inflation, when prices are rising every minute. Money is then a hot potato that no one wants to hold, with people rushing straight from the bank to the shops to buy goods in case their money loses value along the way. As people lose faith in money, barter of goods for goods or services becomes the norm, making transacting significantly more difficult; How much of a physics lecture would you have to pay a taxi driver to drive you to Bandra; moreover would the taxi driver accept a physics lecture in payment; perhaps you would have to lecture a student, and get the student to sing to the taxi driver…you get the point, transacting becomes difficult as hyperinflation renders money worthless. Hyperinflation also has redistributive effects, destroying the middle class’ savings held in bonds and deposits. The horrors of hyperinflation in Austria and Germany in the 1920s still make scary reading. So clearly, no one wants hyperinflation. But what if inflation were only 15 percent per year? Haven’t countries grown fast over a period of time despite high inflation? The answer is yes, but perhaps they could have grown faster with low inflation.1 After all, the variability of inflation increases with its level, as does the dispersion of prices from their fundamental value in the economy. This makes price signals more confusing – is the price of my widget                                                 1  In fact, in a seminal paper, Fischer (1993) presents cross-country evidence to show that growth is negatively associated with inflation, and the causality runs from inflation to growth. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  going up because of high demand or because of high generalized inflation? In the former case, I can sell more if I produce more, in the latter case I will be left with unsold inventory. Production and investment therefore become more risky. Moreover, high and variable inflation causes lenders to demand a higher fixed interest rate to compensate for the risk that inflation will move around (the so-called inflation risk premium), thus raising the cost of finance. The long term nominal (and real) interest rates savers require rises, thus making some long-duration projects prohibitively costly. These effects kick in only when inflation is noticeably high. So it is legitimate to ask, “At what threshold level of inflation does it start hurting growth?” Unfortunately, this question is hard to answer – developing countries typically have higher inflation, and developing countries also have higher growth. So one might well find a positive correlation between inflation and growth, though this does not mean more inflation causes more growth. For this reason, the literature on estimating threshold effects beyond which inflation hurts growth is both vast as well as inconclusive. Most studies find that double digit inflation is harmful for growth but are fuzzier about where in the single digits the precise threshold lies.2  The inflation target Nevertheless, given the limited evidence, why do most countries set their inflation goal in the low single digits – 2 to 5 percent rather than 7 to 10 percent? Three reasons come to mind. First, even if inflation is at a moderate level that does not hurt overall growth, the consequences of inflation are not evenly distributed. While higher inflation might help a rich, highly indebted, industrialist because his debt comes down relative to sales revenues, it hurts the poor daily wage worker, whose wage is not indexed to inflation.3 Second, higher inflation is more variable. This raises the chance of breaching any given range around the target if it is set at a higher level. To the extent that a higher target is closer to the threshold, this makes it more likely the country will exceed the threshold and experience lower growth. Third, inflation could feed on itself at higher levels – the higher the target, the more chances of entering regions where inflation spirals upwards. The received wisdom in monetary economics today is therefore that a central bank serves the economy and the cause of growth best by keeping inflation low and stable around the target it is given by the government. This contrasts with the earlier prevailing view in economics that by pumping up demand through dramatic interest rate cuts, the central bank could generate sustained growth, albeit with some inflation. That view proved hopelessly optimistic about the powers of the central bank. There is indeed a short run trade-off between inflation and growth. In layman’s terms, if the central bank cuts the interest rate by 100 basis points today, and banks pass it on, then demand will pick up and we could get stronger growth for a while, especially if economic players are surprised. The stock market may shoot up for a few days. But you can fool all of the people only some of the time. If the economy is producing at potential, we would quickly see shortages and a sharp rise in inflation. People will also start expecting the central bank to disregard inflation (that is, be hopelessly dovish according to the bird analogies that abound) and embed high inflationary expectations into their decisions, including their demand for higher wages. If contrary to expectations, the central bank is committed to keeping inflation under control, it may then be forced to raise interest rates substantially to                                                 2  For example, Bruno and Easterly (1995) suggest 40 percent as a danger point, beyond which increases in inflation are very likely to lead to a growth crisis. In contrast, Khan and Senhadji (2000) estimate that the threshold above which inflation significantly slows growth is 1–3 percent for industrial countries and 7–11 percent for developing countries. 3  According to Easterly and Fischer (2001), “a growing body of literature on balance-but not unanimously-tends to support the view that inflation is a cruel tax”. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  offset that temporary growth. The boom and bust will not be good for the economy, and average growth may be lower than if the cut had not taken place. This is why modern economics also says there is no long run trade-off between growth and inflation – the best way for a central bank to ensure sustainable growth is to keep demand close to potential supply so that inflation remains moderate, and the other factors that drive growth, such as good governance, can take center stage.4  Put differently, when people say “Inflation is low, you can now turn to stimulating growth”, they really do not understand that these are two sides of the same coin. The RBI always sets the policy rate as low as it can, consistent with meeting its inflation objective. Indeed, the fact that inflation is fairly close to the upper bound of our target zone today suggests we have not been overly hawkish, and were wise to disregard advice in the past to cut more deeply. If a critic believes interest rates are excessively high, he either has to argue the government-set inflation target should be higher than it is today, or that the RBI is excessively pessimistic about the path of future inflation. He cannot have it both ways, want lower inflation as well as lower policy rates. At the same time, the RBI does not focus on inflation to the exclusion of growth. If inflation rises sharply, for instance, because of a sharp rise in the price of oil, it would not be sensible for a central bank to bring inflation within its target band immediately by raising interest rates so high as to kill all economic activity. Instead, it makes sense to bring inflation back under control over the medium term, that is, the next two years or so, by raising rates steadily to the point where the bank thinks it would be enough to bring inflation back within the target range. Let me emphasize that this is not a prediction of either the path of oil prices or a forecast of our monetary actions, lest I read in the paper tomorrow “RBI to raise rates”. More generally, the extended glide path over which we are bringing inflation in check appropriately balances inflation and the need for reasonable growth. Arguments against what we are doing There are many who believe we are totally misguided in our actions. Let me focus on four criticisms. First, we focus on the wrong index of inflation. Second, we have killed private investment by keeping rates too high. Somewhat contradictorily, we are also hurting the pensioner by cutting rates too sharply. Third, monetary policy has no effects on inflation when the economy is supply constrained, so we should abandon our attempt to control it. Fourth, the central bank has little control over inflation when government spending dominates (what in the jargon is called “fiscal dominance”). The wrong index Historically, the RBI targeted a variety of indicators, putting a lot of weight on the Wholesale Price Inflation (WPI). Theoretically, reliance on WPI has two problems. First, what the common citizen experiences is retail inflation, that is, Consumer Price Inflation (CPI). Since monetary policy “works” by containing the public’s inflation expectations and thus wage demands, Consumer Price Inflation is what matters. Second, WPI contains a lot of traded manufactured goods and commodity inputs in the basket, whose price is determined internationally. A low WPI could result from low international inflation, while domestic components of inflation such as education and healthcare services as well as retail margins                                                 4  I am being a bit loose here. The short run tradeoff works because economic actors can be surprised by unexpected loosening, and the surprise can have positive growth effects. In the long run, the central bank loses its power to surprise, and the public embeds its correct forecast of how much inflation the central bank will create into all nominal variables such as interest rates. To the extent that high inflation is harmful for growth and welfare, a central bank that continuously tries to give short run positive surprises will entrench long run high inflation, which will be bad for growth. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  and non-traded food are inflating merrily to push up CPI. By focusing on WPI, we could be deluded into thinking we control inflation, even though it stems largely from actions of central banks elsewhere. In doing so we neglect CPI which is what matters to our common man, and is more the consequence of domestic monetary policy. The effective real interest rate, investments, and savings Of course, one reason critics may advocate a focus on WPI is because it is low today, and thus would mean low policy rates. This is short-sighted reasoning for when commodity prices and global inflation picks up, WPI could well exceed CPI. There is, however, a more subtle argument; the real interest rate is the difference between the interest rate a borrower pays and inflation – it is the true cost of borrowing in terms of goods like widgets or dosas. If policy interest rates are set to control CPI, they may be too high for manufacturers who see their product prices appreciating only at the WPI rate. I am sympathetic to the argument, but I also think the concern is overblown. Even if manufacturers do not have much pricing power because of global competition, their commodity suppliers have even less. So a metal producer benefits from the fall in coal and ore prices, even though they may not get as high a realization on metal sales as in the past. The true measure of inflation for them is the inflation in their profits, which is likely significantly greater than suggested by WPI. A second error that is made is to attribute all components of the interest rate paid by the borrower to monetary policy. For heavily indebted borrowers, however, a large component of the interest rate they pay is the credit risk premium banks charge for the risk they may not get repaid. This credit risk premium is largely independent of where the RBI sets its policy rate. So when someone berates us because heavily indebted industrialists borrow at 14% interest with WPI at 0.5%, they make two important errors in saying the real interest rate is 13.5%. First, 7.5% is the credit spread, and would not be significantly lower if we cut the policy rate (at 6.5% today) by another 100 basis points. Second, the inflation that matters to the industrialist is not the 0.5% at which their output prices are inflating, but the 4% at which their profits are inflating (because costs are falling at 5% annually). The real risk free interest rate they experience is 2.5%, a little higher than elsewhere in the world, but not the most significant factor standing in the way of investment. Far more useful in lowering borrowing rates is to improve lending institutions and borrower behavior to bring down the credit risk premium, than to try and push the RBI to lower rates unduly. The policy rate in effect plays a balancing act. As important as real borrowing rates for the manufacturer are real deposit rates for the saver. In the last decade, savers have experienced negative real rates over extended periods as CPI has exceeded deposit interest rates. This means that whatever interest they get has been more than wiped out by the erosion in their principal’s purchasing power due to inflation. Savers intuitively understand this, and had been shifting to investing in real assets like gold and real estate, and away from financial assets like deposits. This meant that India needed to borrow from abroad to fund investment, which led to a growing unsustainable current account deficit. In recent years, our fight against inflation also meant the policy rate came down only when we thought depositors could expect a reasonable positive real return on their financial savings. This has helped increase household financial savings relative to their savings in real assets, and helped bring down the current account deficit. At the same time, I do get a lot of heart-rending letters from pensioners complaining about the cut in deposit rates. The truth is they are better off now than in the past, as I tried to explain in a previous lecture, but I can understand why they are upset when they see their interest income diminishing. The bottom line is that in controlling inflation, monetary policy makers effectively end up balancing the interests of both investors and savers over the business cycle. At one of my talks, an industrialist clamored for a 4% rate on his borrowing. When I asked him if he would deposit at that rate in a safe bank, leave alone invest in one of his risky friends, he said “No!” 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Nevertheless, he insisted on our cutting rates significantly. Unfortunately, policy makers do not have the luxury of inconsistency. Supply constraints Food inflation has contributed significantly to CPI inflation, but so has inflation in services like education and healthcare. Some argue, rightly, that it is hard for RBI to directly control food demand through monetary policy. Then they proceed, incorrectly, to say we should not bother about controlling CPI inflation. The reality is that while it is hard for us to control food demand, especially of essential foods, and only the government can influence food supply through effective management, we can control demand for other, more discretionary, items in the consumption basket through tighter monetary policy. To prevent sustained food inflation from becoming generalized inflation through higher wage increases, we have to reduce inflation in other items. Indeed, overall headline inflation may have stayed below 6 percent recently even in periods of high food inflation, precisely because other components of the CPI basket such as “clothing and footwear” are inflating more slowly. Fiscal dominance Finally, one reason the RBI was historically reluctant to lock itself into an inflation-focused framework is because it feared government over-spending would make its task impossible. The possibility of fiscal dominance, however, only means that given the inflation objective set by the government, both the government and the RBI have a role to play. If the government overspends, the central bank has to compensate with tighter policy to achieve the inflation objective. So long as this is commonly understood, an inflation-focused framework means better coordination between the government and the central bank as they go towards the common goal of macro stability. I certainly believe that the responsible recent budget did create room for the RBI to ease in April. Pragmatic inflation focus As you will understand from all that I have been saying, monetary policy under an inflation focused framework tries to balance various interests as we bring inflation under control. In doing so, we have to have a pragmatic rather than doctrinaire mindset. For example, emerging markets can experience significant capital inflows that can affect exchange rate volatility as well as financial stability. A doctrinaire mindset would adopt a hands-off approach, while the pragmatic mindset would permit intervention to reduce volatility and instability. Nevertheless, the pragmatic mind would also recognize that the best way to obtain exchange rate stability is to bring inflation down to a level commensurate with global inflation. Similarly, while financial stability considerations are not explicitly in the RBI’s objectives, they make their way in because the RBI has to keep growth in mind while controlling inflation. So if the RBI’s monetary policies are contributing to a credit or asset price bubble that could lead to a systemic meltdown and growth collapse, the RBI will have to resort to corrective monetary policy if macro-prudential policy alternatives are likely to prove ineffective. The transition to low inflation The period when a high inflation economy moves to low inflation is never an easy one. After years of high inflation, the public’s expectations of inflation have been slow to adjust downwards. As a result, they have been less willing to adjust their interest expectations downwards. Household financial savings are increasing rapidly as a fraction of overall 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  household savings, but not yet significantly as a fraction of GDP.5 Some frictions in the interest rate setting market do not also help. Even while policy rates are down, the rates paid by the government on small savings are significantly higher than bank deposit rates, as are the effective rates on tax free bonds. I am glad the government has decided to link the rates on small savings to government bond rates, but these rates will continuously have to be examined to ensure they do not form a high floor below which banks cannot cut deposit rates. All in all, bank lending rates have moved down, but not commensurate with policy rate cuts. The wrong thing to do at such times is to change course. As soon as economic policy becomes painful, clever economists always suggest new unorthodox painless pathways. This is not a problem specific to emerging markets, but becomes especially acute since every emerging market thinks it is unique, and the laws of economics operate differently here. In India, at least we have been consistent. Flipping through a book of cartoons by that great economist, RK Laxman, I found one that indicated the solution for every ill in 1997 when the cartoon was published, as now, is for the RBI to cut interest rates by a hundred basis points. Arguments change, but clever solutions do not. Decades of studying macroeconomic policy tells me to be very wary of economists who say you can have it all if only you try something out of the box. Argentina, Brazil, and Venezuela tried unorthodox policies with depressingly orthodox consequences. Rather than experiment with macro-policy, which brings macro risks that our unprotected poor can ill afford, better to be unorthodox on microeconomic policy such as those that define the business and banking environment. Not only do we have less chance of doing damage if we go wrong, but innovative policy may open new paths around old bottlenecks. Specifically, on its part the RBI has been adopting more liberal attitudes towards bank licensing, towards financial inclusion, and towards payment technologies and institutions in order to foster growth. Institution building Let me return to institution building. We had gotten used to decades of moderate to high inflation, with industrialists and governments paying negative real interest rates and the burden of the hidden inflation tax falling on the middle class saver and the poor. What is happening today is truly revolutionary – we are abandoning the ways of the past that benefited the few at the expense of the many. As we move towards embedding institutions that result in sustained low inflation and positive real interest rates, this requires all constituencies to make adjustments. For example, if industrialists want significantly lower rates, they have to support efforts to improve loan recovery so that banks and bond markets feel comfortable with low credit spreads. The central and state governments have to continue on the path of fiscal consolidation so that they borrow less and thus spend less on interest payments. Households will have to adjust to lower nominal rates, but must recognize that higher real rates make their savings more productive. They will find it worthwhile to save more to finance the enormous investment needs of the country. Adjustment is difficult and painful in the short run. We must not get diverted as we build the institutions necessary to secure a low inflation future, especially because we seem to be making headway. The Government has taken the momentous step of both setting a CPI based inflation objective for the RBI as well as a framework for setting up an independent                                                 5  Data from household surveys also suggest that household financial savings are moving up. For example, two recent financial inclusion surveys for selected states in India – Financial Inclusion Insights survey conducted by InterMedia and the FinScope survey implemented by the Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) – suggest that among individuals “who have a bank account”, the fraction who saved through bank deposits increased from 60% in 2013 to 98% in 2015. Of those who “save money”, the fraction saving through a bank increased from 67% in 2013 to 93% in 2015. Of those who “save money”, the fraction “saving at home” has declined dramatically from 90% in 2014 to 6% in 2015. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  monetary policy committee. In the days ahead, a new governor, as well as the members of the committee will be picked. I am sure they will internalize the frameworks and institutions that have been set up, and should produce a low inflation future for India. The rewards will be many. Our currency has been stable as investors have gained confidence in our monetary policy goals, and this stability will only improve as we meet our inflation goals. Foreign capital inflows will be more reliable and increase in the longer maturity buckets, including in rupee investments. This will expand the pool of capital available for our banks and corporations. The government will be able to borrow at low rates, and will be able to extend the maturity of its debt. The poor will not suffer disproportionately due to bouts of sharp inflation, and the middle class will not see its savings eroded. All this awaits us as we stay the course. Thank you very much for your patience in listening to me. References Bruno Michael and William Easterly. 1995. “Inflation Crises and Long-Run Growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 5209 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research). Easterly William and Stanley Fischer. 2001. “Inflation and the Poor.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking. Volume 33, Issue 2. May. 160–178 Fischer Stanley 1993. “The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth”. Journal of Monetary Economics. Volume 32, Issue 3, December 1993, Pages 485–512 Khan, Mohsin S., and Abdelhak S. Senhadji. 2000. “Threshold Effects in the Relationship Between Inflation and Growth,” IMF Working Paper 00/110 (Washington: International Monetary Fund). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Veerathai Santiprabhob: Financial connectivity in CLMVT (Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar, Vietnam, Thailand) Keynote address by Dr Veerathai Santiprabhob, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the CLMVT Forum 2016 “Towards a Shared Prosperity”, Bangkok, 17 June 2016. *      *      * Your Excellencies, Honorable Speakers, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, A very good morning to you all, It is my great pleasure to be here with you this morning. I would like to start by thanking the Thai Ministry of Commerce for inviting me to give a keynote address at this important forum. Let me take this opportunity to once again welcome all our guests, especially friends from CLMV countries, to Thailand. I am very delighted to have this opportunity to meet with many ministers, senior government officials, and business leaders participating in the first CLMVT forum. This forum provides a meaningful platform for all of us to share perspectives on how to sustainably enhance regional connectivity and unlock great potentials of our region. Over the past decade, economic integration in our region has strengthened impressively. Driven by international trade, direct investment and production networks, the share of intra-regional trade within the CLMVT to total trade volumes has nearly doubled. Amid a slowdown in global trade due to gradual and fragile recovery of major industrial economies and China’s economic transformation, cross-border trade and investment activities within the region continue to grow at a fast pace. For Thailand, the share of exports to CLMV countries to total exports volumes has risen steadily to be over 10 percent surpassing our exports to 27 euro-zone countries combined. This reaffirms the shared benefits from trade and investment connectivity. Owing largely to complementarities in various dimensions among CLMVT economies, the integration should continue to further strengthen in the future. Expanding trade and investment has been accompanied and supported by development of domestic service industries and enhanced connectivity in the service sector. A case in point is the burgeoning growth of the airline industry, both low cost and full service. Over the past few years, any frequent traveler would easily notice a marked increase in a number of flights within the region, particularly those operated by low-cost airlines. Prices have been much more affordable, attracting travelers who otherwise would not travel by planes. The development does not only benefit the airline industry itself, but also unlocks potentials of many other industries and serves the citizens of CLMVT. More seamless travel promotes the tourism industry, reduces logistic costs, and overcomes obstacles to transportation, thus allowing closer people-to-people connectivity and opening up opportunities for people to realize their fullest potentials.  Ladies and Gentlemen, Improved airline service and connectivity might only be one aspect of enhanced regional connectivity. Nevertheless, it serves us well as a model to develop other domestic service industries and to promote regional connectivity in the service sector. The questions I would like to focus on today is what could we learn from the success of the airline industry? And, how will we make this happen in other areas of the service sector that have potentials to serve the region? 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  For the first question, the fast development of the airline industry can be mainly attributed to two factors: the right business model for our market and the enabling infrastructure and eco-system. On the private sector’s part, the low-cost airlines know the region’s untapped market and come to serve the large unmet demand with the right business model. Needless to say, they offer customers with simple products, including no-frills service with a single cabin class. Their business model is successful at minimizing operating costs by using a single aircraft model and by choosing the most fuel efficient plane type to reduce fuel and maintenance costs. The airlines also revolutionized the ticketing system by first offering internet booking, paperless tickets and mobile check-ins for greater convenience and lower costs. Apart from the right entrepreneurial spirit of the private sector, policymakers are to be credited with the creation of the airline network in our region. There are at least five factors policymakers have contributed to the success of the regional airline industry. • First is the introduction of the “open sky” policy which has opened up opportunities for new potential players, at a scale large enough to create a strong viable network of airlnes providing regular services with more competitive prices. • Second, investment in necessary infrastructure has been undertaken, such as airport facilities, landing slots, and aeronautical radio networks to facilitate flight communication. • Third, rules and regulations, especially on cross-border of services, were more harmonized to support the airlines’ operation. Visa requirements and custom procedures were also streamlined to accommodate travelers. • Fourth, authorities lifted up standards for pilots, crews, and airlines’ staff, driving the airlines to actively promote their human resource development to be on par with international standards. • Lastly, the airlines have been encouraged to leverage on investments in specialized facilities in other countries in the region to lower costs, for instance, by using common aircraft maintenance centers and pilot training facilities. This combination of the right business model and appropriate policy supports has yielded tangible benefits to the region. A stronger regional airline network brings in higher competition, lower costs and better service quality, thus improving people’s livelihood and paving way for other types of businesses to benefit and grow. Ladies and Gentlemen, The bigger question is how to replicate the low-cost airlines’ success story in other service industries in the region, where large rooms for improvement have yet to be addressed and a lot of potentials to be unlocked. Among others, the finance industry is one with many untapped opportunities. Currently, a wide group of people in our countries still needs a better access to finance and there are still lots of demand for financial services to be met  –  be they savings, loans, insurance products, or payment services for both domestic and cross-border transactions. By applying the airline industry’ experiences for policymakers, let me lay out five key conditions necessary to developing domestic financial systems and nurturing financial connectivity in the CLMVT in the periods ahead. Analogous to the “Open Sky Policy”, the first factor is to promote domestic financial liberalization policy and a well-integrated regional financial system. The financial liberalization policy should aim to lessen the degree of domestic financial repression, thereby strengthening financial institutions’ performance, and broadening their offer of financial 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  products and services. This can be done along with the policy to enhance financial connectivity by promoting the presence of capable players with regional focus. Under our mandate, the Bank of Thailand aims to promote financial connectivity through more connected banking networks and more integrated payment systems. Under the ASEAN Banking Integration Framework, countries in the CLMVT should gear up efforts to strengthen regional banking networks, which will serve a diverse range of businesses and local people to gain more access to high quality banking services at fair prices. I am glad to see that several banks in our region have already spread their wings to establish representative offices, branches and subsidiaries in neighboring countries. Last month, the Thai financial system had an opportunity to welcome a new representative office of Kanbawza bank from Myanmar. The second factor is for our countries to make enough investment in necessary financial infrastructure. Having adequate infrastructure, including a backbone payment system, a digital network and a credit bureau, will provide a sound basis to develop domestic financial systems and facilitate closer financial connectivity. Technological innovation, notably Fintech, also allows us to bypass many phases of traditional financial sector development. It is therefore crucial that we build necessary infrastructure corresponding to the changing financial landscape. In addition, as investment in these infrastructures, be it ATM pool or clearing and depository services, typically requires a large amount of investment costs and technical expertise, countries should cooperate to build shared infrastructures in order to minimize investment burdens. At present, under the National E-Payment Plan, Thailand is building the new retail electronic payment infrastructure, which can be used to promote payment systems connectivity for the AEC in general and for the CLMVT region in particular going forward. Under the ASEAN Payment Roadmap, our shared vision is to promote secure and efficient electronic payment channels, which will significantly lower business costs, reduce payment uncertainty, pave ways for growing e-commerce and promote financial inclusion. In this light, the Bank of Thailand is keen to collaborate with our regional counterparts to promote payment systems connectivity within the region. The third foundation is the work towards standardized rules and regulations. Given our countries’ diverse financial systems, the harmonization of rules and standards should be given a priority so as to strengthen financial interconnectedness on a sustained basis. In the same way that the airline industry harmonizes the regulation on cross-border supply of services, the finance industry should aim at employing internationally accepted principles on finance, which already exist, to help drive harmonization of rules and regulations. Take the payment systems for instance. Currently, different legacy systems among our countries mean that we are not able to “talk” with each other as seamlessly as we wish. Adhering to the same standards, such as the one on financial messaging schemes, can help overcome this challenge. At this stage, the work to achieve harmonization on diverse aspects of banking businesses is underway, and if completed, will make financial transactions within the region much easier. The fourth factor is human capital development. Financial professionals both working in the finance industry and regulators must be well equipped with a set of skills required to serve people of the region. The fast pace of technological and financial innovation indeed urges us to upgrade our capabilities in order to understand more complex financial activities and to cope with growing risks including those related to cyber security. At the same time, the long-standing challenges to promote access to basic financial services and improve financial literacy of the people at large remain our priorities. For this reason, we need to redouble our efforts to enhance our banking, finance and technological know-how. We also need to make sure that a wealth of knowledge and experiences is effectively shared among members of the CLMVT. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The last one is to leverage on specialized financial services that some of our members are ready to offer. For Thailand, progress has been made to create financial ecosystem to meet growing regional demand for specialized financial services. In the capital market, Thailand allows entities from CLMV countries to raise funds from the Thai capital market with the introduction of more accommodative rules on capital account and taxation. Since 2013, the Lao government and firms from Lao PDR have issued baht-denominated bonds, worth 28 billion baht in total, to support large-scale infrastructure projects. In addition, the Bank of Thailand supports multinational corporations operating in the region to establish regional treasury centers in Thailand. As of now, there are 13 companies holding Treasury Center licenses, of which 4 have been granted in the past 3 months. Ladies and Gentlemen, The work to develop domestic financial sectors and strengthen financial connectivity will always be a work in progress. The Bank of Thailand is committed to working with our counterparts in CLMV countries to develop the financial industry and enhance regional financial integration. Much progress has been accomplished, but there remain many more things that we can and should do to further promote more connected financial system. As we have done in the past decade, the Bank of Thailand will stand ready to work with our CLMV partners in various ways from development of human capital and regulatory frameworks to infrastructure building. If we can build strong domestic financial systems and regional financial connectivity, we will be able to reduce costs and create positive spillovers to several other industries. Livelihoods of our people will improve. Workers and investors can more easily and cheaply remit funds across countries. Merchants will find it easier to trade cross-border. The tourism sector will gain even more momentum. SMEs will be able to utilize e-commerce and e-payment in selling their products regionally and globally. Financing of infrastructure projects can also be supported by long-term financial products with proper risk management features. Furthermore, financial inclusion and financial literacy will equip households and small businesses with the needed resilience to go through the increasingly volatile world. Ladies and Gentlemen, Just ten years ago, the low-cost airlines were still at their infancy. The airlines were not household brands, and it would be difficult for most of us to imagine how fast they would grow only in one decade, not to mention the positive impacts they would create to other industries and the wider public. The success of the airline industry, in turn, urges us to take action to tap the untapped opportunities of several other service industries abound in our promising region. While it is natural to give emphasis to trade and investment connectivity, we must not forget the great potentials that the service sector have to offer to our region, especially financial services’ role to support trade and investment. Developing domestic financial sectors and enhancing financial connectivity are vital as sound infrastructure and conducive financial eco-system will enable us to ride on the growth potential while ensuring macro-financial stability.  Building regional connectivity is like planting a tree. In the very same way that a root network helps the tree grow strong and branch out, financial connectivity is a necessary foundation which nurtures all aspects of regional economic integration – be it trade, investment or tourism. Without a strong root system, it will certainly be difficult for our tree to withstand economic storms in the increasingly volatile world. Like the planters who grow the tree with continued and delicate care, our concerted efforts from both public and private sectors are required to strengthen regional financial connectivity for the better livelihood of our people. Kob Khun Krub. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Raghuram Rajan: Resolving stress in the banking system Speech by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at ASSOCHAM (Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India) – Interactive Meet with Industry & Trade, Bengaluru, 22 June 2016. *      *      * Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. Thank you very much for inviting me to give this talk. Ordinarily, in a city like Bengaluru, we would talk about startups. Today, however, I want to talk about the resolution of financial distress. I will argue that the slowdown in credit growth has been largely because of stress in the public sector banking and not because of high interest rates. As such, what is required is a clean-up of the balance sheets of public sector banks, which is what is underway and needs to be taken to its logical conclusion. Specifically, I will describe what we have been doing in India to change the culture surrounding the loan contract. To start, let us look at public sector credit growth compared with the growth in credit by the new private banks. Public sector lending vs private sector lending As Chart 1 (Credit in India) shows, public sector bank non-food credit growth has been falling relative to credit growth from the new private sector banks (Axis, HDFC, ICICI, and IndusInd) since early 2014. This is reflected not only in credit to industry (Chart 2), but also in micro and small enterprise credit (Chart 3).1 The relative slowdown in credit growth, albeit not so dramatic, is also seen in agriculture (Chart 4), though growth is picking up once again. Whenever one sees a slowdown in lending, one could conclude there is no demand for credit – firms are not investing. But what we see here is a slowdown in lending by public sector banks vis a vis private sector banks. Why is that? The immediate conclusion one should draw is that this is something affecting credit supply from the public sector banks specifically, perhaps it is the lack of bank capital. Yet if we look at personal loan growth (Chart 5), and specifically housing loans (Chart 6), public sector bank loan growth approaches private sector bank growth. The lack of capital therefore cannot be the culprit. Rather than an across-the-board shrinkage of public sector lending, there seems to be a shrinkage in certain areas of high credit exposure, specifically in loans to industry and to small enterprises. The more appropriate conclusion then is that public sector banks were shrinking exposure to infrastructure and industry risk right from early 2014 because of mounting distress on their past loans. Private sector banks, many of which did not have these past exposures, were more willing to service the mounting demand from both their traditional borrowers, as well as some of those corporates denied by the public sector banks. Given, however, that public sector banks are much bigger than private sector banks, private sector banks cannot substitute fully for the slowdown in public sector bank credit. We absolutely need to get public sector banks back into lending to industry and infrastructure, else credit and growth will suffer as the economy picks up. These charts refute another argument made by those who do not look at the evidence – that stress in the corporate world is because of high interest rates. Interest rates set by private banks are usually equal or higher than rates set by public sector banks. Yet their credit growth does not seem to have suffered. The logical conclusion therefore must be that it is not the level of interest rates that is the problem. Instead, stress is because of the loans already                                                 1  In Chart 2, the latest negative growth April number may be an aberration because of UDAY bonds being transferred from bank loan books to investments). 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  on PSB balance sheets, and their unwillingness to lend more to those sectors to which they have high exposure. There are two sources of distressed loans – the fundamentals of the borrower not being good, and the ability of the lender to collect being weak. Both are at work in the current distress. The sources of lending distress: bad fundamentals Why have bad loans been made? A number of these loans were made in 2007–2008. Economic growth was strong and the possibilities limitless. Deposit growth in public sector banks was rapid, and a number of infrastructure projects such as power plants had been completed on time and within budget. It is at such times that banks make mistakes. They extrapolate past growth and performance to the future. So they are willing to accept higher leverage in projects, and less promoter equity. Indeed, sometimes banks signed up to lend based on project reports by the promoter’s investment bank, without doing their own due diligence. One promoter told me about how he was pursued then by banks waving checkbooks, asking him to name the amount he wanted. This is the historic phenomenon of irrational exuberance, common across countries at such a phase in the cycle. The problem is that growth does not always take place as expected. The years of strong global growth before the global financial crisis were followed by a slowdown, which extended even to India, showing how much more integrated we had become with the world. Strong demand projections for various projects were shown to be increasingly unrealistic as domestic demand slowed down. Moreover, a variety of governance problems coupled with the fear of investigation slowed down bureaucratic decision making in Delhi, and permissions for infrastructure projects became hard to get. Project cost overruns escalated for stalled projects and they became increasingly unable to service debt. I am not saying that there was no malfeasance – the country’s investigative agencies are looking into some cases such as those where undue influence was used in getting loans, or where actual fraud has been committed by diverting funds out of a company, either through over-invoicing imports sourced via a promoter-owned subsidiary abroad or exporting to related shell companies abroad and then claiming they defaulted. I am saying that, typically, there were factors other than malfeasance at play, and a number of genuine committed entrepreneurs are in trouble, as are banks that made reasonable business decisions given what they knew then. The sources of lending distress: poor monitoring and collection The truth is, even sensible lending will entail default. A banker who lends with the intent of never experiencing a default is probably over-conservative and will lend to too few projects, thus hurting growth. But sensible lending means careful assessment up front of project prospects, which I have argued may have been marred by irrational exuberance or excessive dependence on evaluations by others. Deficiencies in evaluation can be somewhat compensated for by careful post-lending monitoring, including careful documentation and perfection of collateral, as well as ensuring assets backing promoter guarantees are registered and tracked. Unfortunately, too many projects were left weakly monitored, even as costs increased. Banks may have expected the lead bank to exercise adequate due diligence, but this did not always happen. Moreover, as a project went into distress, private banks were sometimes more agile in securing their positions with additional collateral from the promoter, or getting repaid, even while public sector banks continued supporting projects with fresh loans. Promoters astutely stopped infusing equity, and sometimes even stopped putting in effort, knowing the project was unlikely to repay given the debt overhang. The process for collection, despite laws like SARFAESI intended to speed up secured debt collection, has been prolonged and costly, especially when banks face large, well-connected 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  promoters. The government has proposed reforms to the judicial process, including speeding up the functioning of the Debt Recovery Tribunals, which should make it easier for banks to collect, but those legislative reforms are before Parliament. Knowing that banks would find it hard to collect, some promoters encouraged them to “double-up” by expanding the scale of the project, even though the initial scale was unable to service debt. Of course, the unscrupulous among the promoters continued to divert money from the expanded lending, increasing the size of the problem on bank balance sheets. The inefficient loan recovery system then gives promoters tremendous power over lenders. Not only can they play one lender off against another by threatening to divert payments to the favored bank, they can also refuse to pay unless the lender brings in more money, especially if the lender fears the loan becoming a Non-Performing Asset. Sometimes promoters can offer miserly one-time settlements (OTS) knowing that the system will ensure the banks can collect even secured loans only after years. Effectively, loans in such a system become implicit equity, with a tough promoter enjoying the upside in good times, and forcing banks to absorb losses in bad times, even while he holds on to his equity. Cleaning up the banks: principles The world over, there are three cardinal rules when faced with incipient distress. 1) Viability does not depend on the debt outstanding, but on economic value. Debt may have to be written down to correspond to what is viable. Because of changed circumstances, demand may be lower and project cash flows may be significantly lower than projected earlier. The project has economic value when completed – in the sense that operating cash flows are positive, but much less than the interest on the debt it carries. If the debt is not written down, the project continues as an NPA, even while the promoter, knowing it cannot repay, loses interest. If neglected, the project may stop generating any cash flows and the assets may depreciate rapidly. 2) Complete projects that are viable, even if it requires additional funds infusion. Stalled projects do not get any better over time. If there are small investments needed to complete the project, and the promoter has no funds, it may still make sense to lend to it, even while writing down the overall debt. Essentially, the new loan makes it possible to generate operating cash flows to service some debt, even if not all the outstanding debt. 3) Don’t throw good money after bad money simply because there is an unreliable promise that debt will become serviceable. This is the opposite of (2). If the project is unviable, doubling its size does not make it any more viable. Promoters that have over-borrowed often propose an increase in scale so that the bank’s outstanding debt and new loans will all become serviceable. Perhaps it would be better for the bank to write down its loans to the initial project, rather than going deeper into the hole because the promoter may incur new cost-overruns as he expands. An incompetent or unreliable promoter will remain so even when scale expands. Bank moral hazard Unfortunately, the incentives built into the public sector banking system have made it more difficult for public sector bank executives to follow these principles (I should add that some private sector bank executives have also not been immune on occasion). The short tenure of managers means they are unwilling to recognize losses immediately, and more willing to postpone them into the future for their successors to deal with. Such distorted incentives lead to overlending to or “ever-greening” unviable projects. Unfortunately, also, the taint of NPA immediately makes them reluctant to lend to a project even if it is viable, for fear that the investigative agencies will not buy their rationale for lending. The absence of sound and well documented loan evaluation and monitoring practices by banks makes such an outcome 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  more likely. So excessive lending to bad projects and too little lending to viable ones can coexist. The regulator’s dilemma For regulator who wants the banking system to clean up so it can start lending again, this creates a variety of objectives, which can be somewhat conflicting. First, we want banks to recognize loan distress and disclose it, not paper over it by ever-greening unviable projects. Loan classification is merely good accounting – it reflects what the true value of the loan might be. It is accompanied by provisioning, which ensures the bank sets aside a buffer to absorb likely losses. If the losses do not materialize, the bank can write back provisioning to profits. If the losses do materialize, the bank does not have to suddenly declare a big loss, it can set the losses against the prudential provisions it has made. Thus the bank balance sheet then represents a true and fair picture of the bank’s health, as a bank balance sheet is meant to. Second, we want them to be realistic about the project’s cash generating capacity, and structure lending and repayment to match that. Third, we want them to continue lending to viable projects, even if they had to be restructured in the past and are NPAs. The problem is that any forbearance in labeling loans NPAs on restructuring makes it easier to avoid disclosure and indulge in ever-greening. On the other hand, strict disclosure and classification rules could imply a cessation of lending to even viable projects. There are no clean solutions here given the kind of incentives in the system, and given the absence of an operational bankruptcy code in India. Therefore, the RBI has had to adopt a pragmatic approach to the clean-up, creating new enabling processes. The RBI’s approach Our first task was to make sure that all banks had information on who had lent to a borrower. So we created a large loan database (CRILC) that included all loans over Rs. 5 crore, which we shared with all the banks. The CRILC data included the status of each loan – reflecting whether it was performing, already an NPA or going towards NPA. That database allowed banks to identify early warning signs of distress in a borrower such as habitual late payments to a segment of lenders. The next step was to coordinate the lenders through a Joint Lenders’ Forum (JLF) once such early signals were seen. The JLF was tasked with deciding on an approach for resolution, much as a bankruptcy forum does. Incentives were given to banks for reaching quick decisions. We have also tried to make the forum more effective by reducing the need for everyone to agree, even while giving those who are unconvinced by the joint decision the opportunity to exit. We also wanted to stop restructuring of unviable projects by banks who want to avoid recognizing losses – so we ended the ability of banks to restructure projects without calling them NPA in April 2015. At the same time, a number of long duration projects such as roads had been structured with overly rapid required repayments, even though cash flows continued to be available decades from now. So we allowed such project payments to be restructured through the 5/25 scheme provided the long dated future cash flows could be reliably established. Of course, there was always the possibility of banks using this scheme to evergreen, so we have monitored how it works in practice, and continue tweaking the scheme where necessary so that it achieves its objectives. Because promoters were often unable to bring in new funds, and because the judicial system often protects those with equity ownership, together with SEBI we introduced the Strategic Debt Restructuring (SDR) scheme so as to enable banks to displace weak promoters by 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  converting debt to equity. We did not want banks to own projects indefinitely, so we indicated a time-line by which they had to find a new promoter. All these new tools (including some I do not have the space to describe) effectively created a resolution system that replicated an out-of-court bankruptcy. Banks now had the power to resolve distress, so we could push them to exercise these powers by requiring recognition. This is what the Asset Quality Review, completed in October 2015 and subsequently shared with banks, sought to accomplish. Since then banks have classified existing distressed loans appropriately, and since March 2016 are looking at their weak-but-not-yet-distressed portfolio for necessary actions. There is a change in culture, and banks have been quite willing to get into the spirit of the AQR. Many have gone significantly beyond our indications in what they have cleaned up by the quarter ending March 2016. Of course, once the banks have properly classified a non-performing loan and provisioned against it, their incentive to evergreen or avoid writing down the debt to appropriate levels is diminished. Nevertheless, clean-up is ongoing work. The SDR scheme dealt with weak promoters. But some promoters are competent even while their projects are overly indebted. The ‘Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of Stressed Assets’ (S4A) is an optional framework for the resolution of large stressed accounts. The S4A envisages determination of the sustainable debt level for a stressed borrower, and bifurcation of the outstanding debt into sustainable debt and equity/quasi-equity instruments which are expected to provide upside to the lenders when the borrower turns around. Thus capable-but-over-indebted promoters have some incentive to perform, and because the project is not deemed an NPA if adequate provisions are made, public sector banks continue lending to it if necessary. Most recently, the government is contemplating a fund to lend into distressed situations, with significant participation by third parties, so that new loans can be made to viable distressed projects. Provided decision making is not dominated by banks whose very loans are distressed, this could be an effective vehicle to speed up resolution. Why so many schemes and why the constant tinkering The sources of borrower distress are many, and we have sought to provide lenders with a menu of options to deal with it, even while limiting their discretion to paper over the problem. Effectively the RBI has been trying to create an entirely new bad loan resolution process in the absence of an effective bankruptcy system. We have had to tinker, since each scheme’s effectiveness, while seemingly obvious when designing, has to be monitored in light of the distorted incentives in the system. As we learn, we have adapted regulation. Our objective is not to be theoretical but to be pragmatic, even while subjecting the system to increasing discipline and transparency. The good news is that banks are getting into the spirit of the cleanup, and pursuing reluctant promoters to take the necessary steps to rehabilitate projects. Indebted promoters are being forced to sell assets to repay lenders. We will shortly license a number of new Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) to provide a deeper market for stressed assets. We are also working on a framework to enhance efficiency and transparency of price discovery in sale of stressed assets by banks to ARCs. Bank investors, after initially getting alarmed by the size of the disclosures, have bid up PSB bank shares. To the extent that these are still trading at a fraction of book value, there is still room for upward valuation if the banks can improve the prospects of recovery. The new schemes, as well as the improving economy, should help. Fraud and willful default Even while we make it easier for committed promoters to restructure when they experience bad luck or unforeseen problems, we should reduce the ability of the fraudster or the willful defaulter, who can pay but simply is disinclined to do so, or the fraudster, to get away. This is 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  why it is extremely important that banks do not use the new flexible schemes for promoters who habitually misuse the system (everyone knows who these are) or for fraudsters. The threat of labeling a promoter a willful defaulter could be effective in the former case, and we have coordinated with SEBI to increase penalties for willful defaulters. For fraudsters, quick and effective investigation by the investigative agencies is extremely important. We should send the message that no one can get away, and I am glad that the Prime Minister’s Office is pushing prosecution of large frauds. The RBI has set up a fraud monitoring cell to coordinate the early reporting of fraud cases to the investigative agencies. And for those who have diverted money out of their companies, especially into highly visible assets abroad, a stern message sent by bankers sitting together with investigative agencies should help send the message that the alternatives to repayment can be harsh. Bank risk aversion Bankers often argue that the easiest people to label in a fraud are the bankers themselves, who often could be victims rather than perpetrators. Similarly, they accuse the vigilance authorities of excessive zeal when loans go bad, of immediately suspecting bankers of malfeasance when the bad loan could be an unintended consequence of sensible risk taking. Unfortunately, all too often, such investigations also uncover sloppy due diligence or loan monitoring by bankers. After the fact, it is hard to distinguish sensible risk taking from carelessness or from corruption. While the vigilance authorities continuously attempt to reassure bankers that they are not vigilantes, the bankers themselves know that their own enthusiasm and deficiencies can expose them to unwarranted accusations of corruption. Certainly, part of the solution is for bankers to pull up their socks. But another part of the solution is to not label a banker based on the outcome of a single loan but instead look for a pattern across loans. A banker who makes an excessive number of bad loans compared to his cohort deserves, at the very least, to be questioned. But the banker who makes the occasional bad loan amidst a lot of good ones probably needs to be rewarded. Such pattern-based monitoring by bank authorities, with serious punishment through vigilance action only if there is evidence of money changing hands, could control malfeasance while rewarding risk taking. This does require some changes in the current system, including de-emphasizing the committee based approach to loan approval in banks, which appears to diffuse responsibility for loan decisions. What responsibility does the RBI have? Bankers sometimes turn around and accuse regulators of creating the bad loan problem. The truth is bankers, promoters, and circumstances create the bad loan problem. The regulator cannot substitute for the banker’s commercial decisions or micromanage them or even investigate them when they are being made. Instead, in most situations, the regulator can at best warn about poor lending practices when they are being undertaken, and demand banks hold adequate risk buffers. The important duty of the regulator is to force timely recognition of NPAs and their disclosure when they happen. Forbearance may be a reasonable but risky regulatory strategy when there is some hope that growth will pick up soon and the system will recover on its own. Everyone – banker, promoter, investors, and government officials – often urge such a strategy because it kicks the problem down the road, hopefully for someone else to deal with. The downside is that when growth does not pick up, the bad loan problem is bigger, and dealing with it is more difficult. It is when the bad loan problem is allowed to accumulate through forbearance or non-recognition that regulators have the difficult task of bringing the system back on track. That is the problem we have had to deal with at the RBI. As I have shown you, the consequence since early 2014 of the past build-up of stressed loans was a slowdown in public sector bank lending in certain sectors. The cessation of RBI forbearance and the Asset Quality Review in mid 2015 were therefore not responsible for the 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  slowdown. Instead, high distressed exposures in certain sectors were already occupying PSB management attention and holding them back. The only way for them to supply the economy’s need for credit, which is essential for higher economic growth, was to clean up and recapitalize. The silver lining message in the slower credit growth is that banks have not been lending indiscriminately in an attempt to reduce the size of stressed assets in an expanded overall balance sheet, and this bodes well for future slippages. In sum, to the question of what comes first, clean up or growth, I think the answer is unambiguously “Clean up!”. Indeed, this is the lesson from every other country that has faced financial stress. It is important, therefore, that the clean-up proceeds to its conclusion, without any resort to regulatory forbearance once again. Sometimes, easier monetary policy is proposed as an answer to reducing the bad debt problem. For the heavily indebted promoter, however, easier monetary policy will typically bring no relief. Even with lower policy rates, the bank, which is typically not made whole even if it grabs all the borrower’s cash flows, has no incentive to reduce the interest rate the borrower can pay. And few banks are competing for that borrower’s business, so there is no competition to force down loan rates. The bottom line is that easier monetary policy is no answer to serious distress, contrary to widespread belief. What can the government do? The government is in the process of speeding up the debt recovery process, and creating a new Bankruptcy system. These are important steps to improve the resolution process. In the near term, however, two actions will pay large dividends. The first is to improve the governance of public sector banks so that we are not faced with this situation again. The Government, through the Indradhanush initiative, has sent a clear signal that it wants to make sure that public sector banks, once healthy, stay healthy. Breaking up the post of Chairman and Managing Director, strengthening Board and management appointments through the Banks Board Bureau, decentralizing more decisions to the professional board, finding ways to incentivize management, all these will help improve loan evaluation, monitoring and repayment. The second is to infuse bank capital, with some of the infusion related to stronger performance, so that better banks have more room to grow. Capital infusion into weak banks should ideally accompany an improvement in governance, but given the need for absorbing the losses associated with balance sheet clean up, better that government capital be infused quickly. Governments are sometimes reluctant to infuse bank capital because there are so many more pressing demands for funds. Yet, there are few higher return activities than capitalizing the public sector banks so that they can support credit growth. Finally, the Economic Survey has suggested the RBI should capitalize public sector banks. This seems a non-transparent way of proceeding, getting the banking regulator once again into the business of owning banks, with attendant conflicts of interest. Better that the RBI pay the government the maximum dividend that it can, retaining just enough surplus buffers that are consistent with good central bank risk management practice. Indeed, this is what we do, and in the last three years, we have paid all our surplus to the government. Separately, the government can infuse capital into the banks. The two decisions need not be linked. Alternatively, a less effective form of capital, if the government cannot buy bank equity directly with cash, is for it to issue the banks “Government Capitalization Bonds” in exchange for equity. The banks would hold the bonds on their balance sheet. This would tie up part of their balance sheet, but would certainly be capital. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Conclusion The cleaning up of bank balance sheets, and the restoration of credit growth are vital, related elements in the growth agenda. The government and the RBI are helping our public sector bankers in this difficult but critical task. I know the process is working, so public sector banks will soon be set to finance the enormous needs of this economy once again.       
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9        
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Hendar: Producing competitive human capital for economic empowerment Keynote Speech by Mr Hendar, Deputy Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) Seminar “Producing Competitive Human Capital for Economic Empowerment”, Jakarta, 13 May 2016. *      *      * Bismillahi rahmani rahiim, • Distinguished: Director General of Resources for Science, Technology and Higher Education , Prof. Ali Gufron Mukti; • Distinguished: Director General of Islamic Research and Training Institute-Islamic Development Bank, Prof Azmi Omar; • Distinguished panelist, ladies and gentlemen Assalamu’alaikum Warrahmatullah Wabarakatuh, A very good morning to all of you. 1. Praise to Allah the Almighty, the Most Gracious and the Most Merciful, for His Blessing so that we are able to take part on this meeting in good health and high spirits. Prayers and peace be upon the Last Prophet of Allah, the prophet Muhammad, his family, his companions and followers. 2. First of all, allow me to warmly welcome all of you in this seminar on Human Capital Development in Jakarta, and welcome to Bank Indonesia. It is an honor for Indonesia to be the host of the 41st Islamic Development Bank Group Annual Meeting, which formally will be held in the next few days. In conjunction with the IDB Group Annual Meeting, there are series of side events organized by the IDB Group in collaboration with various institutions in Indonesia. Our seminar today is the first program among those events. This seminar is organized by Bank Indonesia in collaboration with the Islamic Research and Training Institute (IRTI), a member of the IDB Group which takes the theme: “Producing Competitive Human Capital for Economic Empowerment”. 3. Muslim population has a huge potential to develop Islamic economic and finance globally. In the last two decades, we have seen so much development which takes shapes in terms of outreach, financial products, business volume, and financial subsectors. However, if we want to see the Islamic economic and finance stand equally with its conventional counterpart and serve as the other formidable economic pillar to sustain the national economic development, more progressive actions needs to take place. This forum demonstrates our commitment towards better quality of Islamic human capital. Therefore, the theme of “Producing Competitive Human Capital for Economic Empowerment” is very relevant for us to think through the future directions of the human capital development. Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 4. We have witnessed significant global growth in Islamic Economics and Finance. Since the global financial crisis, the islamic finance institution has grown at double digit rates, outpacing growth of the conventional sector. Based on Islamic Financial Services Industry Stability Report 2016, the global Islamic financial services industry has reached an overall total value of USD1.88 trillion in 2015. 5. Despites those achievements, the industry still suffers from certain technical flaws namely relatively low operational efficiency, availability of full range of financial products to entertain the customers, and appropriately designed regulatory 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  framework. In most instances, these lacks are associated with the low quality of human capital involved in the development of Islamic finance industry. Poor promotion strategy that leads to misperception in understanding Islamic economic and finance results in unnecessary burden to the industrial development program. I am of a view that we should pay more attention on improving low quality of human resource. 6. This unfortunate phenomenon has been a common fact in many countries including Indonesia. The lacks of adequate number of universities, available high quality reading material, and dedicatedly designed curriculum have prevented the industry from achieving progressive developments. We realise that the quality of human resources cannot be developed over night. This requires very deep and comprehensive analysis and implementation program. In order to maximise its benefits, the human capital development program should be able to cover all segments in the society besides the level of education. The organization of this seminar that is aimed at exchanging information is very important and timely. 7. Allow me to offer three basic ingredients that can be adopted when developing human capital in Islamic economic and finance. First is ‘link and match’. The universities that offer Islamic economic program should be able to provide teaching materials that has relevance to the current challenges. The graduates produced by the educational institutions, formal as well as vocationals, should be ready for fierce competition and understand all the requirements demanded by the market. The combination between Islamic economic specific and fluency in general knowledge is very important. Second, technology based development program. Now is era of digital technology. There so many development and invention by young entrepreneurs using information technology. In area of financial technology (fintech), many startups provide financial services with lower cost and easier requirements. Some startups also begin using Islamic finance as their business model. In my views, the graduates of should acquire certain level of knowledge in the area of technology considering that the financial industry has become technologically intensive. Failure in acquiring certain level of technology would fail the economic agents in winning the competition. Third, establishing solid platform for cooperation among the educational institutions globally as well as domestically. With the technology in hand, the cooperation between different parties may be conducted more easily. 5. Islamic Development Bank has involved in many education development project conducted in any countries. IDB intervention in Indonesia has been conducted in terms of the physical development of university building. I hope that further intervention may also cover the development of curriculum so that the universities offering Islamic economics and finance may equip young generation with the knowledge and skills which relevant to the market requirement. Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 6. In this occasion, allow me to share Bank Indonesia initiatives in the area of Islamic economics and financial development, especially in the human capital development. In my opinion, when driving Islamic economics and finance as an inclusive system in the national economy, human capital serves as the main pillar. Therefore, we support the development in three components of human capital in the market that consist of academics, practitioner and society. 7. First, at academic side, Bank Indonesia has enhanced the collaboration and cooperation with universities, particularly in the area of research, public lecture, scholarships and research grant. In addition, Bank Indonesia has published a number of books on Islamic Economics and Finance serving as academic references to the academics. The most recent book launched by Bank Indonesia entitled “The journey of Islamic Banking in Indonesia: Institution, policy and challenges”. Beside universities, Bank Indonesia also allocated its resources to human capital development on earlier education including Islamic Boarding Schools or “Pesantren”. Currently, Bank Indonesia is preparing a set of lecture 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  modules which cover the area of: i) Islamic social finance, including zakat and waqf; ii) Empowerment of Micro and Small Enterprise; and iii) Entrepreneurship development. Expectedly, these materials are ready to launch by next July and adopted by 5 universities. Moreover, in order to encourage and foster research activities in the area of Islamic Economics, Monetary and Finance, Bank Indonesia has launched Journal of Islamic Monetary Economics and Finance. The latest volume has just been issued in February 2016. We hope that this journal will be a bridge between theory and practice in the area Islamic Economics, Monetary and Finance.  8. Second, at practitioners’ side, Bank Indonesia also continuously conducts capacity building programs to enhance the competence of human resource in Islamic Finance industry. We maintain good cooperation with local and international institutions, for facilitating expert visit to Indonesia, conducting seminars, workshop and facilitating joint research activities on Islamic Economics and Finance. Next week, we will organize Sukuk Master Class Workshop to develop the competence of practitioner of Islamic banking and finance community, particularly in sukuk issuance. In our views, corporate sukuk should be encouraged along with the development of sovereign sukuk. 9. Third, at society’s side, in order to enhance awareness and commitment of stakeholders in supporting Islamic economic acceleration, Bank Indonesia organize Indonesia Sharia Economic Festival since 2014. This event provides intellectual discussions and business avenues among industry practitioners, business leaders, regulators and Shariah scholars to spur the future growth of Islamic finance. 10. In terms of organization, after sharia banking department moved to OJK, Bank Indonesia has established new department on Shariah Economics and Finance. It is our commitment to strengthen some initiatives to achieve Indonesia as regional center of Islamic Economic and Finance. Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 10. Please allow me to end my speech by expressing appreciation and sincere gratitude to all speakers and participants, particularly the willingness to attend this special event. I also would like to wish you all a productive discussion and deliberation in this important event. I am confident that supported by all participants in this room, we can achieve significant outcomes that are beneficial to promote human capital development in the area of Islamic economy and finance. 11. Finally, allow me to thank all the hard-working and dedicated staff, both from Bank Indonesia and IRTI-IDB, for making this seminar possible. However, we fully understand that the seminar one way or another is still far from perfect. In this respect, therefore, we would like to seek forgiveness for any inconveniences occur in this seminar. I once again welcome you to this seminar and wish you every success in your deliberations. Thank you very much. Wa billahi tawfiq wal hidayah. Wassalamu’alaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Stanley Fischer: Comments on the Resolution Framework for Banks and Bank Holding Companies in the United States Speech by Mr Stanley Fischer, Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Panel Discussion on Resolution Riksbank Macroprudential Conference, Stockholm, 22 June 2016. *      *      * I am grateful to Mark Van Der Weide, Barbara Bouchard and Mark Savignac of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in the preparation of these comments. I’m grateful to the organizers for inviting me to participate in this conference. I would like briefly to describe the legal frameworks that exist for resolving banking organizations in the United States, the steps that the Federal Reserve and other U.S. regulators have taken to make global systemically important banking organizations (GSIBs) in the United States more resolvable, and a few of the criticisms of U.S. regulatory actions in this area, together with my responses to them. U.S. law provides several legal frameworks for resolving failed financial firms. In the United States, a failed depository institution is resolved by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) using a framework created by the Federal Deposit Insurance Act. The FDIC has acted as receiver for several thousand failed banks since 1934, including 465 from 2008 through 2012. Most of these failed banks were relatively small community banks, and all were considerably smaller than the most systemically important firms active today.1 While the Federal Deposit Insurance Act creates a special resolution framework for failed banks, a failed U.S. bank holding company – that is, a corporate entity that controls one or more banks – would generally be resolved under the same provisions of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code as would apply to other corporate debtors, such as industrial firms, in a proceeding overseen by a federal judge. During the recent crisis, fears about the systemic consequences that would follow from the bankruptcies of systemically important financial firms motivated extraordinary government actions to prevent such firms from failing. Unfortunately, the fears proved well founded: The bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers Holdings – the largest bankruptcy filing in American history – significantly exacerbated the crisis.2 To increase the viability of the Bankruptcy Code as a framework for resolving failed financial firms without major systemic consequences, section 165(d) of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act) requires large banking organizations to produce resolution plans, also known as living wills, demonstrating how they could be resolved under the Bankruptcy Code in an orderly fashion in the event of failure. Although the Bankruptcy Code provides the default legal framework for the resolution of a failed bank holding company, Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act creates a backup resolution framework, called the orderly liquidation authority, to be used if the resolution of a failed financial company under the Bankruptcy Code would have serious adverse effects on U.S. financial stability. If that criterion and several others are met, Title II allows the Secretary of the Treasury to appoint the FDIC as receiver for the failed financial company as an                                                 1 The average (per bank) assets of the 465 banks resolved by the FDIC between 2008 and 2012 was roughly $1.5 billion, with a total of $680.3 billion. The largest depository institution ever resolved by the FDIC was Washington Mutual, which was resolved in 2008 and had total assets of $307 billion prior to failure. 2 Lehman’s pre-bankruptcy total assets were $691 billion. The second-largest bankruptcy in American history was the bankruptcy of Washington Mutual, Inc., the savings and loan holding company that owned Washington Mutual; its pre-failure total assets were nearly $328 billion. Both Lehman and Washington Mutual filed for bankruptcy in September 2008. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  alternative to a bankruptcy resolution overseen by a judge. The orderly liquidation authority has several features that could reduce the systemic effect of a financial company’s failure relative to a bankruptcy resolution, including an orderly liquidation fund to provide government liquidity support for the failed firm and provisions to prevent the unwinding of the failed firm’s derivatives and other qualified financial contracts while they are transferred to a solvent firm. The Federal Reserve Board has recently proposed important new rules to increase the prospects for the orderly resolution of a GSIB with minimal effect on financial stability. Last October, the Board proposed a rule to subject the eight U.S. GSIBs to total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) and long-term debt requirements, building on the international TLAC standard established by the Financial Stability Board.3 The proposal would require these systemically important firms to maintain outstanding a large quantity of long-term debt that could be used to absorb losses and recapitalize the firm in an orderly resolution under either the Bankruptcy Code or the orderly liquidation authority.4 The proposal would also apply internal TLAC and long-term debt requirements to the U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign GSIBs in order to facilitate the recapitalization of a failed foreign GSIB’s U.S. operations. Finally, the proposal would restrict the operations of GSIB holding companies (as distinct from their operating subsidiaries) so that those legal entities could go through a resolution proceeding without setting off short-term wholesale funding runs or otherwise jeopardizing financial stability. In May of this year, the Board issued another proposal to make GSIBs more resolvable. This second proposed rule would impose restrictions on GSIBs’ qualified financial contracts – including derivatives and repo agreements – to guard against the mass unwinding of those contracts during the resolution of a GSIB.5 The proposed restrictions are a key step toward GSIB resolvability because the rapid unwinding of a GSIB’s qualified financial contracts could destabilize the financial system by causing asset fire sales and toppling other firms. Acting in conjunction with the FDIC, the Federal Reserve Board has also sought to increase GSIB resolvability through its review of the firms’ living wills. In April this year, the Board and the FDIC announced the results of their review of the eight U.S. GSIBs’ 2015 resolution plans, which evaluated the plans based on the firms’ capital, liquidity, governance mechanisms, operational capabilities, legal entity rationalization, derivatives and trading activities, and responsiveness to prior agency feedback.6                                                 3 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), “Federal Reserve Board Proposes New Rule to Strengthen the Ability of Largest Domestic and Foreign Banks Operating in the United States to Be Resolved without Extraordinary Government Support or Taxpayer Assistance,” press release, October 30. 4 Under the proposal, a U.S. GSIB would be required to hold at a minimum (i) a long-term debt amount of the greater of 6 percent plus its GSIB surcharge of risk-weighted assets and 4.5 percent of total leverage exposure and (ii) a TLAC amount of the greater of 18 percent of risk-weighted assets and 9.5 percent of total leverage exposure. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), “Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity, Long-Term Debt, and Clean Holding Company Requirements for Systemically Important U.S. Bank Holding Companies and Intermediate Holding Companies of Systemically Important Foreign Banking Organizations; Regulatory Capital Deduction for Investments in Certain Unsecured Debt of Systemically Important U.S. Bank Holding Companies,” notice of proposed rulemaking (Docket No. R-1523), Federal Register, vol. 80 (November 30), pp. 74931–32. The GSIB has to satisfy both constraints. TLAC encompasses both equity capital and eligible long-term debt. 5 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), “Federal Reserve Board Proposes Rule to Support U.S. Financial Stability by Enhancing the Resolvability of Very Large and Complex Financial Firms,” press release, May 3. 6 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2016), “Agencies Announce Determinations and Provide Feedback on Resolution Plans of Eight Systemically Important, Domestic Banking Institutions,“ joint press release, April 13. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  The agencies found that five of the GSIBs’ plans fell short of the Dodd-Frank Act’s standard and required those firms to fix the deficiencies in their plans by October of this year or potentially face more stringent prudential requirements. The agencies also identified less-severe shortcomings in the plans of all eight GSIBs, which the GSIBs are expected to address in their next round of resolution plan submissions, due in July 2017. The deficiencies and shortcomings identified by the agencies touched on most of the categories I have just listed, especially liquidity, governance mechanisms, operational capabilities, and legal entity rationalization. I want to end by briefly addressing several criticisms that have been made of the Dodd-Frank Act’s orderly liquidation authority and the Board’s TLAC proposal. One criticism is that there is no need for the backup orderly liquidation authority because the Bankruptcy Code provides an adequate framework for the resolution of any financial company. As Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act recognizes, however, the Bankruptcy Code may not be adequate to minimize the systemic impact of the resolution of a systemically important financial firm. The Bankruptcy Code does not direct the judge to take financial stability into account in making decisions, and it does not provide other important stabilizing features of the orderly liquidation authority, such as government liquidity support and stay-and-transfer treatment for qualified financial contracts. A related line of criticism holds that the orderly liquidation authority enshrines “too big to fail” and provides for taxpayer bailouts of systemically important firms through the orderly liquidation fund. However, under the Board’s proposed TLAC rule, a failed GSIB would be recapitalized by its private-sector long-term creditors (whose debt claims would be converted into equity), not by the government. The orderly liquidation fund would be used only to provide liquidity support, not to inject capital, and in the unlikely event that the fund does incur losses, the Dodd-Frank Act provides that these losses would be covered by assessments on major financial companies and would not be passed on to taxpayers. I also note that credit rating agencies have recognized public-sector efforts to end the too-big-to-fail phenomenon. The rating agencies no longer assume that the U.S. government will take extraordinary actions to prevent the failure of systemically important U.S. financial firms. Finally, one criticism that has been leveled at our TLAC proposal is that imposing long-term debt requirements on GSIBs will lead those firms to increase their leverage and thereby raise their probability of failure, and that they should instead be required to hold higher levels of equity capital. I agree that equity capital plays a key role in preventing financial firm failures, and we have raised equity capital requirements for banking organizations – especially GSIBs – substantially since the crisis. But to protect financial stability, we must reduce not only the probability that a GSIB will fail, but also the damage that its failure could do if it were to occur. At the point of failure, a banking firm’s equity capital is likely to be zero or negative, so to improve GSIB resolvability, our proposal requires GSIBs to have a thick tranche of gone-concern loss-absorbing capacity to ensure that resolution authorities will have the necessary raw material to manufacture fresh equity and recapitalize and stabilize the firm.7 That is the role played by the proposal’s long-term debt requirements. And we expect that firms would generally come into compliance with the proposed requirements by replacing existing ineligible liabilities with eligible long-term debt rather than by increasing their leverage. At any rate, even if a firm were to come into compliance in part by increasing the size of its balance sheet, it would remain subject to our robust equity capital requirements and leverage limits, which are designed to ensure a very low probability of failure. Finally, the existence of a thick                                                 7 See Board of Governors (2015), “Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity, Long-Term Debt, and Clean Holding Company Requirements,” in note 5. Under the proposal, a U.S. GSIB would be subject to external long-term debt requirements of 6 percent of risk-weighted assets plus the amount of the risk-based capital surcharge applicable to the GSIB under the Board’s GSIB surcharge rule and 4.5 percent of total leverage exposure. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  tranche of loss-absorbing long-term debt should reduce a GSIB’s probability of failure by reducing its short-term creditors’ incentives to run at the first sign of distress. In short, we and other U.S. regulators are working hard to address the too-big-to-fail problem by improving the prospects for the orderly resolution of a GSIB in the United States. The Dodd-Frank Act gave us tools to reduce the probability of failure of our largest and most complex banking firms and to significantly reduce the damage that the failure of such a firm would do to the U.S. financial system and the broader economy. We have made a lot of progress toward accomplishing these goals, leaving the U.S. banking system fundamentally safer and stronger, and our work in this area will continue. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Harun R Khan: Foreign exchange market and cross-border transactions – some random reflections Inaugural address by Mr Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 11th Annual Conference of the Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India (FEDAI), Hong Kong, 11 June 2016. *      *      * The speaker acknowledges the contributions of Shri Himansu Mohanty of the Reserve Bank of India. 1. Shri C. Venkat Nageshwar, Chairman, Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India (FEDAI), Shri Ravi Sinha, Acting Consul General of India in Hong Kong, Shri D. G. Patwardhan, outgoing CEO of FEDAI, Shri Ashwani Sindhwani, incoming CEO of FEDAI, distinguished speakers and panellists and delegates to the Conference. It is a great pleasure to be here today in this modern city of Hong Kong which Wikipedia describes as world’s most competitive economy, the world’s most visited city, and among the world’s most significant financial centres with a very high financial development index. My sincere thanks to the FEDAI for inviting me to inaugurate their 11th Annual Convention. These Annual events of FEDAI have been quite well known in recent times for the wide participation of the foreign exchange market participants, for the depth and detail of the deliberations, and of course, for the idyllic locations chosen. I am sure that this Convention too would excel its predecessors in all aspects. 2. FEDAI was formed in 1958, when Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 was in force and life was rather simple. The Bretton-Woods arrangement was in force, there was a fixed exchange rate regime with Rupee pegged to the pound sterling and tranquillity reigned in the markets, such as there were. Mandate of FEDAI was simple too: setting the basic rules for inter-bank and customer transactions pertaining to computation of rates and settlements. Forex market and FEDAI have traversed a long way since then in keeping with the momentous changes that have taken place in financial markets in general and forex market in particular, globally as well as in India. Though not formally designated as a Self-Regulatory Organisation (SRO), it has effectively played such a role and the smooth transition and transformation experienced by the Indian foreign exchange market over the years can be ascribed to FEDAI in no small measure. I am sure FEDAI will continue to play such a role in future with greater élan. 3. In modern times, the economic and market conditions have been evolving rapidly and whenever we find ourselves in the cusp of transformational events, there is a global dimension involved. Today, the Indian economy is reported to be more integrated with the rest of the world than US and China in the sense that trade-GDP ratio for India (at 49.6 per cent) is higher than that for China (41.2 per cent) and US (30 per cent). If we also look at a wider parameter of Global Connectedness Index developed by Pankaj Ghemawat and Steven A. Altman, India’s score and rank is pretty high, e.g., in 2013 our rank at 71 was ahead of China at 84 in a universe of 140 countries. The quest for mobilising resources for India’s vast investment needs also has a pronounced outward-looking refrain. As we engage more and more with the rest of the world, the cross border transactions not only increase in magnitude but also become more complex. Even as we grapple with issues, such as, how to improve the ease of doing business to attract foreign investment and how to contain the potential instability due to increased cross border engagements, the critical factor that influences our thinking and policy setting is the conditions in the foreign exchange market. In this backdrop, I shall discuss today a few select themes relating to “foreign exchange market and cross border transactions,” keeping in view the broad topics of this conference, allowing freedom in foreign exchange markets and internationalization of Indian Rupee. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Foreign exchange market: freedom with stability 4. The modern foreign exchange market as we know it evolved after the Bretton Woods system broke down in early 1970’s and the global currencies became freely floating. It may be recalled that in the Bretton Woods regime the currencies were almost fixed vis-a-vis US dollar and the exchange rate carried within a narrow band. US dollar in turn was linked to gold with a guarantee of the US monetary authorities. When the US Government withdrew this guarantee on August 15, 1971 the currency market went into turmoil and a floating rate regime came into existence. Floating rate regimes were experienced earlier for example, during the 30’s when the markets were volatile and disorderly in the extreme and were shut down for extended periods. It may be of some passing interest to note that Reserve Bank of India Act,1934 was framed during this period and the preamble said ” ….And whereas in the present disorganisation of the monetary systems of the world it is not possible to determine what will be suitable as a permanent basis for the Indian monetary system….” 5. The floating exchange rate regime that came into existence in early 70’s has remained in force for four and half decades. It is not that there has not been occasions of disorderliness and turbulence in the market but the regime has not been over turned. 6. Three interrelated factors have contributed to the evolution of foreign exchange market as we see it now. First, there has been tremendous improvement in global communication infrastructure gone are the days when trading and settlement used to be done over telegraphic systems (hence the term cable rate). The modern communication network has reached the time and space gap and the only limitation now is the diurnal motion of the earth. Secondly, this period also coincided with quantum advancement in computing capacity. This has helped in improving the communication network. But more importantly it has made trading and settlement quite easier. It is possible for the trader as well as the back office to instantaneously understand the implication of a trade. The ultimate culmination of this is of course “algorithm trading”. Thirdly, along with the development in computation, sophisticated mathematical models have evolved to engineer complex and bespoke financial products. A combination of these three factors has brought about a foreign exchange market that is truly global, liquid and large. 7. Notwithstanding the complexity and sophistication of the foreign exchange market, the fundamental principle remains simple yet profound. The foreign exchange market deals with currencies and a foreign currency is but a commodity vis-a-vis the domestic currency. The price is the exchange rate. Any price has two determinants. The supply factor and the demand factor. The first can be seen to be derived from the cost of production and the second from the factors that affect demand, utility for instance. In the foreign exchange market, the first factor which ultimately determines the exchange rate in the long run is the purchasing power parity or the inflation differential. The second factor that causes exchange rate movement in the short run is the expected earnings from exchange rate dynamics. In the simplest of cases it is derived from interest rate differential but in the real world the exchange rate demonstrates random walk and behaves like any other financial asset. It will be important here to remember that both the factors play equally important role in determination of the price. To quote Alfred Marshall, “We might as reasonably dispute whether it is the upper or the lower blade of a pair of scissors that cuts a piece of paper, as whether value is governed by utility or cost of production. It is true that when one blade is held still, and the cutting is effected by moving the other, we may say with careless brevity that the cutting is done by the second; but the statement is not strictly accurate, and is to be excused only so long as it claims to be merely a popular and not a strictly scientific account of what happens (Marshall [1890] 1997, 290).” 8. The exchange rate is a key macro-economic variable. It shapes a country’s balance of payments and engagement with the rest of the world. It affects a country’s export competiveness, of course in conjunction with other factors and its income and employment to 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  the extent that export sector is important for the economy. It determines the cost of import and to the extent that import constitutes articles essential for investment and growth, can act as a retarding factor. It affects the price level through the linkages provided by the tradeable sector. 9. As we have seen earlier foreign currency behaves like a financial asset. The prices of all financial assets are forward looking and are based on the expectation of the future state of the world. As such a country can face large capital inflows or outflows depending on whether its future is perceived to be promising or discouraging. This in turn can affect the exchange rate which may not be in consonance with the fundamentals of the real economy for example the appreciation of the Rupee in 2007–08 was caused by large capital inflows attracted by a buoyant and promising economy but affected the export sector adversely. The reverse was perhaps the case in the East Asian crisis. The capital flows also pose challenge for the monetary policy setting. I allude to the much discussed Mundell-Fleming trilemma, i.e., it is impossible to have an open capital account independent monetary policy and fixed exchange rate. Capital account openness and independent monetary policy framework could lead to flexible exchange rate which can be disorderly and volatile. 10. The reason I am discussing these issues in some detail is to emphasise the criticality of the exchange rate. The importance of exchange rate cannot be over emphasised for developing countries. For instance, it has got special importance for India like unemployment for Americans and inflation for Germans. The memory of the 60’s and 70’s when the critical shortage of foreign exchange reserves forced us to resort to the PL 480 for meeting the food requirement of the country are pretty strong. Exchange rate movement either way can affect us adversely. Appreciation could hurt our exports and depreciation would make the imports expensive. Given that our large part of imports comprises crude, fertilizer, capital goods and intermediates, increase in the cost of imports due to depreciation of currency can hurt our growth and employment and affect the fiscal balance. 11. In this backdrop, there are two questions that need to be posed. First, how to ensure that the exchange rate remains stable and, as is stated in the preamble to FEMA, 1999, how to preserve orderliness in the foreign exchange market? Second, the exchange rate will be stable and not fixed, and therefore, there will be some volatility in the foreign exchange market. Therefore, how to enable those affected by the exchange rate to cope with the risk inherent in a volatile market? 12. I will deal with the second problem first. As long as the inflation differential between India and the other countries remain positive, the Indian currency will exhibit depreciation over the long term. However, in a world dominated by capital flows, there can be significant deviations from the long-term path indicated by the Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER). REER itself, one should note, is a function of several dynamic factors and variables and hence, may not serve as very accurate anchor as the base period loses its relevance in the face of more recent developments. Even in the case of US dollar, the deviation from the long term represented by the REER is known to have been of the order of 80 per cent. Such volatility affects the earnings and balance sheet of all firms that have contracted or even economic exposures. The approach to resolve this problem is to provide a deep and liquid foreign exchange derivatives market to enable market participants to hedge their foreign exchange risk. I have spoken about the derivatives market in detail elsewhere and do not wish to deal with it in detail here.1 The most straightforward derivatives are the forward contracts or their exchange traded counterpart, the currency futures where the payoffs are simple and linear. While the pricing of these derivatives are fairly simple based on the interest rate differentials, the use of these products by the market participants is mostly                                                 1 “Indian Derivatives Markets – Striking a Balance between Risk Protection and Liquidity” address by Mr Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Finance Conclave 2015 organised by the SP Jain Institute of Management & Research, Mumbai, 17 January 2015. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  motivated by their expectations of the future spot rate. Ordinarily, if you have a foreign exchange receivable or payable and if you have entered into a forward sale or buy contract, your exposure is evened out and you should not be bothered about what happens to the exchange rate. However, the concept of mark-to-market is not only in the books of accounts but also in the people’s minds. Not unexpectedly, a cloth manufacturer and exporter decides her hedging strategy based on her own view of the expected future spot price as different from the forward price and of course often based on advice of “experts”. As I have mentioned earlier, the foreign exchange rate exhibits random walk in the short run and the best prediction of tomorrow’s rate is today’s rate. About “expert” advices, I can only paraphrase Samuelson’s famous words, “To prove that Wall Street is an early omen of movements still to come in GNP, commentators quote economic studies alleging that market downturns predicted four out of the last five recessions. That is an understatement. Wall Street indexes predicted nine out of the last five recessions! And its mistakes were beauties.”2 Now, after having booked a forward contract, one tracks the path of the spot rate and starts revelling or repenting about the imagined gains or losses! 13. The other way of hedging risk is by using non-linear derivative options. Once non-linearity is brought into hedging strategy, the universe becomes virtually unlimited. Any combination of linear derivatives will still have linear payoffs. But combination of non-linear derivatives with themselves or with linear derivatives can result in payoffs of varying complexity. Such complex products along with a future that is shrouded in ignorance can have pretty unpleasant outcomes and sometimes even threaten market stability. 14. In this backdrop we have adopted a gradualist approach in respect of regulation and expansion of forex derivatives market, keeping in view certain uncertainties we have witnessed in the global and local level macro-economic environment. On the one hand, we are committed to enable any entity, whether resident or non-resident, with an exposure to the exchange rate of Rupee to hedge it using onshore derivatives and on the other, we have been circumspect about introducing new products, such as, complex options including the so-called exotics for reasons no other than the misuse of the products, either not matching with one’s risk or even for buying risk with a speculative strategy. As I see it, the universe of permitted derivatives will expand and even undertaking a derivative transaction will become simpler. All this, however, depends on how stable the currency markets remain and how responsibly the market participants behave. I hardly need to stress that in all financial transactions in general and derivative transactions in particular, the principle caveat venditor applies just as strongly as the principle caveat emptor. Regulating cross-border transactions: responsibility & responsiveness 15. Now I come to the first question I had posed earlier, that is, how to ensure stability of the exchange rate. The obvious response that springs to one’s mind is intervention by the central bank. Intervention, however, is to be used only in extreme situations and cannot be a part of the policy framework. Intervention has got costs and other implications like negative carry of the foreign exchange reserves, interference with the monetary policy framework, cost of sterilization of intervention operations, etc., depending upon whether intervention consist of buying or selling foreign exchange. The strategy, therefore, seems to be a combination of some capital controls and flexible exchange rate. Earlier this year, the Bank of Japan Governor Kuroda was reported to have advised China to “impose capital controls to defend the yuan rather than keep burning through currency reserves”3. The role of capital controls, rather active capital account management, in preserving stability in the external sector and foreign exchange market has now been well recognised in the aftermath of the                                                 2 Science and Stocks, Newsweek, September 1966. 3 Bloomberg – January 23, 2016. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  global financial crisis. Some studies have shown that capital controls measures for capital account management are desirable in certain circumstances even when the exchange rate is flexible. Here, I can cite the examples of how we have been calibrating the outflows permitted under the Liberalized Remittance Scheme (LRS) and the inflows under the External Commercial Borrowings (ECB) framework in the Indian context. 16. During the FERA regime, there was complete exchange control. Not only capital account, even current account transactions were also subject to control measures. During the acute foreign exchange crisis, the capital accounts were opened up slightly for the expatriate non-resident Indians by way of incentivised accounts, access to the secondary market in equities, etc. Since the liberalisation process started in the early 1990s, the capital account has been progressively liberalised. We were courageous enough to think of full capital account convertibility on two occasions – in 1997 and in 2007. Unfortunately, because of unfolding of global macro-economic developments, the implementation of the path to full capital account convertibility remained on the drawing board stage. Our commitment to progressive liberalisation of the capital account has of course remained steadfast through the problems ranging from the post-Pokhran II global reactions to the recent global financial crisis. 17. What has been our approach to management of capital account? One way of looking at the issue is to see how it affects three different segments of the economy – the non-financial firms and businesses, the individuals and the financial firms. As far as the first segment is concerned, a more open capital account provides better access to resources and investible funds, brings in better technology and management practices and improves their valuation. Right since the first days of opening up of capital account, the emphasis has been to ensure that the real sector is not deprived of the benefits of an open capital account. We can say that, in effect, the capital account is fully open for most of the real business sector. The restrictions are in respect of individuals and the financial sector. In a resource starved country, enabling individuals, particularly those with high net-worth, to transfer their wealth to foreign places is surely a low priority policy objective. As far as the financial sector is concerned, the restrictions stem from the premise that it is this segment which creates systemic vulnerabilities in an open economy. 18. There is another way of classifying capital flows, viz. by the asset class – equity, debt and immovable property. The distinction between equity and debt is too well known. The two financial contracts have their own structures and implications. From the limited perspective of external sector stability, suffice it to say that while a capital inflow in the nature of equity poses little stability issues (except in socially or economically sensitive sectors where foreign ownership may not be considered appropriate) debt contracts can lead to build up of significant risks at the firm and more importantly at the systemic level. History stands witness to this proposition. Whether it is Latin America or East Asian countries or Greece in recent times, financial and economic stability were rooted in borrowing a foreign currency or in a currency over which the country had no control. 19. The regime for foreign debt is dictated by the concern for excessive indebtedness in foreign currency which can sow the seeds of instability. Take the example of the ECB the regime as is in force today. The prudential focus of the current ECB framework is to provide a nudge towards long term borrowing to mitigate rollover risk and/or borrowing in Rupees so that currency risk is not borne by the borrowers, discouraging borrowing by those who do not have any natural hedge by way of foreign currency earnings or earnings linked to the exchange rate, all-in-cost-ceiling to prevent poor quality borrowers from accessing risky foreign currency loans and encouraging borrowings from long-term lenders/investors like sovereign wealth funds, insurance companies and pension funds. 20. Here, I would like to mention two inter-related issues in the passing. Often, we hear mention of foreign currency borrowings as a source of cheap funds. Is it really cheap? In a perfect market with no capital account restrictions there should not be any opportunity for 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  arbitrage between a fully hedged foreign currency borrowing and a Rupee borrowing on the one hand and when the borrowing is long-term with coupons and repayments spread over the lifetime of the borrowing and between the cost of hedging and the long term average rate of depreciation on the other. Thus, as far as the cash flows are concerned, it would not matter whether an Indian firm avails of foreign currency borrowing or Rupee borrowing. The arbitrage opportunities that exist are due to market imperfections and barrier to arbitrage. But whether foreign currency borrowing is truly cheaper requires deeper study with long-term data. The second issue relates to whether foreign currency borrowings should be hedged? It is intuitive to expect that those whose revenues are neither in foreign currency nor are indexed to the exchange rate should not leave the currency mismatch unhedged. Although it may be argued that the cost of hedging is often more than the rate of long term depreciation of the Rupee, it is worth asking the question whether one can trust one’s instinct to remain unhedged hoping and betting that one would be able to ride on the best part of the exchange rate cycle or protect oneself against possible adversities in line with a prudential risk management framework. This choice has to be very carefully evaluated. 21. Coming back to the issue of other asset class of equity, it needs to be noted that the regime for foreign investment in equity is pretty permissive – be it as foreign direct investment or foreign portfolio investment. As far as I can see, the only two high level restrictions: (i) in a few sectors where the extent of foreign investment is capped due to their sensitive nature and, (ii) in the stipulation that the issue or transfer of securities should be at fair value. But as always, the devil often is in the detail. Obviously, the investment should be in equity securities. Some leeway is provided through hybrid securities – fully and compulsorily convertible preference shares and debentures. The other hybrid securities such as partially convertible debentures, optionally convertible debentures or equities with embedded optionality are not treated at par with equities and hence not permitted as instruments for making foreign direct investment. 22. Most of the details of the structures in the foreign direct investment regime comes from the concern to allay the appreciation that a FDI should not be used as a camouflage for debt. But how complex does the structure become! In a manner of speaking, every investment is an act of speculation. Every investor must have an expectation about future state of affairs and the cash flows or return that will accrue to him. Every act of investment is subject to the usual information asymmetry. Therefore, every investment contract must provide for the probable states of affairs and how the investor will protect himself against the uncertainties and the information problems. Straitjacketing investment contracts, thus, often results in disputes, or worse, much needed investment shying away from socially useful sectors. Here I would like to refer to cases where hybrid instruments (e.g. optionally convertible preference shares) are issued with the option to exit linked to pre-determined milestones. This becomes imperative as investment strategy of many investors (e.g. Private Equities) is often different and there is need for a reasonable exit option under certain circumstances without any assured return. 23. This problem is aggravated by the way the FEMA is structured. Unlike in case of current account transactions, where the principle is that everything that is not specifically forbidden is allowed, in case of capital account transactions the principle is that only anything that is not allowed is forbidden. This makes a great demand on the framers of regulations, lest the investment and business is subject to the limitations of their perceptions. The way business is done is forever evolving and it is a difficult job for the regulators to keep pace with it. There is a very good case for relooking at this principle and align the regulatory approaches for current and capital account transactions. Even as we liberalise capital account more and more, the universe of restrictions shrinks and the regulatory structure will be simpler if it mentions what is prohibited rather than what is allowed. 24. As we move to more liberalisation and rationalization of regulations, there have been some unsettling developments in the recent past. Advance remittance for imports without any corresponding imports into India, receipt of advances for exports without exports 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  materialising for a long time and more recently the revelations of the so called “Panama Papers”. In case of Panama Papers, on the basis of reports, it is suspected that some Indian individuals may have been involved in setting up of businesses maintaining balances abroad illegally. Investigations are on and the situation can be assessed only on conclusion of the process when full details are available. The question that troubles us is should the unfolding of these events influence our approach to regulating cross-border transactions? 25. On this subject I cannot help recalling what the Finance Minister Yashwant Sinha said in the Lok Sabha on November 19, 1999 while replying to a debate on the Foreign Exchange Management Bill. I quote “What we are trying to do through this legislation is to bring the entire management of foreign exchange in line with the changes which have taken place as a result of liberalization on current account. I strongly refute with all the emphasis at my command that this piece of legislation is going to help the blackmarketeers, the black money operators or the hawala operators. This is a figment of the imagination of a section of the Members of this House and I refute it as I said with all the emphasis at my command. This is in terms of meeting a new situation which has come about as a result of liberalization of the foreign exchange management and the Act will only facilitate that management. That is the reason why we are introducing this legislation. We have already introduced the Prevention of Money Laundering Bill. The two legislations, I will suggest, should be considered together because they cover the entire gamut of the issues that are involved in these two pieces of legislation.” 26. Often what comes across as contraventions of FEMA indeed are issues related to tax evasion or money laundering. I wonder if it would not be more appropriate to deal with these wrongs within the framework of tax and money laundering laws. It is nobody’s case that these wrong doers should go unpunished; indeed the punishment should be swift and exemplary. What I am emphasizing is that this should not colour our perception in respect of cross border transactions and mould our regulatory approach in a regressive fall back to the FERA mindset. After all, countries with no foreign exchange laws do have such wrongs and do effectively deal with them. There is a case for avoiding any possible attempts for regression into FERA regime. This will of course be helped by Authorised Dealers in foreign exchange collecting, collating and sharing the information so as to ensure that the regulatory intent is not compromised in letter and spirit. 27. Just a word in passing on the internationalisation of the Rupee in recognition of the fact that this is one of the themes of this Conference today. This has been an exciting topic of discussion amongst the academia and market participants in recent times. In the annual conference of FEDAI held in Zurich in 20124, I had alluded to this aspect in some detail keeping in view the seven prerequisites for moving towards internationalization of a currency as laid down by Peter Kennen. The issues relating to pace and sequence of internationalization; in fact, even its definition and desirability, continue to be raised with a lot of passion. I must mention that the Rupee was in a sense an international currency till the 60’s and it was even a legal tender in parts of Africa and much of Gulf. Those were the Bretton Woods days of fixed exchange rate and the Rupee was linked to the Sterling. After a quarter century of near autarchy in currency, the 90’s saw a flexible exchange rate regime, complete convertibility on the current account and gradual opening up of the capital account. Today, Indian holding of global assets including the official reserves and the global holding of Indian assets are very large. India has tremendous growth prospects and even in these days of tardy growth around the globe, the Indian growth story continues to be a beacon of light. The world obviously wants to have a share of this pie and Indian assets continue to be valued and attractive. But with this will come the exposure to the volatility of Indian Rupee                                                 4 “Musings on the FEDAI, the forex market and the Indian Rupee” address by Shri Harun R. Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 7th Annual Conference of the Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India (FEDAI), Zurich, 5 April 2012. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  and the need for hedging the risk. The NDF market came into existence to address this need and, no wonder, continues to thrive. The correct approach to address this problem is not to engage in an ad hominem tirade against the NDF market and its participants but to address the genuine need by increasing the access to domestic onshore market to all those who have a legitimate Rupee exposure. Several steps have been taken in this direction and more are in the offing. 28. In a sense, internationalisation of Rupee is rather a process than an event. The pace of the process depends upon how fast the capital account opens up which in turn depends upon the evolving macroeconomic conditions and the financial stability concerns. Rupee cannot be an international currency by issue of a fiat. Pound Sterling in its time or US Dollar today achieved the status of the leading international currency of the day because the inherent strength of their economies and their financial markets and not by any administrative proclamation. The conditions necessary for greater internationalization of Indian Rupee in terms of its acceptability in trade and other cross-border transactions, as a reserve currency and reaching much higher level of capital account convertibility will be ensuring the macro-economic stability, and having a deep and liquid financial market. In the interim, the measures taken and planned for using Indian Rupee in trade denomination and settlement, particularly with our neighbouring countries, where intra-regional trade volumes are very low, should be taken forward. And also the facilities for onshore hedging of all non-resident entities for their increasing capital account exposure including off-shore Rupee bonds issued by multilateral institutions and Indian corporates should be eased further. Concluding thoughts 29. As I prepare to hang my boots after a long campaign, various shades of feelings and emotions flash across my mind. I have had an almost four decade long association with the country’s central bank and with its financial system. This is a pretty long period in the modern times. Around the time I joined the Reserve Bank, momentous things were happening around the globe. The Bretton Woods System had broken down, so had the Smithsonian Agreement. Following the Jamaica Agreement of Jan 1976, the flexible exchange rate regime had been officially endorsed. The European Exchange Rate Mechanism was being conceived and would be introduced in 1979, to culminate in a single currency two decades later. 30. Closer home, though the “draconian” legislations FERA, enacted in 1973 and COFEPOSA, in 1974 were at their prohibitive peak, we had begun to emerge from the dark ages. The Green Revolution had taken roots mitigating the pressure on our BoP for importing foodgrains and the remittances from the expatriates were buoyant. Both put together, had eased our external sector management. Since then, despite ups and downs, we have grown in strength in the management of our external sector, which in turn has catalysed our quest for growth and development. Though much remains to be done, the achievements are not to be scoffed at. To mention just one statistic, the life expectancy at birth was 41 years in 1960, 54 years in 1978 and has gone up to almost 70 years at the latest count. 31. A vibrant financial sector is an inevitable part of a developed modern society. In due process of development of the financial sector, it culminates in seamless integration with the rest of the world. In the meantime, it is the responsibility of the regulators to steer the process in a non-disruptive and facilitative manner. I hope that we have achieved that to a large extent and I personally feel happy and proud to have played some part in that process. We are now ready for transiting to a more developed economy and advanced society. As the Prime Minister paraphrased Walt Whitman in his recent address to the US Congress “The orchestra have sufficiently tuned their instruments, the baton has given the signal, and …..there is a new symphony in play” I shall enjoy the music from my comfortable perch outside the burden of responsibility. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  32. I wish the convention all success and would like to convey my best wishes to all the participants for whatever endeavours they may choose to pursue. Thank you all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Guy Debelle: Liquidity in Australian fixed income markets Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 4th Australian Regulatory Summit, Sydney, 21 June 2016. *      *      * Thanks to Jon Cheshire for his work locally and globally on this topic. Fixed income markets in many jurisdictions have been going through a period of change, resulting in a debate as to whether they are continuing to function effectively and, in particular, function effectively in times of stress. Changes in dealer business models and increased use of electronic trading platforms are influencing the nature of liquidity in bond markets. However, these changes are not as prevalent in Australia as they are in some markets overseas, and that is what I am going to talk about today. Globally the debate on bond market liquidity has been ebbing and flowing over the past couple of years. You can hear that it is simultaneously the best of times and the worst of times for liquidity in the bond market. Or to stick with the water analogy that is so prevalent in such discussions, the market is awash with liquidity at the same time as the tide is going out. As an aside, the water references in liquidity discussions are as pervasive as they are in Pixies’ songs. I discussed some of these issues in a speech last year1 and there have been two recent publications from two BIS Committees that I am a member of that provide a comprehensive account of recent developments in bond market liquidity globally.2 Rather than recount the global discussion, instead I will try and make it more directly relevant to this audience and run through some of the factors affecting Australian fixed income markets, drawing on work done by my colleague Jon Cheshire published in the RBA Bulletin last week.3 The assessment that Jon makes, which I share, is that liquidity in most segments of the physical bond market in Australia is lower than it has been in the past. That is, it is generally a little more costly to transact in the same volumes, with immediacy, in the Australian bond markets than it used to be. These changes are partly a response to regulation and partly a reassessment of business models by banks. But, given that liquidity was oversupplied and underpriced in the years prior to the global financial crisis, these changes in liquidity are broadly desirable and, to date, have not presented any significant issues in the Australian market. Measuring liquidity What do we actually mean by bond market liquidity? Often participants in this debate talk at cross purposes using different metrics of liquidity, so let me explain how we are assessing bond market liquidity. Market liquidity is the ability to execute transactions in size, immediately, at low cost and with limited price impact. As you can see, there is both a quantity and time element to liquidity which is often conflated in discussions about it. 1 Debelle G (2015), ‘Bond Market Liquidity, Long-term Rates and China’, Speech at the Actuaries Institute ‘Banking on Change’ Seminar, Sydney, 16 September. 2 Markets Committee (2016), ‘Electronic Trading in Fixed Income Markets’, Markets Committee Publications No 7 Available at <http://www.bis.org/publ/mktc07.htm>, Bank for International Settlements, Basel. CGFS (Committee on the Global Financial System) (2016), ‘Fixed Income Market Liquidity’, CGFS Papers No 55, Bank for International Settlements, Basel Available at <http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs55.htm>. Jon Cheshire made a significant contribution to both of these papers. 3 Cheshire J (2016), ‘Liquidity in Fixed Income Markets’, RBA Bulletin, June, pp 49–58. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Given these different dimensions to liquidity, measuring it precisely is not a straightforward exercise. This is particularly the case in Australia, where much of the secondary market activity is not conducted on electronic platforms and so the trade data is less readily available. It would be good to see more trade data on transactions in the market, although, in saying that, it is possible to have too much transparency in this regard. This is particularly so in a relatively small fixed income market like that in Australia, where the revelation of market participants’ positions in close to real time can be problematic. The first metric I will use to illustrate developments in liquidity is turnover; that is, the quantity dimension. I will discuss the price aspect below. A smaller share of the stock of outstanding bonds is being transacted relative to the past (Graph 1). The turnover ratio (the ratio of the value of transactions undertaken in bond markets over the course of a year relative to the average outstanding stock of bonds on issue over the year) for government bonds has declined from an average of around five in the decade prior to 2012, to a little above three over the past four years. However, over the same time, the supply has grown significantly, so that the absolute amount of turnover hasn’t changed all that much. The turnover ratio of corporate securities has declined to a little above one in the decade prior to 2012 to its current level of about a half. Graph 1  Looking at this another way, the share of the government bond market that used to turnover in an average month now takes a bit over six weeks, while the average share of the corporate securities market that used to turnover in one month now takes closer to two months. We also hear from market participants that it is, in general, a bit more difficult to transact in size. Should we be concerned about this? Not necessarily. The corporate bond market in Australia has never had a highly liquid secondary market. It has always been predominantly a buy and 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  hold market, and most participants are well aware of this. More generally, bond market activity in Australia has been structurally declining over a long period. In the mid 1990s, the turnover ratio for government bonds was around 10, by the late nineties this had fallen to around 7. A decade later in the mid 2000s, it had fallen to around 5 and now it is 3. There are number of explanations for this decline in turnover which I will now turn to. Derivatives Market participants have been increasingly transacting in derivative instruments rather than the cash bonds. Since the mid 1990s, activity in bond futures and interest rate swaps, relative to bonds outstanding, has increased sharply (Graph 2). In 2015, the value of turnover in bond markets was around $A2½ trillion whereas the value of turnover in both the Australian dollar interest rate swaps and bond futures markets was each around $A9 trillion.4 Growth in activity in these markets in recent years has significantly outpaced growth in issuance of Australian dollar bonds. Overall, the increase in derivative activity has more than offset the decline in bond market activity. Graph 2                                                  4 These figures are sourced from the AFMA. I’m only referring to interest rate and tenor basis swaps turnover here. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  There is a clear preference for bond issuers and investors in Australia to manage the risk associated with their bond issuance or bond holdings by transacting in the derivative instruments rather than in the physical instruments.5 This has resulted in a further concentration of liquidity in the derivative instruments and a decline in liquidity of cash instruments. This development is likely to continue to occur, particularly for less liquid segments of the bond market. This is occurring because these standardised derivative instruments can be significantly cheaper to transact than the physical instruments. One of the reasons for this is simply that a physical transaction has a larger cash component than a derivative transaction. This cash component has to be funded. If the cost of funding is relatively high, market participants are likely to shift activity into other instruments. That said, fixed income derivative markets cannot act as a perfect substitute for bond markets because they are not a funding source for the seller nor do they represent an investment for the buyer. The underlying bonds still have to be issued! Electronic trading The share of derivative market transactions relative to cash transactions is larger in Australia than in European and North American fixed income markets. This presents a challenge for local bond markets to compete for business with the derivative markets. How could this come about? One way is to look to lower the cost of transacting in bond markets. This could happen if a greater share of transactions were conducted via electronic trading platforms. Electronic platforms typically offer a lower cost structure than traditional phone dealing. The share of electronic trading in government bond markets in Australia is around a third. But in European and US bond markets the share of electronic trading is considerably greater at over fifty per cent. In the bond futures markets most trades are conducted via an electronic platform while around 25 per cent of interest rate swap transactions occur via electronic platforms. There appears to be scope for a greater share of trading in Australia’s government bond market, at least, to take place on electronic platforms. The price of liquidity Having talked so far about the stock of liquidity, I will now turn to developments in the price of liquidity. While turnover appears to be lower in bond markets, the price of transacting doesn’t appear to be much different from where it has been in the past. This is apparent from bid-ask spreads, which is a measure of the difference between the price that a buyer is willing to pay for a typical amount of an asset and for which a seller is willing to sell. Bid-ask spreads have been narrowing or are around their narrowest in domestic government bond markets. Part of the explanation is that there has been a decrease in the volume that can be transacted at these spreads, as a consequence of both increased electronic trading and decreased principal-based market-making. So spreads are narrower but how much you can make use of these narrower spreads when trading larger volumes is not so clear, and this is often at the root of the divergence in opinion about the current health of markets. Other measures of the price of liquidity also paint a positive picture. For instance, spreads on risky bonds over government bonds are above levels that prevailed in the years leading up to the financial crisis, but significantly lower than the average or extreme levels seen during the crisis years. Volatility too has been a bit higher in the past six to twelve months, but has not reached levels seen in the crisis.                                                 5 For instance, bond dealers and issuers use exchange for physical transactions to manage interest rate risk. See Cheung B (2014), ‘Trading in Treasury Bond futures Contracts and Bonds in Australia’, RBA Bulletin, September, pp 47−52. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  One reason why Australian fixed income markets continue to function smoothly is that the derivative markets have been operating effectively. For instance, the market depth (the size of a trade that can be executed for a given trade size) in the futures market appears to be similar to levels that prevailed prior to the financial crisis (Graph 3). As I mentioned, these markets account for the bulk of activity in Australian markets. As such, they play a key role in price discovery and in facilitating a transfer of risk among market participants. While part of the concern in global markets is over a withdrawal of market-making activity from bond markets, it is apparent that this issue has not been as important in Australia for some time. Graph 3  The role of market makers The Australian bond markets still rely relatively significantly on market makers who have a dominant presence in the markets. For instance, according to AFMA data, banks account for around 45 per cent of all trades in the Australian Government Securities (AGS) market, down from around 60 per cent in the decade to 2011. At 45 per cent, banks account for a slightly larger share of transactions in the semis market than they did in the past. Their share of transactions in non-government bond markets has declined slightly from 50 to 45 per cent. While in aggregate, banks are still significantly involved, there have been some shifts in the composition of this activity. Australian bond markets have traditionally had a mix of both local and foreign banks, although the number of institutions involved in the bond markets has ebbed and flowed with the size of markets. There was an increase in participation by foreign banks in 2010 and 2011, partly in response to increased demand from their offshore clients, who sought to capitalise on the strength of fixed income markets in Australia relative to those in other jurisdictions. This led the domestic market to be oversupplied for a while in my opinion. More recently, we have seen some foreign participants leave again as it has become uneconomic for them to continue to provide market-making services. As a result, while bond markets are currently larger, relative to GDP, than in the past, the foreign bank presence is a little smaller than it has been at some times in the past. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The decline in the presence of foreign banks reflects both a change in business strategy and, in some cases, the effect of regulations. For many banks operating in Australia, the effect of regulations such as increased capital requirements and the leverage ratio have not been binding on their business models. Nevertheless, just as has happened in the larger fixed income markets offshore, banks operating in Australian bond markets have changed their business models. This has seen a lower level or greater rationing of principal-based market-making as a result of a decrease in appetite to warehouse risk, particularly bonds that are not very liquid. This is evident in the bond inventories that banks hold in their trading books. Banks have decreased the stock of non-government bonds they hold in their trading books and increased the share of government bond holdings. This is partly driven by a decrease in willingness to warehouse bonds that do not trade actively in the secondary market. It also reflects the incentives for banks to hold government bonds to satisfy the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR). Banks’ holdings of government bonds have increased to around 30 per cent of the market. The RBA’s judgement is that a greater holding than 30 per cent may impair the functioning of the government bond markets. In coming to that assessment, one of the considerations is the sizeable share of government securities held by offshore investors. In the case of AGS, this currently amounts to more than 60 per cent of the stock. Many of these investors are buy-and-hold investors. They generally do not undertake securities lending. As a result, these bond holdings are not contributing to the liquidity of the market. Hence, a more relevant metric in considering the share of the government bond market that banks can hold to meet the LCR is the stock of bonds held by domestic investors. Last week, the RBA published its latest assessment of the amount of AGS and semis that could be reasonably held by the domestic banks without impairing market functioning.6 (APRA then sets the aggregate size of the Committed Liquidity Facility as the difference between the LCR requirements of the banks and the amount of AGS and semis that can be reasonably held.) We have maintained the assumption that the domestic banks can reasonably hold a quarter of the stock of AGS and semis in 2017. Foreign banks operating in the local market hold around another 5 per cent of the stock to meet their LCR requirement. So, in total, this remains at 30 per cent. Based on budget projections of the Commonwealth and State governments, we expect that the domestic banks could reasonably hold $220 billion without impairing the market, which would be an increase of $25 billion compared to the holdings in 2016. High frequency trading High-frequency trading is not as prevalent in the domestic bond markets as it is in some markets There are mixed views on the contribution of high-frequency trading to market functioning, particularly in terms of its contribution to flash events in the bond market such as occurred in the US Treasury market on 15 October 2014 and the German “bund tantrum”.7                                                  6 See RBA (Reserve Bank of Australia) (2016), ‘The Committed Liquidity Facility’, rba.gov.au site, 16 June. 7 Joint Staff (US Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, US Securities and Exchange Commission, US Commodity Futures Trading Commission) (2015): ‘The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014’, Joint Staff Report, July. Markets Committee (2016). Available at <https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Documents/Joint_ Staff_Report_Treasury_10–15–2015.pdf>, ‘Electronic Trading in Fixed Income Markets’, Markets Committee Publications No 7, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, January. Available at <http://www.bis.org/publ/mktc07.htm>. See also ASIC (Australian Securities and Investments Commission) (2015), ‘Review of High-Frequency Trading and Dark Liquidity’, Report 452, October. Available at <http://asic.gov.au/regulatory-resources/markets/market-structure/dark-liquidity-and-high-frequency-trading/ review-of-high-frequency-trading-and-dark-liquidity-2015/>. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  High-frequency trading does not have a presence in the physical bond market while it has a modest presence in the bond futures market, growing to around 15 per cent over the past few years. That said, high-frequency trading activity in the domestic market is often concentrated around particular events, most notably the bond futures rolls. The share of high-frequency trading around the futures roll can be considerably higher. The presence of high-frequency traders can reduce the costs, in terms of spread, of transacting small parcel sizes. There is evidence of that occurring in the domestic market. But, high-frequency trading firms do not hold trading positions for a long period of time. During periods when market prices are adjusting, the presence of market participants that have longer holding periods can be beneficial because these participants absorb some of the order imbalance. One possible concern for the future evolution of the bond market is that high-frequency firms reduce the return to market-making activities in normal (benign) times causing market makers to exit as such activity becomes uneconomic. This reduction in market-making then becomes problematic in more turbulent times exacerbating market disruption. This is a potential development we will be monitoring, although there is no evidence that this has been an issue to date in the local market. Conclusion In conclusion, Australian fixed income markets have continued to function satisfactorily, even while in some overseas markets there has been increased concern about the capacity of such markets to function effectively. As I’ve noted, part of the explanation for the difference is that the withdrawal of dealers from the bond market in Australia has not been as sizeable as it has been elsewhere. Regulatory change has contributed to the reduced capacity in the domestic market, but not to the detriment of market functioning. Indeed, the fact that the price of liquidity now more accurately reflects the cost of providing liquidity is a positive outcome. Another development that has contributed to the satisfactory outcomes in the domestic market is that a large share of market activity is undertaken in derivative markets that don’t rely as much on market-making capacity and are relatively low cost and efficient. It is likely that fixed income markets in Australia will continue to evolve in coming years, which will require market participants to keep adapting. On our side, we will continue to monitor this evolution and its impact on the efficient functioning of the market. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Janet L Yellen: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress Testimony by Ms Janet L Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, Washington DC, 21 June 2016. *      *      * Chairman Shelby, Ranking Member Brown, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve’s semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. In my remarks today, I will briefly discuss the current economic situation and outlook before turning to monetary policy. Current economic situation and outlook Since my last appearance before this Committee in February, the economy has made further progress toward the Federal Reserve’s objective of maximum employment. And while inflation has continued to run below our 2 percent objective, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) expects inflation to rise to that level over the medium term. However, the pace of improvement in the labor market appears to have slowed more recently, suggesting that our cautious approach to adjusting monetary policy remains appropriate. In the labor market, the cumulative increase in jobs since its trough in early 2010 has now topped 14 million, while the unemployment rate has fallen more than 5 percentage points from its peak. In addition, as we detail in the Monetary Policy Report, jobless rates have declined for all major demographic groups, including for African Americans and Hispanics. Despite these declines, however, it is troubling that unemployment rates for these minority groups remain higher than for the nation overall, and that the annual income of the median African American household is still well below the median income of other U.S. households. During the first quarter of this year, job gains averaged 200,000 per month, just a bit slower than last year’s pace. And while the unemployment rate held steady at 5 percent over this period, the labor force participation rate moved up noticeably. In April and May, however, the average pace of job gains slowed to only 80,000 per month or about 100,000 per month after adjustment for the effects of a strike. The unemployment rate fell to 4.7 percent in May, but that decline mainly occurred because fewer people reported that they were actively seeking work. A broader measure of labor market slack that includes workers marginally attached to the workforce and those working part-time who would prefer full-time work was unchanged in May and remains above its level prior to the recession. Of course, it is important not to overreact to one or two reports, and several other timely indicators of labor market conditions still look favorable. One notable development is that there are some tentative signs that wage growth may finally be picking up. That said, we will be watching the job market carefully to see whether the recent slowing in employment growth is transitory, as we believe it is. Economic growth has been uneven over recent quarters. U.S. inflation-adjusted gross domestic product (GDP) is currently estimated to have increased at an annual rate of only 3/4 percent in the first quarter of this year. Subdued foreign growth and the appreciation of the dollar weighed on exports, while the energy sector was hard hit by the steep drop in oil prices since mid-2014; in addition, business investment outside of the energy sector was surprisingly weak. However, the available indicators point to a noticeable step-up in GDP growth in the second quarter. In particular, consumer spending has picked up smartly in recent months, supported by solid growth in real disposable income and the ongoing effects of the increases in household wealth. And housing has continued to recover gradually, aided by income gains and the very low level of mortgage rates. The recent pickup in household spending, together with underlying conditions that are favorable for growth, lead me to be optimistic that we will see further improvements in the 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  labor market and the economy more broadly over the next few years. Monetary policy remains accommodative; low oil prices and ongoing job gains should continue to support the growth of incomes and therefore consumer spending; fiscal policy is now a small positive for growth; and global economic growth should pick up over time, supported by accommodative monetary policies abroad. As a result, the FOMC expects that with gradual increases in the federal funds rate, economic activity will continue to expand at a moderate pace and labor market indicators will strengthen further. Turning to inflation, overall consumer prices, as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures, increased just 1 percent over the 12 months ending in April, up noticeably from its pace through much of last year but still well short of the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Much of this shortfall continues to reflect earlier declines in energy prices and lower prices for imports. Core inflation, which excludes energy and food prices, has been running close to 1-1/2 percent. As the transitory influences holding down inflation fade and the labor market strengthens further, the Committee expects inflation to rise to 2 percent over the medium term. Nonetheless, in considering future policy decisions, we will continue to carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward our inflation goal. Of course, considerable uncertainty about the economic outlook remains. The latest readings on the labor market and the weak pace of investment illustrate one downside risk – that domestic demand might falter. In addition, although I am optimistic about the longer-run prospects for the U.S. economy, we cannot rule out the possibility expressed by some prominent economists that the slow productivity growth seen in recent years will continue into the future. Vulnerabilities in the global economy also remain. Although concerns about slowing growth in China and falling commodity prices appear to have eased from earlier this year, China continues to face considerable challenges as it rebalances its economy toward domestic demand and consumption and away from export-led growth. More generally, in the current environment of sluggish growth, low inflation, and already very accommodative monetary policy in many advanced economies, investor perceptions of and appetite for risk can change abruptly. One development that could shift investor sentiment is the upcoming referendum in the United Kingdom. A U.K. vote to exit the European Union could have significant economic repercussions. For all of these reasons, the Committee is closely monitoring global economic and financial developments and their implications for domestic economic activity, labor markets, and inflation. Monetary policy I will turn next to monetary policy. The FOMC seeks to promote maximum employment and price stability, as mandated by the Congress. Given the economic situation I just described, monetary policy has remained accommodative over the first half of this year to support further improvement in the labor market and a return of inflation to our 2 percent objective. Specifically, the FOMC has maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 1/4 to 1/2 percent and has kept the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securities at an elevated level. The Committee’s actions reflect a careful assessment of the appropriate setting for monetary policy, taking into account continuing below-target inflation and the mixed readings on the labor market and economic growth seen this year. Proceeding cautiously in raising the federal funds rate will allow us to keep the monetary support to economic growth in place while we assess whether growth is returning to a moderate pace, whether the labor market will strengthen further, and whether inflation will continue to make progress toward our 2 percent objective. Another factor that supports taking a cautious approach in raising the federal funds rate is that the federal funds rate is still near its effective lower bound. If inflation were to remain persistently low or the labor market were to weaken, the Committee would have only limited room to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate. However, if the economy were to overheat and inflation seemed likely to move significantly or 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  persistently above 2 percent, the FOMC could readily increase the target range for the federal funds rate. The FOMC continues to anticipate that economic conditions will improve further and that the economy will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate. In addition, the Committee expects that the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below the levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run because headwinds – which include restraint on U.S. economic activity from economic and financial developments abroad, subdued household formation, and meager productivity growth – mean that the interest rate needed to keep the economy operating near its potential is low by historical standards. If these headwinds slowly fade over time, as the Committee expects, then gradual increases in the federal funds rate are likely to be needed. In line with that view, most FOMC participants, based on their projections prepared for the June meeting, anticipate that values for the federal funds rate of less than 1 percent at the end of this year and less than 2 percent at the end of next year will be consistent with their assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Of course, the economic outlook is uncertain, so monetary policy is by no means on a preset  course and FOMC participants’ projections for the federal funds rate are not a predetermined plan for future policy. The actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on economic and financial developments and their implications for the outlook and associated risks. Stronger growth or a more rapid increase in inflation than the Committee currently anticipates would likely make it appropriate to raise the federal funds rate more quickly. Conversely, if the economy were to disappoint, a lower path of the federal funds rate would be appropriate. We are committed to our dual objectives, and we will adjust policy as appropriate to foster financial conditions consistent with their attainment over time. The Committee is continuing its policy of reinvesting proceeds from maturing Treasury securities and principal payments from agency debt and mortgage-backed securities. As highlighted in the statement released after the June FOMC meeting, we anticipate continuing this policy until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. Maintaining our sizable holdings of longer-term securities should help maintain accommodative financial conditions and should reduce the risk that we might have to lower the federal funds rate to the effective lower bound in the event of a future large adverse shock. Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Haruhiko Kuroda: Overcoming deflation – theory and practice Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at Keio University, Tokyo, 20 June 2016. *      *      * Introduction It is a great honor to have the opportunity to speak to you today at the Faculty of Economics at Keio University. Founded by Yukichi Fukuzawa in 1858, Keio Gijuku has a history spanning more than 150 years. The Faculty of Economics – the precursor of which, together with the Faculty of Letters and the Faculty of Law, was one of the three original faculties of Keio University established in 1890 – is said to be the oldest economics faculty in Japan. Since then, it has not only been a leading force in economic scholarship in Japan in a wide range of research areas but has also turned out a large number of individuals that have gone on to play prominent roles in the world of politics, business, and finance. Since I have been given the opportunity to speak at such an academic venue, today I would like to talk about the implementation of so-called unconventional monetary policy and their link to developments in academic research, based on the Bank’s experience in implementing quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE). I. QQE with a negative interest rate Japan has struggled with deflation since the late 1990s, and in the process the need for more powerful monetary easing gradually became evident. The Abe administration was inaugurated in December 2012 and launched its so-called “Abenomics” policies consisting of “three arrows,” and I assumed my role as Governor of the Bank of Japan in March 2013. In April, at the first Monetary Policy Meeting after I became Governor, the Bank decided to introduce QQE. QQE comprises two elements designed to break through the bounds to previous monetary policy measures (Chart 1). The first element consists of trying to drastically convert the deflationary mindset that had gained hold among people and to raise inflation expectations through the Bank’s strong commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. The second element consists of exerting downward pressure not only on short-term nominal interest rates but on the entire yield curve through massive purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs). The consequence of these elements is that they make it possible to exert greater monetary easing effects on the real economy by substantially lowering real interest rates not only at the short end but also at the long end. Subsequently, the pace of monetary expansion was accelerated in October 2014 both in quantitative and qualitative terms and, in January this year, the policy was augmented in a third dimension by adding an interest rate dimension to the quantitative and qualitative dimensions through the introduction of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” (Chart 2). The introduction of a negative interest rate aims to exert further downward pressure on the entire yield curve by lowering the short end of the yield curve, coupled with massive purchases of JGBs. This could be called “enhanced QQE” in that it is an extension of previous QQE policies and further enhances their effects. With regard to massive purchases of JGBs, the Bank initially conducted purchases such that the amount outstanding of JGBs held by the Bank would increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen, and in October 2014 this was accelerated to today’s pace of about 80 trillion yen. Since Japan’s nominal GDP is about 500 trillion yen, an annual increase of 80 trillion yen corresponds to about 16 percent of GDP (Chart 3). As a result of such purchases, the 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Bank of Japan’s balance sheet relative to nominal GDP increased from about 35 percent at end-March 2013 to about 81 percent at end-March this year and will continue to rise. For comparison, following the three rounds of large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) in the United States, which now have ended, the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet at end-March this year was equivalent to 25 percent of nominal GDP. I think this shows you just how massive the monetary easing conducted by the Bank of Japan is. II. The costs of deflation As mentioned, the aim of QQE is to overcome the prolonged deflation that has gripped Japan. Even if this deflation has been mild, the fact that it has continued for more than 15 years means that its cumulative costs have been extremely large. Looked at in terms of the price level, an annual inflation rate of minus 0.3 percent over a period of 15 years implies that the price level will fall by around 5 percent, but an annual inflation rate of 2 percent over a period of 15 years means that the price level will rise by around 35 percent. Therefore, I think it is clear that even mild deflation, if it continues for a prolonged period, will have a large impact on the medium- to long-term decision-making of economic entities. The problem with persistent deflation is that it gives rise to a vicious cycle in which firms and households – since they expect prices to fall further and due to heightened uncertainty – postpone various expenditures, which further prolongs weak growth and deflation. Under such circumstances, with falling prices and heightened uncertainty, postponing expenditures may be the optimal response for individual economic entities; however, from a macroeconomic perspective, it is a typical example of the “fallacy of composition,” since it results in prolonging weak growth and deflation. Therefore, to overcome deflation, it is absolutely essential to drastically convert the deflationary mindset. Moreover, merely achieving a positive inflation rate is not sufficient; it is also necessary that a self-reinforcing cycle of strengthening economic activity gains traction with prices increasing moderately. During the period of deflation, Japan’s economy experienced a simultaneous downward shift and flattening of the Phillips curve (Chart 4). If the average inflation rate is low, the opportunity costs of leaving prices unchanged are also low, so that the frequency of price adjustments by firms is likely to fall. Macroeconomic theory suggests that such a decline in the frequency of price adjustments at the micro level is linked to a flattening of the Phillips curve at the macro level.1 A key question in this context, I think, is whether the flattening of the Phillips curve or, in other words, the decrease in the responsiveness of the inflation rate to economic fluctuations, is simply the result of changes in firms’ price-setting behavior. If we look at Japan’s experience of prolonged deflation, the decline in the frequency of price adjustments can also be regarded as signaling a weakening in the metabolism of the economy, of which the postponement of expenditure activities by firms and households is only a symptom. If this is the case, it is possible that the change in the shape of the Phillips curve reflects a deterioration in the fundamentals of Japan’s economy. Of course, at the moment, this is nothing more than a hypothesis. To examine this hypothesis, we need theoretical and empirical studies taking the interaction of deflation and firms’ behavior into account, but to date there is limited amount of research on this issue. Moreover, when considering the lessons from Japan’s prolonged deflation, it is also essential to deepen our understanding with regard to the link between deflation and macroeconomic performance.                                                 1 Laurence Ball, N. Gregory Mankiw, and David Romer, “The New Keynesian Economics and the Output-Inflation Trade-off,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 1988, pp. 1–65. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  III. Formation of inflation expectations Earlier, I mentioned that QQE consists of two elements. One of these was the drastic conversion of the deflationary mindset, and related to this, I would like to consider the formation of inflation expectations in more detail. When considering the formation of inflation expectations, theoretical and empirical research on forward guidance under zero interest rates provides useful insights. With many central banks grappling with the zero lower bound on policy rates not only as a theoretical possibility but as a problem encountered in practice, research on forward guidance has made considerable progress.2 Such research has helped to elucidate that, even in a situation where the zero lower bound has been reached and it is not possible to lower policy rates further, monetary easing effects can be achieved through forward guidance by committing to maintaining zero interest rates, which can be regarded as a mechanism to borrow monetary easing effects from the future (Chart 5). The first time this mechanism was employed in the actual conduct of monetary policy was with the introduction of the zero interest rate policy commenced by the Bank of Japan in February 1999. At that time, the Bank committed itself to maintaining a zero interest rate until deflationary concern was dispelled, and the impact of that policy was called the “policy duration effect.” Backed by growing theoretical research, similar policies were subsequently adopted by central banks of other major advanced economies and have recently come to be referred to as forward guidance. It is well known that in standard macroeconomic models, macroeconomic variables respond strongly to forward guidance by the central bank, giving rise to substantial policy effects. Thus, from a theoretical perspective, a commitment to continuing with zero interest rates for a prolonged period not only allows borrowing unlimited monetary easing effects from the future, but such policy effects also materialize immediately. However, these predictions are at odds with the effects actually observed in practice – a phenomenon that has been described as the “forward guidance puzzle.”3 When considering this puzzle, two factors are important. The first is that in standard macroeconomic models, there are no limits to consumption smoothing over time due to the large intertemporal elasticity of substitution and the absence of borrowing constraints. The second is that inflation expectations respond instantaneously to any change in policy. It is this latter point – the speed with which inflation expectations respond – that I would like to focus on next. In theoretical models assuming a forward-looking Phillips curve, inflation expectations respond instantaneously if the commitment regarding future monetary easing is credible. However, inflation expectations observed in practice are highly sticky and change only slowly. This means that in the actual formation of inflation expectations, the backward-looking component determined by actual inflation rates observed in the past plays a large role. Moreover, in standard theoretical models, it is assumed outright that the commitment to monetary easing is perfectly credible, which potentially gives rise to a discrepancy between such theoretical models and reality. If we consider Japan’s experience, with inflation expectations having declined in the deflationary period, what plays an extremely important role in the process of overcoming deflation is to push inflation expectations back up to close to the target inflation rate and to re-anchor them there. How to do this, including how to deal with the impact of the backward-looking component of inflation expectations, is a challenge that is not necessarily addressed                                                 2 Gauti Eggertsson and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 2003, pp. 139–211. 3 Marco Del Negro, Marc Giannoni, and Christina Patterson, “The Forward Guidance Puzzle,” Staff Reports 574, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2012. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  by theory. Moreover, with not only the Bank of Japan but many other central banks around the world currently having nearly exhausted conventional monetary policy means – that is, lowering short-term interest rates – responding to deflationary pressures and firmly stabilizing inflation expectations at the desired level represents an unprecedentedly difficult challenge. In this sense, the formation of inflation expectations can be regarded as an “old new” issue of debate. IV. Large-scale purchases of financial assets Next, I would like to talk about pushing down the entire yield curve through massive JGB purchases, which is another element of QQE. As is well known, although the market operations of a central bank – by exchanging monetary base for government bonds – are transactions in financial assets that are not perfect substitute, they should be neutral with regard to price formation if arbitrage in financial markets operates fully.4 However, if arbitrage in financial markets for some reason is imperfect, the market operations of the central bank will affect term premiums.5 Moreover, it is likely that such financial market imperfection will become more severe during times of financial crisis. In practice, if we look back at the response of central banks in the United States and Europe immediately after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, we find that the most important issue was the stabilization of financial markets and the financial system, and central banks to this end provided large amounts of liquidity and intervened in financial markets that showed signs of malfunction. Subsequently, with financial markets having calmed down to some extent, central banks continued with large-scale asset purchases with the aim of stabilizing the macroeconomy and avoiding deflation by pushing down various premiums in financial markets. Furthermore, another important component of QQE, as mentioned earlier, was to raise inflation expectations by influencing forward-looking expectations formation. A number of studies employing New Keynesian models – the standard type of macroeconomic models employed to analyze monetary policy issues – have sought to incorporate various kinds of financial market imperfections to examine the impact of such quantitative easing.6 However, I think that to date it is not sufficiently clear under what circumstances and through which mechanisms quantitative easing is effective. In fact, former Fed Chairman Bernanke has quipped that “[t]he problem with QE is it works in practice, but it doesn’t work in theory.” Given that different countries and regions have different financial systems, I think that when examining the impact of quantitative easing it is necessary not only to focus on the financial markets in which large-scale asset purchases are conducted but also to explicitly take into account such differences, for example in the transmission mechanisms in the financial systems. V. Monetary policy rules I would now like to slightly change the topic and consider unconventional monetary policy and monetary policy rules.                                                 4 Neil Wallace, “A Modigliani-Miller Theorem for Open-Market Operations,” American Economic Review, Vol. 71, No. 3, 1981, pp. 267–274. 5 Franco Modigliani and Richard Sutch, “Innovations in Interest Rate Policy,” American Economic Review, Vol. 56, No. 2, 1966, pp. 178–197. 6 See, for example, Mark Gertler and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Business Cycle Analysis,” in Benjamin Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3A, 2010. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  One of the areas in which there has been considerable progress since the 1990s in theoretical and empirical research on monetary policy is research on policy rules, of which the Taylor rule is a prime example.7 Studies in this area highlight the importance of systematically setting policy rates in line with changes in the macroeconomy in order to maximize monetary policy effects. Put differently, they indicate that in order to ensure the effectiveness of monetary policy, the important thing is not to cause unanticipated shocks, but to maintain consistent and predictable policy responses (Chart 6). These considerations regarding the conduct of monetary policy essentially also apply to the conduct of unconventional policies. This means that, in order to raise the effectiveness of monetary policy, it is important to show in advance the policy options the central bank can use to address an exogenous shock to the economy large enough for interest rates to hit the zero lower bound. However, looking back at Japan’s experience since the late 1990s and the policy response in the United States and Europe following the collapse of Lehman Brothers, central banks essentially stumbled along in devising new policy measures to respond to the situation and problems facing them at the time. Since in practice the world is full of uncertainty, it is difficult to present policy options for all contingencies in advance. Moreover, because policy responses to unanticipated events are formulated by taking not only financial and economic circumstances but also various structural and institutional constraints into account, they tend to consist of a complex package of policies. The issue of what kind of institutional framework should be built in order to achieve an efficient allocation of resources in circumstances where such uncertainty is great and it is necessary to deal with complex challenges falls into the arena of incomplete contract theory.8 Research in this field has made rapid progress in recent years and the findings are applied in practice in a growing range of areas, such as firm organization, financial contracts, and legal systems. I think that, by employing the new understanding gained and considering a possible policy framework for comprehensive policy rules – including in response to crises – as well as the application of such rules, it may be possible to expand the research frontier of monetary policy. VI. Long-term equilibrium While it is premature to talk about the timing of an exit from “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” and how to go about it, I would finally like to take the valuable opportunity of speaking here today to say a few words about the relationship between Japan’s economy and monetary policy once deflation has finally been overcome. Standard models analyzing monetary policy take the trend growth rate and the inflation rate in steady state as given and focus on economic fluctuations around the trend. The central interest of monetary policy analysis employing such models is how to smooth cyclical economic fluctuations and to stabilize the inflation rate near the target level. Standard macroeconomic models generally make simplifying assumptions: short-term models focusing on business cycles take the potential growth rate as exogenously given, while long-term economic growth models examining the determinants of the potential growth rate ignore short-term economic fluctuations, since it is assumed that these are smoothed out over time and do not affect long-term economic growth.                                                 7 The pioneering study in this area is John B. Taylor, “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39, 1993, pp. 195–214. 8 A standard textbook in this field is Patrick Bolton and Mathias Dewatripont, Contract Theory, The MIT Press, 2005. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Similar simplifying assumptions are made in the analysis of unconventional monetary policy. When unconventional monetary policies are analyzed using standard theoretical macroeconomic models, it is assumed that even if there is a shock large enough for interest rates to hit the zero lower bound the economy returns to its steady state as the shock dissipates. In other words, such analyses of unconventional monetary policies examine how the impact of a large shock is smoothed out and absorbed over time. However, if there is a downward shift in the steady state and the natural rate of interest, which reflects long-term growth expectations, shifts down permanently, the stimulative effects of a decline in real interest rates on economic activity will weaken and the effectiveness of monetary policy will be substantially hampered. Moreover, if there is substantial uncertainty regarding the level of the natural rate of interest, this would make it difficult to assess the degree of monetary easing or tightening required and it would increase uncertainty over the future course of monetary policy. In addition, since the decline in the potential growth rate is likely to also lower expected permanent incomes, it will give rise to a negative income effect, which likely will exert downward pressure on economic activity. In fact, as seen in the “secular stagnation” debate of recent years, there has been active debate in major advance economies regarding the possibility that, following the large shocks they have suffered, the steady state may have shifted downward due to a variety of factors.9 Meanwhile, whereas Japan’s potential growth rate until the early 1990s had been in the range of 3 to 4 percent, it subsequently followed a downward trend, falling to around 1 percent in the second half of the 1990s and further to a level below 0.5 percent after the collapse of Lehman Brothers (Chart 7). The natural rate of interest – that is, the interest rate at which the economy neither accelerates nor decelerates – is likely to also have followed a downward trend in line with the decline in the potential growth rate. In this sense, the relationship between uncertainty surrounding the medium- to long-term steady state and the conduct of monetary policy can be said to be an issue faced not only by the Bank of Japan, but by all central banks. In order to consider this issue, it is necessary to devise an analytical framework that takes the interaction between long-term economic growth and short-term business cycle fluctuations into account. Doing so is not only of practical importance but should also present an interesting research topic from an academic perspective. Conclusion Japan’s experience of battling with mild but extremely persistent deflation provides a valuable case study both for academic research on unconventional monetary policy and for the practical conduct of monetary policy by central banks. By making use of this experience, we have made significant progress over the past decade and a half in academic research and the actual conduct of monetary policy. However, it is also true that, as I mentioned today, there still remain gaps between the two. Going forward, I am sure that if academia and central banks continue to join forces in their efforts, this will produce important benefits to both sides. Thank you.                                                   9 Lawrence H. Summers, “Have we Entered an Age of Secular Stagnation? IMF Fourteenth Annual Research Conference in Honor of Stanley Fischer, Washington, DC,” IMF Economic Review, Vol. 63, No. 1, 2015, pp. 277–280. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7         
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches       
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9         
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Perry Warjiyo: Indonesian economic outlook this year and the years ahead Keynote speech by Mr Perry Warjiyo, Deputy Governor of Bank Indonesia, at BNP Paribas Economic Outlook 2016, Jakarta, 23 March 2016. *      *      * Introduction Following the success of strong macroeconomic policy adjustments since the Fed tapper tantrum Mei 2013, Indonesia economy is already surpassing its turning point since second half of 2015. Macroeconomic and financial stability have been intact at the back of continued turbulences in the global economic and financial environments. There was an unintended consequence of the policy adjustments, though, that the domestic economic growth has been slowing, albeit still at relatively comfortable level compared to other emerging countries. I do believe Indonesia economy will be better this year. And even it will accelerate further next year and years to come. Let me persuade you on this. • First, we will continue to stress the importance of macroeconomic and financial stability as a prerequisite for sustainable growth. We already show our commitment and long-standing track record on this, and we will continue to do so. The recent global economic and financial condition is still challenging and uncertain. But compared to last year, which was I reckon the challenging year, there are some elements of certainty that will make 2016 better than 2015, including the likelihood of FFR increases. • Second, this is the time where all the three policy mix of Indonesia economic developments, i.e. fiscal, monetary, and structural reforms, are working together and reinforcing each other. This is where actually Indonesia differs with other countries. Following the brave removals of subsidies, fiscal stimulus has been in effect and accelerated for higher economic growth. Structural reforms have been speed up too. The government has done remarkably well in accelerating reforms in many key areas: better investment climate, infrastructure developments, manufacturing and industry, agriculture, maritime, and tourism. • Third, central bank policies have been reinforcing the fiscal stimulus and structural reforms by the government. Last year, at the backdrop of uncertainty surrounding FFR increases, we started to relax our macroprudential policy of LTV ratio and reserve requirements to support bank lending for economic growth. This year we already cut our BI policy rates three times in January, February, and March a total of 75 bps to 6.75%. We believe that monetary and macroprudential easing are consistent with our forecast of stable macroeconomic condition and higher economic growth. These three reasons why I am very confident that in 2016 Indonesian economic prospect will be better, with higher economic growth and sound macroeconomic and financial stability. And I believe it will be even more promising in 2017 and beyond. Now let me talk on these three following aspects: first, our assesment on the global economic and financial outlook, and the challenges that we saw; second, Indonesian economic outlook, how we try to stimulate our economic growth and maintain the stability; and third, how BI policy mix plays a key role in this road to Indonesia promising outlook to the future. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Global Outlook and Risks We particularly put emphasize on these three aspects of global economic and financial outlook and risk: global economic growth, commodity prices, and divergence of monetary policies. In addition, we also monitor closely the development in China, as its important role in the global and regional economy. On the global economic growth. It is still a challenging year. IMF just released in January the world economic outlook for this year and next year of 3.4% and 3.6%, respectively, a 0.2% lower than earlier forecasts. The US is still the main engine of the global economic growth, at 2.6% for both 2016 and 2017. We see slower recovery in Europe at 1.7% for both years, slightly higher than 1.5% in 2015. So I think that parts of developed economies have started their economic recovery albeit at slow pace. The challenge is, of course, on China, which is forecasted to grow around 6.3% this year and 6.0% next year. These are the main challenges from the global economic growth, which force us to rely more on domestic demand to support our growth. On the commodity prices. Last year, we saw a decline on our export commodity price index. This year it still declines before rebound in 2017 with slightly positive increase. This means that the commodity prices will reach at the bottom this year, and will start rising next year. In fact, palm oil price already stated to rebound, forecasted to increase this year. Though volatile in the short-term, oil prices will likely be around $35 per barrel, much lower than $50 per barrel assumed in the budget. That means our inflation will be lower, even though it puts pressures on budget revenues. All in all, it is imperative for Indonesia to ladder up from commodity export base to manufacturing.  On the divergence of monetary policy. After the first FFR increase of 25bps at the end of last year, most of the markets predicted another 50bps increases this year, once probably in June and another at the end of year. We already included this scenario in our policy making. Although it is still challenging, but compared to 2015 I think the uncertainty and volatility will be lower this year. We closely monitor the negative policy rates of Euro and Japan. Frankly, I am in doubt that these will be effective to address their deflation problems compared to their quantitative easing. All in all, these FFR outlook and negative rates in Europe and Japan as the ‘push factors’, with the positive outlook in our part as the ‘pull factor’, will be positive for FDI and portfolio inflows to Indonesia and rupiah exchange rate. On China. There are three channels that we need to anticipate from China factors: trade, renmimbi depreciation, and investment. On trade, China slowdown and commodity price declines continue to put pressures on our export. Our simulation shows that every 1% of economic slowdown in China corresponds to 0.3% slowdown in Indonesian economic growth. On renmimbi, I do not believe there will be big devaluation as we saw last year. I think PBoC will continue to intervene and reckon that renminbi depreciation will be gradual this year. The challenge in China is of course the policy adjustments that being implemented right now, i.e.: further capital account liberalization, financial market development, as well as greater exchange rate flexibility. This leads to the third China factor that we must not forget. China is aggressively pursuing its outward investment to support economic growth, embedded into its ambitious silk road strategy. So we have to prepare and open our arms for greater investments from China, as we have done to Japan and South Korea. These are what we see from the global economic and financial condition. Last year up until September was the most difficult time, but after December we see some improvements. The uncertainty is still there, but overall we are more confident now. We have incorporated these uncertainties in our policy making. Indonesia has shown its resilience in the past, and it poises to progress well now and to the future. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Indonesia Economic Outlook and Risks With stimulus from both fiscal and monetary fronts, as well as accelerated structural reforms in many key areas, we will be seeing significant improvements on Indonesia economy this year and beyond. The fiscal stimulus started to kick in in the third and fourth quarter last year, and budget absorption has been accelerated since early of this year, notably in capital expenditures. The continuous series of deregulation packages from the government will provide greater impetus for better investment climate, competitiveness, and buoyant economic activities. We are seeing accelerated completions of key infrastructure projects: toll road, airports, energy, irrigation, and more. Our macroprudential relaxation and monetary easing will also provide supports for higher economic growth. Let me provide our latest economic outlook for this year and next year. On economic growth. Last year, we recorded an economic growth of 4.79%. With the fiscal stimulus, the economic growth reached the bottom of 4.66% in the second quarter of last year and picked up to 5.04% in the last quarter. Investment in construction related to government projects together with private and government consumptions support the recovery. This year will be much better. Compared to early of last year, where the government must deal with the administrative procedures, this year fiscal stimulus through the acceleration of government projects already started to kick-in in the first quarter. With that, our economic growth forecast for this year will be around 5.2–5.6%. It will be supported by fiscal stimulus as well as the monetary policy easing to accelerate economic growth. Private consumption will still be robust. Government related expenditures, especially investment in infrastructures, will boost the economy, as we saw since Q3-2015. That is why the sectors that start rebounding will be construction, transportation, communication, and electricity, which are most of the government related fiscal stimulus sectors. I am sure that trade and manufacturing sectors will follow as the economic growth starts to gain broad momentum. This is the dynamic of the stimulus to economic growth that we will be seeing to the future. On inflation. We managed to lower inflation from 8.3% in 2014 to only 3.3% in 2015, which I think a part of its success owes to our monetary policy credibility that we gain since 2013. This year and next year we forecast inflation within our range of 4±1%. In the past, the challenge of price stability mainly came from administered prices, namely the subsidy of fuel and electricity. But the government has succeded in reforming these subsidies. This helps the central bank to be more certain in forecasting and controlling inflation. Unlike in the past, both CPI and core inflations will be convergent and under controlled. Exchange rate passthrough has been benign, because of the weak domestic demand, commodity price declines, and very well anchored inflation expectation. On current account deficit. Our macroeconomic adjustments in the past have succeded in lowering the CAD from the peak 4.4% of GDP in Q2-2013 to about 2% for the whole year 2015. For Indonesia, a CAD of 2.5–3% is still sustainable, because we still need to grow and for that we need sustainable financing from FDI and other long-term financing. That is why, with 2% CAD in 2015, we have room for monetary easing without worrying to external sector stability. This year, with the economic recovery gains momentum, CAD will be expected to widened but still within our long term sustainable CAD norm of 2.5–3% of GDP. We expect more than enough external financing for these deficits, with FDI constitutes the majority of the capital inflows and to a lesser extent long-term private external borrowing and portfolio investments. On financial system stability. Overall banking industry is sound, with CAR relatively high at about 21%. Lending growth is slowing, only about 10% in January 2016. But with economic stimulus from both fiscal and monetary, as well as liquidity injection with 1% reduction of reserve requirement that Bank Indonesia decided recently, we expect lending growth to increase to about 12–14 % this year. Overall NPL is low at 2.7% (gross) or 1.4% (net), although a bit increasing for some banks especially for the mining sectors. We have done 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  analysis on the corporate risks as well as household risk. Last year we record corporate earnings were declining as economy was slowing down. But overall corporates are adjusting quite well, as they are doing a lot of efficiency and early repayments of their debts, both local and external debts. With economy is rebounding, overall corporate performances will also improving this year. Bank Indonesia Policy Mix Bank Indonesia mandate is to achieve price stability (inflation) and maintain exchange rate stability to support economic growth. We also support financial system stability. For our policy making, we analyze and forecast macroeconomic condition two years ahead: inflation, economic growth, exchange rate, current account balance, and bank lending, taking into account the latest assessment on fiscal and financial system conditions as well as on global economic growth, interest rates, and commodity prices. We do not rely only one instrument, i.e. interest rate, but employ a policy mix of monetary, macroprudential, capital flow management and payment systems. As such, in every monthly board meeting we formulate interest rate, exchange rate policy, monetary operation, capital flows management, and macroprudential measures based on the latest assessment and forecast on overall macroeconomic and financial system. Early last year, we noted the need for balancing of macroeconomic stability and supporting economic growth. We forecasted at the time that inflation would be under controlled within target, current deficit narrowed, while economic growth slowed because of both external and domestic factors. That was the theme of policy coordination between Bank Indonesia and the government. We agree to accelerate fiscal stimulus for supporting economic growth, benefiting the savings from subsidy reforms in 2014. At Bank Indonesia, we also rebalance our policy mix. While interest rate cut was not possible at that time because of possibility of FFR increases, we have started to relax our macroprudential policy. We relaxed LTV ratios by an average 10% in June 2015 and lower reserve requirements in June and December 2015. Following the first FFR increase in December 2015 and less uncertainty about the future courses of possible FFR increases, we started to cuts our policy rates this year. Thus, both of our monetary and macroprudential policies are now on easing modes. Together with fiscal stimulus and structural reforms by the government, all of the national policy mix, i.e. fiscal, monetary and structural reforms, are reinforcing for accelerating economic growth while maintaining macroeconomic and financial stability. Let me brief on the latest board decision of Bank Indonesia policy mix. On the monetary policy. With inflation will remain low and within target for this year and next year, and current account deficit under controlled witin sustainable range, there has been room for monetary easing. We have communicate since October last year, and started to cut our BI policy rate by 25bps in January 2016. We cut again the BI Rate in February and March by 25bps each to 6.75%. More than that, we cut again our reserve requirement by 1% to 6.50% in February 2016, which we count would add liquidity in the banking system by about IDR 34 trillion (about USD 2.6 billion) and with money multiplier of about 4.8 times add liquidity in the economy of about IDR163 trilliun (USD12.5 billion). Our signal is clear, that macroeconomic stability provided us rooms for monetary easing for supporting economic growth through interest rate cuts and ample liquidity in the banking system. Eventhough there is still room, we will be cautious in deliberating our further monetary easing. We will assess throughly overall economic and financial developments, both domestic and global, when we formulate monetary policy in every monthly board meeting. In the meantime, we will focus on strengthening our monetary operations to reinforce the monetary policy transmission mechanisms. On the exchange rate policy. We adopt greater exchange rate flexibility. We will let the market mechanism to determine the exchange rate according to evolving supply and demand. And we are proud that with continuous financial market deepening the size and 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  price mechanisms in the foreign exchange market has been much developed now. That is why in most cases the exchange rate reflect the market mechanism. But we do not shy away to intervene in the market if exchange rate moves excessively and there is jittery in the market, especially in cases of large foreign capital reversals. If necessary, we intervene by both supplying the foreign exchange and buying government bonds from the secondary market. That is why you do not see excessive volatility both in the exchange rate as well as in the government bond yield. Last year was a bit difficult because there was capital outflows from the equity due to turbulences in the global market. But it has been reversed this year, with accumulated inflows from both fixed income and equity. Our exchange rate appreciated by 5.5% year-to-date to mid March. Going forward, with the economy rebounding, I do believe that both domestic and global factors will provide favorable environment for our exchange rate and financial market. On the macroprudential policy. We started with relaxing our loan to value ratio, on average about 10% in June last year. We also ease liquidity in the banking system, both through our monetary operation as well as reductions in the reserve requirement. Overall lending growth is still low at about 10% now as demand is just rebounding and not as strong as yet. However, looking closer to each sectors, the construction loan increased by 20% and real estate loan increased by 23%, showing that significant demand for bank lending from the fiscal stimulus related activities. We haven’t seen the impact on mortgage loan yet, it grew by about 10% last month, as demand for housing is not recovering yet. On the second half of last year, with the fiscal stimulus and monetary easing, the domestic demand will keep a pace and it will be so for demand for bank lending. We are seeing now increasing demand for lendings to government project related activities, but we will be seeing increasing demand for bank loans to other economic sectors as domestic economic growth becomes more broad based. Final Remarks I have shared my optimisms about positive Indonesian economic outlook this year and the years ahead. Economic growth will be higher, and macroeconomic and financial stability will be sound. There are some risks, of course, that we need to closely monitor and address, e.g. FFR increases, China factors, commodity price declines, and fiscal revenues. This is the time for Indonesia to move forward, and we will. All the three policy mix at the national level, i.e. fiscal stimulus, monetary easing, and accelerated structural reforms, are reinforcing to support higher economic growth. We know it, and investors see it. That is why investors already make differentiation of their views and valuations among emerging countries, where Indonesia as one of the promising economies. That will support for the better Indonesia to the future. Hope I bring more optimisms to you. I thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Yannis Stournaras: Present situation and proposals to move forward Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the Conference organized by the Hellenic Observatory of the London School of Economics on “Getting Policy Knowledge Into Government”, London, 19 May 2016. *      *      * Before I begin my presentation I would like to congratulate the Hellenic Observatory at the LSE, Professor Kevin Featherstone and his colleagues, for twenty years of valuable contribution to a better understanding of economic and social realities in Greece. The lectures, publications and research work of the Observatory allowed us to look at Greece through the lens of an outside, independent observer, detached from our everyday entanglements. On this happy occasion of your 20th anniversary I would like to thank the Hellenic Observatory for that contribution and wish you many more years of creative activity. Ladies and Gentlemen, dear colleagues, The speakers who took the floor in the preceding panels have covered the European and Greek experiences, giving us powerful insights into the respective patterns and methods used. All discussions converged in the assessment that, if governments recognize, accommodate and internalize outside knowledge and technical expertise, the efficiency of policy making mechanism, as well as the quality of the decisions should be greatly improved. This leads directly to the conclusion that, in order to move forward, we must improve and enrich this fruitful relationship, removing existing obstacles. Ladies and Gentlemen, Allow me now to share with you some general thoughts on the subject, based on the Greek experience. I will begin by describing briefly the nature and the characteristics of outside knowledge. Then I will focus on the supply and sources of knowledge and particularly on the dual position of the Bank of Greece. Finally, I will outline the attitude of Greek governments vis a vis external knowledge and their willingness to use it as an input into their decision making, concluding with some remarks on the formative factors shaping this attitude. Outside knowledge – technical expertise I understand outside knowledge and expertise as knowledge developed outside the Government policy mechanisms. In the long – run one can rightfully advocate that outside knowledge is the cornerstone of economic policies, which are based on theories developed outside politics, in the field of science. But, as we are not here to discuss the perennial question of the relationship of science and politics, I must confine the analysis to the short and medium run. In this time-frame, outside knowledge should be seen firstly as public knowledge, i.e. as the existing corpus of research results, publications, criticisms and proposals coming from a variety of sources but sharing a common element: they are relevant and potentially useful in the formulation of present-day economic policies. The basic characteristics of public knowledge is that it is a free good, available not only to governments but to the society at large. In that respect, it is an important factor shaping attitudes, ideas and conceptions that can legitimize or reject economic policies. External expertise on the other hand refers to the total of skills and technical abilities that are available on demand. The supply of outside knowledge In Greece, as in other European countries, the supply of outside knowledge and expertise comes from universities, individual academics, commercial banks, think-tanks and business associations. KEPE, the Centre of Planning and Economic Research, may also be included 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  in the list, although institutionally is part of public administration. All of them publish studies on topical issues, regular reports on the state of the economy, policy recommendations, forecasts and evaluations of current policies. The Bank of Greece is an independent institution with specific tasks and responsibilities, which include safeguarding financial stability and implementing monetary policy. It is therefore an indispensable part of the policy making apparatus and its technical expertise on these issues should be considered as internal to the formation and implementation of economic policy. The institutional importance of the Bank of Greece is clearly demonstrated by the fact that all Memorandi of the crisis bear two signatures: that of the Minister of Finance, alongside with the Governor’s of the Bank of Greece. In the same context, according to its mandate, the Bank of Greece should assist and support general economic policy on condition that the Bank’s primary goal of safeguarding price stability is not jeopardized. It fulfils this role, acting as an outside source of knowledge on general economic policy issues. This is done mainly through its regular and extraordinary publications and/or public interventions including: • the Governor’s Annual Report on the state of the economy; • the biannual Monetary Policy Report, submitted to the Greek Parliament and the Cabinet; • testimonies by the Governor before the Greek Parliament; • articles, speeches, statements and interviews of the Governor; • periodical publications; • studies on economic policy relevant issues; • press releases, which provide information and communicate the Bank’s position on topical issues. All these activities communicate to the public the Bank’s stance on economic issues, which is the outcome of collective work carried out by all departments, particularly the Economic Analysis and Research Department, and endorsed by the Bank’s decision-making bodies. In the years of the crisis the Bank of Greece saw a need to enhance its public discourse and increase the frequency of interventions, with a view to: – warn about major risks which although clearly looming, had not been realized by the general public and were ignored by the governments. – raise awareness of the complexity of the situation and the need to change the course of the economy, thus contributing to the formulation of policies for a more effective management of the crisis. The Bank of Greece’s public discourse has been enriched with new elements since the Bank has sought to strengthen its role as an advisor to society, communicating directly with the public, which in that period was inundated with conflicting and inaccurate information and signals that often resulted in confusion and higher uncertainty. Through its statements and its participation in the public debate, the Bank of Greece has aimed to present the true facts in a comprehensible manner, dispel misconceptions and misunderstandings and provide all citizens with reliable and timely information on the available options and implications thereof. It should be noted that most central banks undertook similar changes regarding their communication policies, which – in response to the conditions of the crisis – have shifted away from the traditional communication model whereby their discourse was addressed to a close circle of experts and was often cryptic. To sum up, I am convinced that Greece has an abundant supply of public knowledge that can benefit our country. Non-domestic knowledge should also be added, as it is 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  communicated to the public by numerous reports, studies, analyses, proposals and forecasts for Greece published by international organisations, think-tanks and research bodies. Thus, one can safely assume that Greek governments have at their disposal a bulk of knowledge that can be evaluated and used – if it is considered to be helpful – in the formulation of economic policies. The demand side Let me now discuss the demand side, i.e. governments’ willingness to recognize the usefulness of outside knowledge, particularly public knowledge as I have described it. Experience shows that governments are reluctant in general, with perhaps one exception, the Simitis government, who I am happy to see here tonight, to exploit public knowledge, even if the proposals and recommendations are potentially relevant and useful. A revealing example is the prolegomena of the present crisis: Many years before 2008, many independent observers, among them the Bank of Greece, had been warning that the Greek economy was vulnerable and if the large public and external deficits were not restrained, a severe crisis was unavoidable. They had also put forward concrete policy proposals and structural reforms that – if adopted – could have changed the course of events. The warnings however were not heeded and successive governments continued borrowing and spending, bringing the economy to the edge of disaster when the international crisis broke out. In general, governments in Greece are reluctant to accept outside expertise and they perceive the available supply with distrust. The reasons behind this attitude lie in the fierce partisanship of Greek politics. The political system is based on confrontation that breeds strong distrust for the “other”, leaving no ground for independent voices. The term “technocrat” carries derogative connotations and it is definitely considered inferior to the “political”. Independent proposals and/or technical expertise are not judged on their merits, but on their perceived position in the political spectrum. The preference for “political” decisions, as opposed to “technocratic”, is ever present in Greek politics and reflects an ideological system that gives precedence to the “political”, over all other considerations. This is clearly indicated by the methods Greek governments recognize the need for external knowledge and use it in their policy planning. The first method is by hiring individual experts as advisors and consultants to the Ministers. The fact however that all of them leave their positions together with the Government that hired them reveals a basic problem. A relevant case is the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors, which is the body of economic experts in the Ministry of Finance that participates vigorously in the formulation of economic policies. The Chairman of the Council is usually a prominent economist, but the person changes with every change of government. I would say also with ministers of the same government. Panos Tsakloglou can confirm that. When I left, the Minister who succeeded me, changed Panos as well. The position is termed political, meaning that academic excellence is not the sole criterion for the choice of the Head. Another example of this practice is the appointment of university professors as Ministers or in other high positions. Governments in this case do want the input from outside, i.e. the professors’ knowledge, on the condition that this knowledge is politicized. A second method Governments use in order to acquire expertise from external sources is by setting up extra parliamentary committees of experts to study and suggest policy guidelines on major issues. The participants are practitioners, academics, representatives of various social groups or individuals with a proven knowledge of the subject. Issues that committees of this kind dealt with in the past have been, among others: the social security system, fiscal policy and tax reforms, the system of national statistics, policies for growth. The Spraos reports was a famous example. The work of the committees ended up with detailed reports, extensive analysis of the facts and concrete policy recommendations. These reports, besides summing up the existing knowledge on the subject, reflected the interchange of different 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  ideas and the consensus of the participants on what was feasible and desirable at the time. In that sense they constituted an ideal starting point for policy decisions that could be easily legitimized by the broad, non-partisan character of the committees. Governments however have missed that opportunity too. The findings of the committees, after going through a maze of political considerations, were eventually forgotten. It was again politics that won the upper hand. A third way governments internalize extraneous expertise in decision making is to commission consultant firms, think tanks, university centers and/or individual academics to carry out research projects on specific, mostly technical issues. The terms and conditions of such a project are set by the relevant authority and the selection of the candidates is done according to the provisions of the European and Greek law. There is no quantitative evidence to show to what extent this practice is used and the findings of these projects are not published. It seems however that undertakings of this kind are not rare and that they are often part of a larger project financed by European funds. This revealed demand indicates that public authorities recognize the need for external expertise and resort to it in an institutional framework. In the years of the crisis the importance of external expertise became paramount. Economic policies had to adapt to the directions specified by the agreements with the EU, the ECB and the IMF, and technical expertise was urgently needed to deal with new problems. Under these conditions the bulk of technical assistance came from outside, non-domestic sources (IMF, ECB, EU) as an indispensable, mandatory input in the formulation of economic policies. In Greece, the new situation had no visible effects on the way governments evaluate and use external knowledge. The response to the great challenge of radical reforms was planned in-house, with help from non-domestic consultants. Moreover, political criteria continued to weigh down on policy decisions, contrary to the obvious need of non-partisan solutions. I argue (from personal experience) that in the rare occasions when political criteria were set aside and decisions were supported by strong technocratic knowledge, the outcome has been positive and the policies successful. To conclude: There are two main reasons behind the distrust of outside knowledge: First, the overriding importance given to the “political” as opposed to the “technocratic”. Second, the partisan nature of Greek political life that polarizes opinions, minimizes the middle ground, excludes consensus and degrades expertise, unless it is partisan. As long as these attitudes persist, outside knowledge will have a marginal role in the formulation of policy decisions. And I am really very sorry to notice tonight that Nikos Theocarakis’ speech before mine was such an example of partisan politics, since I used to be a Finance minister in the government that he described as almost colonial in his partisan speech. He failed though to admit that the “brave” negotiations that he and Yanis Varoufakis led, which led to the change of the name of the Troika to institutions and removed the Troika from the ministries to the Hilton, had also a cost. If we assume that what he described were benefits, the cost of course was €86 billion: That was the third memorandum and the capital controls that have been imposed after €45 billion of deposit outflows. And these capital controls have been imposed in order to safeguard financial stability following the “brave” negotiations of Mr. Theocarakis and Mr. Varoufakis. I am sorry to say that, but I had the obligation to put the record straight. I believe however that even deeply embedded beliefs can change under the pressure of extraordinary conditions and that the traumatic experience of the last several years will help changing attitudes of the past. We have already witnessed a gradual convergence of political forces on the necessary policies to overcome the crisis and the sterile confrontations between anti-memorandum and pro-memorandum supporters to fade out. It is therefore reasonable to assume that, in the future, policies will be increasingly based on facts and knowledge and less on preconceptions and ideas. The long negotiations of successive Greek governments with the European partners and the IMF, in the years of the crisis, have left us a valuable legacy: analysis of the facts, technical 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  expertise and accurate forecasts are indispensable and cannot be substituted by political will. I hope that this paradigm will not be forgotten, and governments in the future will see more clearly the need for and the advantages of independent, outside knowledge and expertise.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Agus D W Martowardojo: Growth diagnostic for Indonesia – focusing on human capital and infrastructure Keynote speech by Mr Agus D W Martowardojo, Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the Bank Indonesia-Asian Development Bank International Seminar “Structural Reform in Emerging Asia”, Jakarta, 23 March 2016. *      *      * Distinguished speakers, seminar participants, ladies and gentlemen, Good Morning. 1. It is such a pleasure for Bank Indonesia to host this international seminar jointly organized with Asian Development Bank, and I am very delighted to welcome you all to this event. 2. I find the theme of this seminar “Structural Reform in Emerging Asia” both relevant and important for all of us today, with the global economy still in a state of growth deficit, and the future path seems to look bleak if not uncertain. 3. I believe that the seminar will provide a great opportunity to discuss how structural reform can provide a breakthrough which accelerates growth, and make it more sustainable and inclusive. The discussion will also be a good platform for sharing of experiences on the implementation of structural reforms in various countries, and from that we can draw valuable lessons. 4. I am also excited to know that the seminar has been preceded by a technical workshop on issues surrounding the similar topic, particularly the use of Growth Diagnostic method and relevant economic models to identify the growth most binding constraints and the needed policy reforms. Ladies and gentlemen, Global and Indonesia’s recent economic development and challenges 5. Entering 2016, the global economy continues its period of uncertainty that has lingered since the global financial crises in 2008. With global growth declining and inflation remaining low, another sign of ambiguity in the global economy emerged, which is divergence of economy and monetary policies among major economies. 6. Pressures in the financial market in the beginning of 2016, in the middle of uncertain bottoming-up of oil prices, have added to concerns about global growth. Conversely, the deteriorating macroeconomic outlook and worries about medium-term vulnerabilities in the global economy have unsettled financial markets. With financial institutions under renewed pressure, adverse feedback effects between finance and the real economy could become significant. 7. The emerging economies have once withstood the recent global economic turmoil by taking advantage of credit-fuelled growth as a spillover effect from large accommodative monetary policy in advanced economy. What may happen next after the recent normalization of US monetary policy and China’s current economic rebalancing process could be a heightened pressure in emerging economies’ growth and financial market. We may simply face a period of emerging market-originating spillbacks, from the previous emerging market-receiving spillovers. 8. Despite tangible results from efforts to increase resilience to external shocks, the vulnerability of emerging economies remain, due to their rather weak economic structure. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Indonesia’s economy in particular, has managed to pick up its growth in 2015 with the help of increased government consumption on goods and investment in infrastructure projects. 9. In the meantime, dissipating global economic uncertainty and improved confidence on Indonesia’s economy have led to a surplus in capital and financial account during the last quarter of 2015, bolstered by increase in foreign capital inflows, mainly to government securities. 10. The confidence on Indonesia’s economy also contributed to a more stable Rupiah with an upward trend and less volatility, while foreign exchange reserves still hover well above the international standards. Moreover, the low global prices amid weakened domestic demand also brought domestic CPI inflation to slow down. Outlook, risks and policies 11. Against the background of maintained stability with carefully monitored vulnerabilities, we are still optimistic that domestic economic growth is going to be slightly higher in 2016, supported by the acceleration of infrastructure projects on the fiscal side, and increased private investment as a result of government policy packages and measurable monetary easing while maintaining macroeconomic stability. 12. Inflation is expected to be at around of the 4±1% inflation target, with the current account deficit projected to be below 3% of GDP. 13. However, this outlook is presented with some overshadowing risks in the horizon, both external and domestic, including another FFR increase expected in the second half of 2016, the slowdown in the Chinese economy, the continuing decline in commodity prices, and domestically, rising volatile food inflation. Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 14. The recent economic dynamics show us the significance impact of external economic conditions on Indonesia’s economy, and emerging economies in general. While Indonesia is still optimistic toward rising growth, risks are weighing down, especially those from the external sector, normally uncontrollable to a small open economy or emerging markets in general. 15. In this juncture, we are arriving at the point why domestic economic strength needs to be increased, and the effective way to do it is by rising its own growth potential. Monetary and fiscal policies are mainly aimed at supporting demand, but demand cannot be optimized if structural problems are not addressed well. Therefore, I believe it is timely for policymakers in emerging economies, Indonesia included, to focus on structural reform to boost economic growth in a sustainable manner. Growth dynamic analysis 16. On that note, it is important to point out that reform needs will differ from one country to another. History reveals that reform packages commonly prescribed only provide small benefits for countries that tried to adopt it. On the other hand, countries that implemented well-focused reforms in key areas have accelerated their growth. Having that said, we certainly need growth strategy that cater to domestic opportunities and constraints. 17. Economists have concluded that growth accelerations materialize when binding constraints on growth are removed. Many countries including Indonesia, have keen interest in a growth diagnostic approach, which aims at identifying the most binding constraints on economic activity, and the respective set of policies that should be prioritized and implemented to allow for accelerated and sustainable growth. 18. Growth diagnostic method has been profound and used by a number of countries as well as international organizations such as the IMF, the World Bank and the ADB itself for 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  their country analysis. A number of donor agencies has also used this approach as part of their toolkit when formulating their operational strategies in developing countries. Growth diagnostic analysis for Indonesia 19. Bank Indonesia has also conducted research using growth diagnostic analysis, which takes into account the view that development priorities should not only put emphasis on factor-driven aspects, but also efficiency-driven and innovation-driven areas, all combined to avoid middle-income trap. 20. BI’s growth diagnostic research is unique since it takes into account different characteristics of Indonesia’s regional economies and brings up quantified analysis for policy response. The result reveals that the low level of return from economic activities is the main factor that hinders Indonesia’s economic growth. 21. Further analysis shows that the root of the problem, which is the most binding constraints hindering the country’s economic growth, are in the area of human capital enhancement and infrastructure development, particularly in relation to connectivity and logistics. 22. Human capital issues is indeed a classical problem for middle income countries. Human development is certainly important for inclusive growth. Currently, Indonesia is in the period of demographic bonus for up to 30 years ahead, where the period of 2015–2045 will be marked by 70% working class out of the total population. 23. However, having large population without appropriately large proportion of highly skilled and educated people would make it difficult to exit the middle income trap. Labor force with high education is crucial to shift the existing majority of labor-intensive/low-technology and resource-based industry up to the middle or high technology industry. 24. The development of human capital would lift up the productivity level of the labor force, which would in turn enhance Indonesia’s competitive advantage, which is an important prerequisite to excel within the current ASEAN Economic Community Era. 25. Infrastructure problem also poses as Indonesia’s major constraint for accelerated growth. Connectivity issues among regions, including the need for high quality and high capacity harbors, airports, roads and railways in Indonesia have spurred logistical costs. Manufacturing activities related to exports and imports are especially in need of appropriate harbors, even for Java region which contribute the largest part to the national economy. 26. In addition, energy particularly electricity, also becomes a crucial issue and serves as important prerequisite for domestic industry’s development. A reliable and adequate supply of electricity would attract investors’ interest to build manufacturing facilities in Indonesia. The increased foreign direct investment will enhance Indonesia’s role within the global value chain. 27. Policy simulation in our growth diagnostic research indicates the importance of resolving these human capital and infrastructure issues for growth acceleration process. Bank Indonesia found that modest increase in electricity capacity and human development will each enhance growth of around 0.25% per year, while enhancement in the quality human capital will contribute to an increase in employment of around 0.50%. Ladies and gentlemen, Policy priorities 28. To address the existing challenges, I believe we have come to a common understanding that reforms to improve the economic structure should be underlined and properly implemented. Cyclical policies from monetary and fiscal domains remain indispensable indeed, but not sufficient as it only responds to short term recurrent symptoms. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  29. Thus far, Bank Indonesia’s monetary and macroprudential policies have been among the key factors in safeguarding macroeconomic stability, which support the structural reforms pursued by both central and regional government. 30. Bank Indonesia has lowered BI Rate and Primary Reserve Requirement as available room to ease monetary policy became apparent on the back of solid macroeconomic stability, including lower inflationary pressures going forward. However, stability remains the priority. 31. In this regards, Bank Indonesia will also continue to strengthen coordination with the Government. In addition, by cooperating in harmony with other authorities such as Indonesia Financial Service Authority (OJK), Bank Indonesia also strives to maintain financial stability, which together with macroeconomic stability, will provide strong ground for the country’s accelerated and sustainable growth. 32. The needed structural reforms itself should be targeted to address the most binding constraints. For Indonesia in particular, it may include building more education facilities, providing highly competent teaching resources, as well as increasing funds for education both from government and private sector. 33. To address infrastructure problem, providing sufficient land for power plants, improving business climate for investment in infrastructure, and enhancing regional tax collection, as well as public private partnership to raise funds for infrastructure projects can become priority policies to implement. Ladies and gentlemen, Going forward 34. Let me reiterate that a good balance of monetary policy, fiscal policy and structural reform will altogether bring out a policy mix that will take the country many steps forward toward faster and more sustainable growth. Lessons from countries that are successful in implementing structural reforms to boost their economic growth such as China and India, will be especially valuable. 35. Let me also express my special appreciation for the successful collaboration between ADB and BI in producing a joint book entitled “Growth Diagnostic of Indonesia.” I am looking forward to the launching of the book, which I am certain will provide valuable insight to all of us. 36. As a final note, I would like to wish you a pleasant and fruitful experience during this one day seminar. I believe that ideas, insights, and experiences shared among international and domestic experts as well as the audiences during the sessions will contribute to better understanding on the important topic of Growth Diagnostic, and bring refreshed ideas for policy formulation and priorities. Thank you. 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 1   Stephen S Poloz: Monetary/fiscal policy mix and financial stability – the medium term is still the message Text of The Doug Purvis Memorial Lecture by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the 50th Annual Conference of the Canadian Economics Association at the University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Montreal, 4 June 2016. *      *      * Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. The paper benefited greatly from the assistance of Stephen Murchison, as well as from José Dorich, Vadym Lepetyuk and HanJing Xie, who performed the model simulations. All remaining errors and omissions are my own responsibility. Summary Financial stability risks have become topical in the wake of the global financial crisis and the subsequent extended period of very low interest rates. This paper investigates the significance of the mix of monetary and fiscal policies for financial stability through counterfactual simulations of three key historical episodes, using the Bank’s main policy model, ToTEM (Terms-of-Trade Economic Model). The paper finds that there is an intimate relationship between the monetary/fiscal policy mix and the dynamics of both private sector and public sector debt accumulation. No attempt is made to develop criteria for policy mix optimization, since it is clear from the model simulations that the appropriate policy mix is highly state-dependent. This finding points to the need for a coherent framework for weighing the relative financial and macroeconomic consequences of accumulating public sector versus private sector debt. Furthermore, the analysis suggests that there are potential benefits to ex ante monetary/fiscal policy coordination, and that Canada’s policy framework – where the monetary and fiscal authorities jointly agree on an inflation target while enshrining central bank operational independence – represents an elegant coordinating mechanism. 1.  Introduction Doug Purvis was a friend of mine. I did my undergraduate degree in economics at Queen’s University from 1974 to 1978 and, in my fourth year, was lucky enough to be invited to take Doug’s graduate macro course. Doug was 30 at the time, only six years my senior, and already he had serious stature. For some reason, he took an interest in me, in my undergraduate thesis and my plans for graduate school, and we stayed in touch after I started work at the Bank of Canada in 1981. Needless to say, I admired him greatly and was crushed when he passed away in 1993.  Therefore, it is truly an honour for me to be asked to deliver the Doug Purvis Memorial Lecture today. It is a unique opportunity to pay homage to someone special and, hopefully, to offer you a new insight at the same time.  As I began to think about what I might discuss today, I found myself remembering an important talk – the Harold Innis Lecture – that Doug gave at the meetings of the Canadian Economics Association in 1985 in Montréal (Purvis 1985). I was in the audience that day. That lecture was titled “Public Sector Deficits, International Capital Movements and the Domestic Economy: The Medium-Term Is the Message.” Doug certainly held that fiscal policy was an effective tool for economic stabilization, but he drew us to a very important caveat – that stimulative fiscal policy meant government borrowing, and the accumulation of debt through that channel would one day have important side effects not captured in most macroeconomic models at the time. As Doug showed, these cumulative debt dynamics would, in time, have both domestic and international consequences. 
    2 BIS central bankers’ speeches   Those important side effects would manifest themselves in the medium term. Many of you will recognize Doug’s subtitle, “The Medium-Term Is the Message,” as a reference to the familiar quote, “the medium is the message,” penned back in 1964 by the Canadian philosopher Marshall McLuhan, who may have been the most famous student of Harold Innis. This was typical of Doug – always clever with words, but in a way that connected with a very broad audience. My hope today is to do something similar in Doug’s memory, leveraging his work and that of many others who followed. Back in 1985, Doug walked us through a series of theoretical models, mostly extensions of the Mundell-Fleming model with debt-stock effects captured; today, I will explore the same issues using a state-of-the-art policy model to simulate instructive counterfactuals during key episodes of Canadian economic history. Of course, I now find myself actually in the job I was dreaming of while sitting in Doug’s macro class 38 years ago. I’m quite sure Doug would never have forecast that. In fact, he was rather hoping I would land in academia. But as a central banker, it would be unusual for me to give a lecture on fiscal policy per se. In fact, what I will do is focus on the implications of alternative mixes of monetary policy and fiscal policy for public sector and private sector debt, and for financial stability. The concept of a monetary/fiscal policy “mix” is itself not all that precise. For one thing, measuring a shift in policy stance requires a definition of what is neutral, which is particularly uncertain in the case of monetary policy. Further, while the change in nominal interest rates is the most reasonable proxy for the change in the stance of monetary policy, as is the change in the fiscal balance for fiscal policy, both variables are highly endogenous to the rest of the economy. For example, a government may set out a balanced fiscal policy ex ante, but because of an unexpected weakening in the economy, the fiscal balance turns negative, which would be interpreted ex post as an expansionary fiscal policy when this was never the intention. In this sense, the mix of monetary and fiscal policy ex post is only partly a matter of plan or prior choice. In what follows, therefore, I use the term “policy mix” with the understanding that it is not truly a control variable, although of course it is possible for the monetary and fiscal authorities to exercise some degree of coordination of the policy mix ex ante, even if all they do is make clear what each is intending to do. Meanwhile, financial stability issues have become top of mind since the global financial crisis of 2007–08 as persistently low interest rates have been blamed for various financial imbalances, including rising household debt and hot housing markets. Indeed, the experience is spawning a new literature on how best to incorporate financial stability risks into monetary policy decision making (e.g., Poloz 2014). I will argue – and illustrate with concrete examples – that the issues of financial stability and the monetary/fiscal policy mix are intimately related. I will begin by reminding you of some important policy history and then bring us to the present day, where I think the issues Doug loved to debate remain highly relevant. 2.  Some history To fix ideas, it is worth spending a few moments describing the policy setting in which Doug found himself in the mid-1980s. In fact, it is better to start the narrative a bit earlier. When I was Doug’s student in 1977, inflation was perceived as the paramount macroeconomic problem since it was fluctuating in the 8 to 12 per cent range (Chart 1). The Bank of Canada had deployed targets for the growth of the money supply as a means of reducing inflation over time. Experiments with wage and price controls had not delivered much. By 1980, breaking the inflation trend would take hikes in interest rates to around 20 per cent – first by the Chairman of the US Federal Reserve at the time, Paul Volcker, and followed by then Bank of Canada Governor Gerald Bouey. After a severe recession in 1981–82, inflation fell to the  4–5 per cent range and remained there for the next decade or so. Real interest rates stayed elevated throughout the 1980–95 period (Chart 2). 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 3   Given this array of developments, fiscal deficits ballooned in the run-up to Doug’s Innis Lecture in 1985 (Chart 3). The 1970s had witnessed persistent fiscal deficits of 2 to 5 per cent of GDP, but the deficit expanded during the 1981–82 recession and continued to widen even as the recovery gained traction, hitting 8 per cent of GDP in 1984. Doug’s message was that the implications of those deficits for debt accumulation would someday matter. As it happens, deficits began to shrink in 1985, but it would take a full 10 years for budget balance to be achieved. As a consequence, the stock of fiscal debt continued to build over that period (Chart 4). The macroeconomic situation was made even more difficult by a significant decline in Canada’s terms of trade (the ratio of export prices to import prices) during the  1984–87 period, driven mainly by a significant drop in global oil prices (Chart 5), which made the process of fiscal consolidation doubly challenging.  As the fiscal debt ratio rose through the mid-1980s and early 1990s, consternation in global financial markets also grew. In 1994–95, federal debt as a share of GDP reached a peak of 67 per cent. Today, such a government debt ratio sounds high but certainly not catastrophic. Importantly, though, real interest rates were much higher in the mid-1990s, making the relative burden of servicing debt much greater than it is at today’s rates. In any case, markets came to look negatively on Canadian sovereign debt, even describing the weakening Canadian dollar as “the northern peso” in early 1995 (Chart 6). Both monetary and fiscal policy-makers responded to this souring of investor sentiment with renewed urgency. The Bank of Canada had committed to inflation targets in 1991, and interest rates had been on a declining path, along with inflation. However, interest rates increased again during 1994–95, despite a slow economy caused in part by weak oil prices; to some extent, interest rates rose because markets perceived that the associated exchange rate depreciation would loop back into inflation pressures, forcing the Bank to tighten policy eventually. With the benefit of hindsight, it is likely that this market dynamic reflected the fact that domestic inflation expectations had not yet become anchored by the Bank’s new inflation-targeting policy, which in turn made it difficult to keep one-time relative price effects on inflation distinct from the underlying trend in inflation. This is in sharp contrast to our most recent experience, where well-anchored inflation expectations have enabled the Bank to “look through” the temporary increase in inflation caused by a weaker currency and actually cut interest rates to cushion the blow to the economy from falling oil prices. Meanwhile, fiscal policy was tightened sufficiently to generate a surplus, and fiscal debt as a share of GDP began a long decline that would be interrupted only by the global financial crisis and the ensuing global recession. As a consequence, federal government debt as a share of GDP is around half what it was at its peak in the mid-1990s. Accordingly, at the risk of oversimplification, we can characterize the history of Canada’s monetary/fiscal policy mix as follows. When Doug was preparing his Innis Lecture, we had tight monetary policy and easy fiscal policy. Over the following 10 years, fiscal policy gradually tightened, and monetary policy took this trend into account while pursuing its inflation targets. Then, from the late-1990s until the global financial crisis, fiscal surpluses were generally the norm, and monetary policy remained focused on keeping inflation close to target. In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, of course, the G20 countries undertook a coordinated fiscal easing, with many easing monetary policy as well. Starting in 2010, however, with the worst effects of the crisis behind us, Canada’s fiscal policy gradually moved back into consolidation mode. Even so, the legacy effects of the financial crisis have lingered in many countries, and Canada’s export recovery has been halting at best. Accordingly, monetary policy has remained very easy in order to keep inflation near its target. Thus, in broad strokes, over 30 years, Canada’s policy mix moved from tight monetary/easy fiscal to neutral/neutral and then to easy monetary/tight fiscal, until the fiscal adjustments made in 2016, just at the time of writing. 
    4 BIS central bankers’ speeches   This quick historical sketch raises some obvious questions about the mix of monetary and fiscal policies and the consequences for debt dynamics, for both governments and the private sector. Intuitively, a tight monetary/easy fiscal policy mix means a relatively slow accumulation of private sector debt and relatively rapid accumulation of fiscal debt; an easy monetary/tight fiscal policy mix would deliver the opposite dynamic. Either dynamic can eventually give rise to financial stability risks, as was the case for rising government debt in the mid-1990s and for rising household imbalances over the past few years. In the following sections, we explore these linkages in greater depth.  3.  Some counterfactuals In this section, we use the Bank of Canada’s core policy model, ToTEM (Terms-of-Trade Economic Model) to investigate the significance of the policy mix for some key macroeconomic episodes. ToTEM is a large-scale, multi-sector, dynamic stochastic general-equilibrium (DSGE) model that reflects the consensus view of the key macroeconomic linkages in the Canadian economy (Murchison and Rennison 2006; Dorich et al. 2013). In particular, ToTEM captures the stock-flow dynamics for both government debt and household wealth (and therefore debt) that so preoccupied Doug Purvis. ToTEM represents some 30 years of research effort, beginning (not coincidentally) at about the same time that Doug began to work on these issues. ToTEM is essentially the grandchild of SAM (Small Annual Model) (Rose and Selody 1985), which was developed in the mid-1980s. SAM incorporated for the first time fully articulated household and government debt dynamics, endogenous potential output and model-consistent (i.e., rational) inflation expectations. SAM was later made quarterly and elaborated in a number of respects to produce QPM (Quarterly Projection Model) (Black et al. 1994; Armstrong et al. 1995), which was the Bank’s projection model from the mid-1990s until the mid-2000s. As its name suggests, ToTEM is the first model of its kind to have a fully developed commodity sector that captures economic and financial interactions with the terms of trade. This investment in modelling more than paid for itself in 2015, when the Bank was able to reach an early understanding of the plunge in global oil prices that took place in late 2014 and early 2015. I have no doubt that Doug would have enjoyed using ToTEM to explore the issue of the monetary/fiscal policy mix in Canada. Although his preference was to gain his insights from tractable theoretical models, the literature has progressed with more elaborate models mainly by going numerical. In what follows, we seek insights by examining alternative scenarios in known macroeconomic episodes constructed using ToTEM. 3.1  Counterfactual 1: Purvis’s 1985 warning is heeded immediately As discussed above, Doug expressed considerable concern in 1985 about the medium-term debt implications of fiscal policies in place at the time. Although budget deficits began a slow decline around that time, these efforts really became aggressive after the emergence of international financial market pressures in 1994–95. As noted earlier, the headwind of declining oil prices posed a significant challenge for fiscal policy during the 1980s. Accordingly, in our first counterfactual, we ask what the implications for the economy might have been had Doug’s warning been heeded immediately, with the federal deficit brought into balance over the five years from 1985 to 1990, about five years earlier than when it actually occurred. The historical and counterfactual budget deficits are shown in Chart 7, along with a number of other simulation results. In this ToTEM simulation, monetary policy is modelled using a reaction function estimated on historical data that aims to keep inflation and therefore aggregate demand (or real GDP) close to their actual historical paths. Since neither fiscal nor monetary policy is modelled as truly optimal, we are abstracting from the possibility that different policies might have offered a different, potentially superior, set of macroeconomic 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 5   outcomes. We are also abstracting from a key monetary policy issue at the time, namely, the lack of a well-defined policy target, as inflation targets were not formally introduced until 1991. ToTEM is built on a credible inflation target and a mixture of rules of thumb and rational expectations. Despite these caveats, the simulation is instructive. The shock we analyze is a series of cuts to government spending beginning in 1985 that brings the federal budget into balance by 1990 and holds it there. Notice that, given the importance of debt servicing to federal spending at the time, this would have meant a significant surplus of 4 to 5 per cent of GDP measured in primary terms (i.e., net of interest payments). Obviously, since we are basing our counterfactuals on actual history, starting points will matter to the simulations. According to our model, under this assumption of aggressive fiscal consolidation, the federal debt would have peaked at about 50 per cent of GDP in 1986–89, instead of around 67 per cent in 1995. Indeed, the federal debt would have declined over the next several years, falling into the high 30s as a percentage of GDP, some 30 percentage points lower than actually occurred. Under this tighter fiscal scenario, interest rates would be lower by between 1 and 2 percentage points, since monetary policy would be cushioning the economy from the downside shock of lower fiscal spending. This lower interest rate profile would have had a significant impact on the Canadian dollar, which would have been lower by as much as 8 cents US. The currency would have peaked at around 80 cents US (measured in annual average terms), compared with the actual peak of more than 87 cents US on average in 1991. Canadian households would have responded to this lower interest rate environment by purchasing more durable goods and houses and therefore borrowing more. Household debt would have been higher in 1995, by more than 3 per cent of GDP. Clearly, with less government demand in the economy, there would have been more private sector activity, including consumption spending, housing construction and, given the lower Canadian dollar, more exports.  What this counterfactual illustrates is that a shift in policy mix along the lines suggested by Doug in 1985 would have had predictable implications for the Canadian economy. Notice, however, that the lower trajectory for government debt would have had a mirror image, albeit more modest in scope, in household debt. Thus, even from this modest experiment, it is clear that the stocks of fiscal debt and household debt are interrelated. As for the desirability of one policy mix over another, hindsight is always 20:20 and such a discussion would have little meaning here. The Canadian economy was going through a very challenging period – recovering from the trauma of very high interest rates, falling oil prices and unanchored inflation expectations – and monetary policy and fiscal policy were both trying to achieve very important objectives. Here, and in subsequent sections, we will refrain from evaluating the pros and cons of alternative policy mixes. 3.2  Counterfactual 2: fiscal policy in primary structural balance from 2000 Having examined an interesting but fairly arbitrary counterfactual adjustment to fiscal policy in the late-1980s, we now turn to a more rigorous experiment around the policy mix. In our remaining counterfactuals, we hold fiscal policy in balance (moving the primary structural fiscal balance to zero) and allow monetary policy to adjust to produce the same level of economic activity that was observed in the historical data. The primary structural fiscal balance (Chart 8) is estimated by adjusting budgetary components of revenues and spending to account for the effect of the output gap and the trading-gain gap, as estimated by the Bank of Canada (see Pichette et al. [2015] for information on the output gap and Barnett and Matier [2010] for information on the trading-gain gap). This approach is similar to the one used by the Parliamentary Budget Officer (Barnett and Matier 2010). Having estimated the primary structural balance, we then add fiscal spending shocks to the model to force that definition of fiscal balance to zero while constraining real GDP to follow its original historical path through 
    6 BIS central bankers’ speeches   a corresponding adjustment to the path of short-term interest rates. This allows us to investigate the policy issue purely in terms of a monetary/fiscal mix. The simulations are summarized in Chart 9. Because the government ran persistent fiscal surpluses prior to the global financial crisis, this counterfactual would have implied considerably easier fiscal policy during the 2000–07 period, with additional fiscal spending of about 3 to 4 per cent of GDP in primary terms in most years. Federal debt would have risen steadily throughout the 15-year period, including a sharp rise during the Great Recession of 2008–10. By 2015, federal debt would have been around 70 per cent of GDP and still rising – a higher level than the one that prompted market angst in the mid-1990s. Clearly, therefore, this counterfactual simulation could have tested the limits of policy mix flexibility. Indeed, such a policy might have proven technically unsustainable, given the starting point. Monetary policy in the scenario would have been much tighter under this easy fiscal policy profile because the central bank would be working to achieve the same path for real GDP as occurred in history, despite much higher government spending. In other words, monetary policy would be working to offset the fiscal stimulus. Short-term interest rates would have fluctuated between 5 and 10 per cent during most of the period, except during the aftermath of the global financial crisis when rates would have fallen to as low as around 2 per cent. But rates still would have risen to around 7 per cent again by 2012–15. Not surprisingly, the Canadian dollar would have been much stronger under this scenario. Already being pushed toward parity by the steady rise in prices for oil and other commodities during 2002–12, the dollar would have averaged about 6 cents US higher than its actual historical level but would have averaged around 10 cents higher during 2012–15. This would have meant even more long-term damage to the export sector and an even more laborious recovery from the global financial crisis. Clearly, this alternative scenario strains credibility in various ways, but our objective is not to derive a preferable policy path but rather to consider the implications of the shift in policy mix for debt and financial stability. While the federal government would be racking up a historically high stock of debt under the fiscal assumptions in our counterfactual, Canadian households would be doing the opposite. By 2015, household debt as a share of GDP would have been more than 20 percentage points lower than it is today, while government debt would be nearly 40 percentage points higher. Notice that there is not a 1:1 inverse relationship between the debt stocks of the public and private sectors. This reflects the empirical finding that household indebtedness is only modestly influenced by monetary policy, a characteristic embedded in our simulations. It also reflects the overall impact of monetary policy on real GDP, which extends well beyond its influence on household borrowing. The trade-off between the two debt stocks is highly dependent on the array of shocks hitting the economy at a point in time. 3.3  Counterfactual 3: fiscal policy in primary structural balance from 2011 Our third counterfactual scenario looks at the post-crisis period. After a significant easing of both monetary and fiscal policies from 2008 to 2010 across most of the G20, there was a fairly synchronized return toward neutral or tighter fiscal policy in the next couple of years. Monetary policy remained easy in many countries, particularly advanced economies, and in some cases was eased further as recoveries faltered. This has given rise to a debate around the monetary/fiscal mix – essentially asking what would have happened had fiscal policy remained easier for longer. In particular, the issue of rising household imbalances and the associated risks to financial stability have come to the fore. Accordingly, we use ToTEM to conduct a simulation with the primary structural fiscal balance constrained to zero, starting in 2011. The results are shown in Chart 10. Because Canada’s primary structural fiscal balance actually moved into surplus in 2011 and rose to about 2 per 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 7   cent of GDP by 2015 (Chart 8), this counterfactual would have entailed rising fiscal spending and persistent fiscal deficits through the 2011–15 period. By 2015, federal debt would have risen by about 6 per cent of GDP, to about 37 per cent. To therefore achieve the same level of real output, monetary policy would have been somewhat tighter, with interest rates fluctuating around 2 to 3 per cent instead of around 1 per cent, as actually happened. The Canadian dollar would have been stronger as well, by about 3 cents US, on average. It would be fair to argue that, in the context of a soft economy, monetary policy might not have been tightened as the scenario describes, especially since for most of 2012 and 2013 core inflation was around 1 per cent, about 1 percentage point below target. By forcing our model to replicate the historical GDP performance, monetary policy would have necessarily been tighter and would have clearly offset some of the effects of the increased fiscal spending in the counterfactual – an unlikely outcome, given the situation. With the higher profile for interest rates, household debt would have been lower than it actually was in 2015, by some 7 per cent of disposable income, or 5 per cent of GDP. Notice that the trade-off between private sector debt and fiscal debt in this shorter simulation is close to 1:1. Even if the financial vulnerability associated with household debt had been lower throughout the period, it would still have begun to rise again, beginning in 2014. Thus, although the counterfactual shift in policy mix would have mitigated financial stability risks, they would still have figured prominently in monetary policy deliberations by 2015. 4.  The appropriate policy mix depends on the state of the economy These counterfactual simulations offer a practitioner’s glimpse into a difficult problem – how to define a guide for a monetary/fiscal policy mix that, if not optimal ex ante, at least works well on average ex post. The literature on this subject has employed increasingly complex DSGE models (see, for example, Gnocchi and Lambertini 2016). Despite those complexities, such models remain far more simple than the sort of elaborate model a policy-maker generally relies on, such as ToTEM. Thus, one can learn only so much from the conclusions that have been reached to date. A key finding in this literature relates to monetary policy’s “commitment,” or, in common parlance, inflation targets. In a model with government debt, the higher the level of that debt, the more incentive there is for government to create some surprise inflation, because surprise inflation erodes the real value of outstanding debt and reduces the need for future taxation. Such inflation surprises, of course, erode the value of private sector savings and, in time, lead to a de-anchoring of inflation expectations. Clearly, an inflation target committed to by the central bank (and, in the case of Canada, agreed to jointly with the federal government) can help offset this incentive. Accordingly, models with inflation commitments tend to predict a lower stock of government debt. As well, the credible inflation commitment gives both monetary and fiscal policy the ability to offset macroeconomic fluctuations. Because inflation stability emerges only when the economy is sustainably at full capacity, the coordination problem between monetary and fiscal policy is highly simplified when there is such a joint commitment to inflation targets. Where the issue of monetary/fiscal policy mix comes more to the fore is when the economy is far from equilibrium, and persistently so. As we saw in our simulations, starting points matter, and persistent disequilibrium gives rise to accumulating debt stocks in either the public sector or the private sector, or both. As is well known, so-called Ricardian effects are likely to become increasingly apparent as private sector debt rises – households know full well that they will have to pay the money back someday, so they will not accumulate debt ad infinitum. There is every reason to expect similar reactions to high and rising public sector debt: since households know that they will someday have to pay higher taxes to cover the debt the government is incurring, they might respond to increased government spending by increasing their savings today and, in so doing, partially offset the government’s stimulus efforts. 
    8 BIS central bankers’ speeches   This suggests that there is a meaningful trade-off in the policy space between the medium-term consequences for debt of monetary and fiscal policies. An easy monetary/tight fiscal policy mix will lead to higher private sector debt and lower public sector debt, all other things being equal. Similarly, a tight monetary/easy fiscal policy mix will lead to lower private sector debt and higher public sector debt. In effect, for a given macroeconomic situation, policy-makers have the ability to choose the dynamics of those two debt stocks – they can’t influence the two debt stocks independently, but their policy choices have simultaneous implications for both variables. What we lack at this time is a coherent framework for weighing the relative macroeconomic consequences of private sector debt versus public sector debt. For a given economic situation, what combination of public sector debt and private sector debt represents the best outcomes from the point of view of financial stability? On all counts, this trade-off is likely to be extremely complex, highly dependent on the economic situation and therefore likely to complicate significantly the choice of policy mix. The next generation of policy models will hopefully be enriched in this dimension, capturing the complexity of the underlying linkages between economic behaviour and financial variables in much the same way that ToTEM made such a significant advance with respect to terms-of-trade shocks. In addition to the stocks of debt, these enriched models would include other dimensions of financial stability risk, such as overvalued property or stock market prices, and the feedback these elements can have for consumers and financial intermediaries. A better understanding of the medium-term trade-off of private sector versus public sector debt will be helpful in developing stronger guidance around the monetary/fiscal policy mix. No doubt, over the next few years in Canada, we will learn more about this trade-off at a practical level. 5.  Conclusion We have seen a lot in the 30 years since Doug Purvis gave his Innis Lecture. We have learned that there are limits to how much government debt financial markets will tolerate, as Doug thoughtfully predicted. We have also learned that, in unusual circumstances, private sector debt can reach levels that can similarly strain the tolerance of financial markets. These strains inevitably feed back into monetary policy deliberations, either because they have real effects on the economy or because central banks see the danger of making financial stability risks worse while trying to lessen macroeconomic risks. Central banks are actively engaged in determining how best to incorporate such financial stability concerns into the conduct of monetary policy. The analysis presented here has demonstrated that there is an intimate connection between the debt stocks embedded in financial stability issues and the monetary/fiscal policy mix. Objectives for monetary policy, such as monetary or inflation targets, have historically been seen mainly as a recipe for staying out of trouble; in other words, they are meant to manage macroeconomic risks in the face of uncertainty, while delivering a less uncertain environment for economic decision making. While experience shows that inflation targets have improved macroeconomic performance, the experience of the global financial crisis and its aftermath demonstrates well that such targets are not sufficient for preventing trouble. Clearly, there can be medium-term consequences that must be taken into account when formulating monetary policy, certainly in the presence of persistent shocks to the economy. This strongly suggests that the best mix of monetary and fiscal policy will depend on the economic situation, and any derived optimality condition is likely to serve only as a rough guide. Rather, policy coordination around an agreed goal seems to hold out more promise than seeking some optimality condition. Given the sanctity of central bank independence, the narrowest form of monetary and fiscal policy coordination would be for the central bank to take fiscal policy into account while pursuing its inflation target independently. However, within an institutional arrangement that enshrines central bank independence, there is scope for ex ante 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 9   sharing of information and judgment between the two authorities. After all, the inflation target in Canada is agreed to by the central bank and the government. This institutional framework is a simple yet elegant form of monetary and fiscal policy coordination that may have anticipated some recent literature (e.g., Leeper and Leith 2016). My guess is that Doug Purvis already understood most of this. Certainly, he pointed us in the right direction 30 years ago. So, if I may paraphrase one of my late friend’s most famous lines, the appropriate monetary/fiscal policy mix depends on the situation, but the medium term is still the message. References Armstrong, J., R.Black, D. Laxton and D. Rose. 1995. “The Bank of Canada’s New Quarterly Projection Model, Part 2. A Robust Method for Simulating Forward-Looking Models.” Bank of Canada Technical Report No. 73. Barnett, R. and C. Matier. 2010. “Estimating Potential GDP and the Government’s Structural Budget Balance.” Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer. Available at http://publications.gc.ca/site/eng/366811/publication.html. Black, R., D. Laxton, D. Rose and R. Tetlow. 1994. “The Bank of Canada’s New Quarterly Projection Model, Part 1. The Steady-State Model: SSQPM.” Bank of Canada Technical Report No. 72. Dorich. J., M. Johnston, R. Mendes, S. Murchison and Y. Zhang. 2013. “ToTEM II: An Updated Version of the Bank of Canada’s Quarterly Projection Model.” Bank of Canada Technical Report No. 100. Gnocchi, S. and L. Lambertini. 2016. “Monetary Commitment and the Level of Public Debt.” Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper No. 2016-3. Leeper, E. and C. Leith. 2016. “Understanding Inflation as a Joint Monetary-Fiscal Phenomenon.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 21867. Murchison, S. and A. Rennison. 2006. “ToTEM: The Bank of Canada’s New Quarterly Projection Model.” Bank of Canada Technical Report No. 97. Pichette, L., P. St-Amant, B. Tomlin and K. Anoma. 2015. “Measuring Potential Output at the Bank of Canada: The Extended Multivariate Filter and the Integrated Framework.” Bank of Canada Staff Discussion Paper No. 2015-1. Poloz, S. S. 2014. “Integrating Uncertainty and Monetary Policy-Making: A Practitioner’s Perspective.” Bank of Canada Staff Discussion Paper No. 2014-6. Purvis, D. 1985. “Public Sector Deficits, International Capital Movements, and the Domestic Economy: The Medium-Term Is the Message.” Canadian Journal of Economics 18: 723–42. Rose, D. and J. Selody. 1985. “The Structure of the Small Annual Model.” Bank of Canada Technical Report No. 40. 
    10 BIS central bankers’ speeches             024681012141970197519801985199019952000200520102015%Chart 1:Inflation in Canada as measured by total CPI, 1970–2015Year-over-year percentage change, annual dataLast observation: 2015Source: Statistics Canada-5051015201970197519801985199019952000200520102015%Nominal interest rateReal interest rateChart 2:Interest rates in Canada, 1970–2015Per cent, annual dataLast observation: 2015Sources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada calculationsNote: Nominal interest rate is the annual average of the 3-month treasury bill yield (annualized yield). Real interest rate is the nominal interest rate minus the inflation rate measured by total CPI. 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 11              -10-8-6-4-20241970197519801985199019952000200520102015%Chart 3:Budgetary balance in Canada (federal), 1970–2015As a per cent of GDP, annual dataLast observation: 2015–16Sources: Finance Canada Fiscal Reference Tables 2015  for fiscal years 1970–71 to 2014–15, Federal Budget 2016 for 2015–Note: Negative numbers represent a deficit, while positive numbers represent a surplus.0102030405060701970197519801985199019952000200520102015%Chart 4:Federal government debt in Canada, 1970–2015As a per cent of GDP, annual dataLast observation: 2015-16Sources: Finance Canada Fiscal Reference Tables 2015  for fiscal years 1970–71 to 2014-15, Federal Budget 2016 for 2015-16
    12 BIS central bankers’ speeches              0.91.01.11.21.31970197519801985199019952000200520102015IndexChart 5:Canada's terms of trade, 1970–2015Index: 1970=1, annual dataLast observation: 2015Sources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada calculations0.60.70.80.91.01.11970197519801985199019952000200520102015Chart 6:Exchange rate (US$/Can$), 1970–2015Annual dataLast observation: 2015Sources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada calculations
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 13   Chart 7: Faster fiscal consolidation over the 1985–95 period Annual data       Sources: Statistics Canada, Finance Canada Fiscal Reference Tables 2015, Bank of Canada, Bank of Canada calculations    -9-8-7-6-5-4-3-2-101198519871989199119931995%HistoryCounterfactuala. Federal total balancePer cent of GDP -5-4-3-2-10123456198519871989199119931995%HistoryCounterfactualb. Federal primary balancePer cent of GDP 303540455055606570198519871989199119931995%HistoryCounterfactualc. Federal debtPer cent of GDP303540455055606570198519871989199119931995%HistoryCounterfactuald. Household debtPer cent of GDP0123456789101112131415198519871989199119931995%HistoryCounterfactuale. Short-term interest rate0.60.70.80.9198519871989199119931995HistoryCounterfactualf. Exchange rate (US$/Can$)
    14 BIS central bankers’ speeches      -10-8-6-4-2024681970197519801985199019952000200520102015%Federal fiscal balancePrimary fiscal balancePrimary structural fiscal balanceChart 8:Alternative measures of fiscal balance as a share of nominal GDP, 1970–2015Annual dataLast observation: 2015Sources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada calculations
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 15   Chart 9: Balanced fiscal policy from 2000 Annual data, 2001–15        Sources: Statistics Canada, Finance Canada Fiscal Reference Tables 2015, Federal Budget 2016, Bank of Canada, Bank of Canada calculations   -6-5-4-3-2-101220012003200520072009201120132015%HistoryCounterfactuala. Federal total balancePer cent of GDP -2-1012345620012003200520072009201120132015%HistoryCounterfactualb. Federal primary structural balancePer cent of GDP203040506070809010020012003200520072009201120132015%HistoryCounterfactualc. Federal debtPer cent of GDP203040506070809010020012003200520072009201120132015%HistoryCounterfactuald. Household debtPer cent of GDP01234567891020012003200520072009201120132015%HistoryCounterfactuale. Short-term interest rate0.60.70.80.91.01.11.220012003200520072009201120132015HistoryCounterfactualf. Exchange rate (US$/Can$)
    16 BIS central bankers’ speeches    Chart 10: Balanced fiscal policy, 2011–15 Annual data        Sources: Statistics Canada, Finance Canada Fiscal Reference Tables 2015, Federal Budget 2016, Bank of Canada, Bank of Canada calculations   -3.0-2.5-2.0-1.5-1.0-0.50.00.51.020112012201320142015%HistoryCounterfactuala. Federal total balancePer cent of GDP -2.0-1.5-1.0-0.50.00.51.01.52.020112012201320142015%HistoryCounterfactualb. Federal primary structural balancePer cent of GDP303132333435363738394020112012201320142015%HistoryCounterfactualc. Federal debtPer cent of GDP85909510020112012201320142015%HistoryCounterfactuald. Household debtPer cent of GDP0.00.51.01.52.02.53.020112012201320142015%HistoryCounterfactuale. Short-term interest rate0.70.80.91.01.120112012201320142015HistoryCounterfactualf. Exchange rate (US$/Can$)
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jens Weidmann: Opening speech at the Deutsche Bundesbank’s third cash symposium Opening speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Deutsche Bundesbank’s third cash symposium, Frankfurt am Main, 13 June 2016. *      *      * 1. Introduction Ladies and gentlemen, good morning and a very warm welcome to this, the Deutsche Bundesbank’s third cash symposium. We launched our cash symposium as a platform for fostering dialogue and promoting interaction between the various stakeholders in the cash space. So it gives me great pleasure today to officially open what is already the third cash symposium and to see that there is quite obviously strong and enduring demand for an event of this kind. And if you ask me, there’s no better place to host this event than Frankfurt. This city, after all, has close ties with money, and with cash and coinage, too. And I’m not saying that just because of the nearby bank towers or the Bundesbank’s own collection of coins and banknotes, which, incidentally, ranks among the country’s four largest and will this year be celebrating its centenary – though that’s not exactly a ripe old age in the world of numismatics. No, ladies and gentlemen, the city of Frankfurt’s close ties with cash also have a lot to do with where we chose to hold today’s symposium. Many of you will already know, I’m sure, that Bethmannstrasse, the street in which today’s venue is situated, was named after Bethmann Bank, a credit institution established by the Bethmann brothers back in the 18th century. But fewer of you, I suspect, will be aware that back in the late 17th century, an ancestor of the Bethmann brothers, a certain Konrad Bethmann, was employed as mintmaster for Princess von Nassau-Holzappel in what is today the German federal state of Rhineland-Palatinate. The profession of a mintmaster was without doubt a reputable one. But even back in those days, people certainly had their wits about them when it came to filling the state coffers. The debasement of small coins like the pfennig or the groat was quite a widespread phenomenon, especially so in the era in which Konrad lived. So back then, mintmaster Bethmann may well have been among those generally suspected of debasing the coinage – that is to say, of “tipping the scales”, possibly even at his employer’s behest. And to be absolutely honest, aren’t we central bankers, too, often widely suspected of “tipping the scales”? After all, in an era in which money is made of paper, and the metal value of coins is less than their face value, it has become much cheaper to manufacture currency. It was to nip any such suspicions in the bud that the European Treaties committed the Eurosystem to the objective of maintaining price stability and made it independent of political influence. The rationale for this was that preventing monetary policy from being subjugated to the fiscal whims of governments would keep the value of money stable. That is why central banks attach such great importance to sound government budgets and fiscal compliance – criteria which, at the end of the day, serve the overriding goal of shielding monetary policy. 2. Cash – an anchor of confidence German sociologist Georg Simmel wrote more than a century ago that “... money ... is perhaps the most concentrated and pointed form and manifestation of confidence in the socio-political organisation and order.” Money and confidence are inextricably linked. And confidence in a currency has its roots in cash. That is perhaps even more true for the euro than it is for other 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  currencies since euro cash – the common means of payment we use throughout the euro area – is the most manifest symbol of European integration. It’s the calling card, if you will, of every single European institution, something that passes through everyone’s hands on a regular basis. That’s one reason why cash is so hugely important for us. And that’s why we at the Bundesbank set high standards for the quality of the cash we introduce into the system. Quality has its price, of course – in this instance, it’s our dedication to providing a sufficient quantity of cash that consistently meets high quality standards. Just over two years ago – at the second cash symposium, in fact – Professor Otmar Issing recounted how, shortly after he took office at the Bundesbank in 1990, he was informed, only half-jokingly, by the then-Bundesbank President Karl Otto Pöhl that the Bundesbank was not only responsible for monetary policy but that it was “primarily a business engaged in transporting and distributing banknotes”. The staff levels, Mr Pöhl explained, were proof of that. Not all that much has changed since then in this regard. Cash-related operations endure to this very day as the most labour-intensive of our five core business areas. Saying that, the number of staff involved in running the Bundesbank’s cash operations has almost halved over the past twelve years. And it’s not as if cash is a pastime the Bundesbank has chosen to indulge in. It’s a field where we mainly respond to the general public’s payment habits. And one thing is for sure: Germans love cash. Although overnight and short-term bank deposits nowadays make up the lion’s share – more than 90 %, in fact – of money, it is still the case that the majority of purchases in Germany are settled in cash. Cash is used in 80 % of transactions, though that figure is dwindling somewhat. It would only be a slight exaggeration to say that money is what you save in accounts but spend as notes and coins. Germany is the world’s number one country in the use of cash. For one thing, this is because Germans have a strong preference for cash – indeed, this is particularly evident when one considers how customers tend to pay at petrol stations. Not only is that a point of sale where customers can pay either by card or in cash in all the countries observed; transaction values are roughly the same, too. But there are still further factors that have a bearing on whether and how much people tend to pay in cash. These include ease of access to ATMs, the rates of interest on current accounts, the extent to which retail merchants accept card payments, and how much effort card providers put into boosting the popularity of card payments by running marketing campaigns or loyalty schemes. Many of these factors also play a role in the relatively strong propensity to use cash in Germany. As a case in point, if more retail merchants in Germany accepted debit or credit card payments, that would undoubtedly drive down the share of cash in higher payment amounts – though I admit that this does bring to mind the question “What came first: the chicken or the egg?”. Even if this scenario were to materialise, debit and credit card payments would not crowd out cash payments altogether. Contrary to what some might believe, cash isn’t actually a particularly expensive form of payment. Indeed, in terms of costs per transaction, cash payments are far cheaper than both debit and credit cards. Only when the costs are regarded as a share of the transaction amount does cash lose out to debit cards, but not to credit cards. So there’s certainly nothing unreasonable about paying small amounts in cash and using a card for larger purchases. And of course, cash tends to grow in popularity whenever confidence in the financial sector evaporates. Only last summer in Greece did we see banks shutting their doors for days on end and long queues forming at ATMs. And Germany, too, saw how popular cash can be during the financial crisis, when, in the wake of the Lehman Brothers insolvency, the Bundesbank 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  issued as many €500 euro banknotes in a single month as it had done in the entire previous year. Only euro banknotes are sole unrestricted legal tender; only they give the general public the cast-iron certainty that they are in full possession of their money at all times, free from any influence. That’s why it is often said that “cash is king”. All these aspects are worth considering in the current deliberations over whether or not to place constraints on cash payments. I know full well that politicians are doing their utmost to clamp down on terrorism. But there is not a single academic paper I know of that proves, beyond any doubt, that restricting the use of cash really is an effective means of combatting organised crime, tax evasion and international terrorism. Whereas potential resolutions on an upper limit for cash purchases are still pending, the Governing Council of the ECB has already taken a decision on the €500 note, namely to discontinue production. The new series of euro banknotes will therefore no longer include the €500 note. Following an adequate transitional period which will probably last until at least the end of 2018, the issuance of €500 notes will be discontinued as well. The time can then be used to produce other banknotes. This time will certainly be needed, as €500 notes account for as much as one-third of the currency circulating in the euro area (in terms of value). What this means is that, in the future, more banknotes will need to be printed in order to cope with a rise in the quantity of currency in circulation. Moreover, I do not expect the €500 banknotes returning to the Eurosystem to be fully deposited in bank accounts. There are initial signs that the public is already beginning to trade in their €500 notes for smaller denominations. The quantity of euro notes will therefore tend to rise overall – along with the costs of their manufacture, quality assurance and transportation. At least the €500 note will remain legal tender and can be exchanged at national central banks for an indefinite period of time. In other words, €500 notes still in circulation will not be recalled or withdrawn. This means that an approach which we at the Bundesbank have always practised has prevailed. In my view, this is an important point. Any other action would not have been conducive to confidence in the single currency. Moreover, the debate on the abolition of the €500 note has led to the Governing Council of the ECB coming out clearly in favour of cash. This signal is especially important in the current low-interest-rate environment, as restrictions on the use of cash are, in some cases, mentioned in the same breath as proposals to do away with cash altogether, as that would be one way of making it easier to broadly push through negative deposit rates in the context of an even more accommodative monetary policy. However, in my opinion, such proposals would be wrong and an entirely disproportionate response to the monetary policy challenges close to the zero lower bound. The right approach is more a question of strengthening the growth forces in the euro area as a way of moving rates away from the zero lower bound going forward. And there’s another thing I wish to express very clearly: there is no need to loosen monetary policy any further in the current environment, either. Let me explain this briefly below. 3. Economic activity and monetary policy 3.1  Economic activity The global economy is on a moderate growth path. Though its momentum is weaker now than we had expected a little over half a year ago, the fears that prevailed in the financial markets every now and then did not materialise. However, right now we are seeing a shift in the dynamics of growth. In the emerging markets, where the situation had clouded over perceptibly at the beginning of the year, the situation is stabilising to a degree. The recessionary tendencies plaguing Russia have died down, although a sustainable recovery is not yet in sight. In China, growth prospects repeatedly required downward revisions in the past. The shift in growth seen thus far, though, is consistent with China’s transition to a more services-
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  oriented, domestically driven economic model; if we look at it that way, we have no cause for anxiety. And those countries which derive a large proportion of their value added from commodity exports are likely to benefit from the latest recovery of commodity prices, especially the significant increase in oil prices. By contrast, the United States and United Kingdom recently saw a slight deceleration of growth, with US growth being curbed by the oil industry delaying investment, amongst other factors. Private consumption was also on the weak side in both countries. On the other hand, the euro area got off to a good start in 2016. Gross domestic product grew by a healthy 0.6 % on the quarter. Lively domestic demand, which benefited from low oil prices and the accommodative monetary policy, was a pillar of the upturn. However, another decisive factor was the surprisingly mild weather at the start of the year, which boosted, above all, the construction sector. The strong first-quarter growth should therefore not be extrapolated to the year as a whole. On aggregate, the euro-area economy’s growth path is still only tepid at present. The latest Eurosystem staff projection has the euro-area economy growing by 1.6 % this year, with 1.7 % growth assumed for each of the coming two years. Economic growth in Germany is looking relatively similar, even though the situation – seen, for instance, in terms of capacity utilisation and labour market indicators – is significantly better than in the rest of the euro area. Our country did, after all, post respectable first-quarter growth of 0.7 %. However, even in Germany, aggregate economic growth will peter out somewhat as the year progresses. Bundesbank economists are expecting growth of 1.7 % this year. Owing to the difficult external environment, growth is projected to decelerate temporarily to 1.4 % for 2017 before then climbing back up to 1.6 % in 2018. 3.2  Monetary policy For us as central bankers, macroeconomic analysis is, of course, not an end in itself. After all, our mandate is not to steer the economy but instead to maintain price stability. Economic growth, however, is one determinant of enterprises’ capacity utilisation and their scope for raising prices. It also indicates how much leeway wage bargainers have in wage negotiations. Inflation rates have been very low for some time now in many currency areas, and the euro area is no exception. Here, inflation is even in negative territory; in May, prices were down by 0.1 % on the year. In the past two years, it was mainly the sharp fall in commodity prices, particularly oil prices, which pushed inflation down. However, the impact of a change in oil prices will automatically be washed out of the inflation rate over time. And the recent rise in oil prices is helping to speed up this process somewhat. However, the low inflation rates in the euro area are not just an outcome of the fall in oil prices. Core inflation, i.e. the price index adjusted to exclude energy and food prices, is likewise relatively low. The muted domestic price pressures measured in this manner also show that some euro-area economies are recovering only gradually and that unemployment levels in those countries are still very high. Seeing as the euro-area economic recovery is only tepid, the Eurosystem projections foresee no more than a gradual increase in inflation to 1.3 % next year and 1.6 % in 2018. In view of this muted price outlook, an accommodative monetary policy is appropriate at present, though reasonable people can disagree about the specific design of the non-standard measures. There is one thing I would like to stress, though: Our definition of price stability requires the target inflation rate to be achieved over the medium term. This will give us enough time to see how the adopted monetary policy measures will impact on price movements, especially since, as I have been pointing out time and again, the Eurosystem is still something of a novice when it comes to applying non-standard monetary policy, and the risks and side-effects of the ultra-accommodative monetary policy are growing over time. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  4. Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen, I have covered a wide range of themes: from cash to confidence in currency to monetary policy. However, I do not wish to unduly tax your attention span, for, as the saying goes, a good speaker can talk about anything – as long as it’s about 20 minutes or less. You still have an exciting programme ahead of you today. I hope you enjoy the interesting talks we’ve lined up for you and have a stimulating exchange of views. Thank you very much! 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Benoît Cœuré: Structural reforms on the way to a complete Economic and Monetary Union Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the International Conference on Structural Reforms in Advanced Economies, Hertie School of Governance, Berlin, 17 June 2016. *      *      * The Footnotes can be found at the end of the speech. Introduction Many people would like central bankers to remain quiet about the need for structural reforms. In the end, we have a clear and narrow mandate defined as price stability[1]. And in undergraduate-level economics we learn that inflation in the long run is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon. So why do we bother? And why should we, unelected policymakers, venture into policy debates so obviously shaped by political considerations? I agree that central bankers should tread very cautiously in other economic policy areas. But monetary policy, and particularly so in a monetary union, does not operate in a vacuum. Although central bankers take their decisions independently, they also have to take into account what other parties are doing. As I have already said elsewhere, monetary policy is independent and interdependent.[2] In this respect, there are at least three reasons why central bankers cannot be indifferent to structural reforms. First, the combination of low potential growth and the debt overhang inherited from the crisis threatens the European social contract, a contract that was established in the post-war era and that was fair and affordable at that time[3]. This in turn is a threat to the sustainability of our social market economy, which is the environment in which our monetary policy operates. Second, factor reallocation over time and across sectors is necessary in order to adjust to shocks and therefore key to the smooth transmission of monetary policy. And third, convergence between economies is both an economic and political prerequisite for a well-functioning monetary union.  I will argue today that for structural reforms to successfully lift potential growth in a monetary union, they have to fulfil two important criteria: (i) they need to be comprehensive and well sequenced and (ii) all-encompassing. “Comprehensive” means that a narrow focus on labour market reforms is not sufficient. Structural reforms are also about incentivising innovation, competition and fighting rent-seeking and monopolistic structures. They entail offering new income chances – particularly for the younger generations – by reducing and redistributing rents, and by encouraging economic players to adjust.[4]  “All-encompassing” means that reforms cannot focus only on addressing inefficiencies in Member States, but have to take into account externalities and inefficiencies at the level of the Union. This implies reforms in the area of economic governance, and progress in completing the Single Market. And they will form the basis for a better functioning Economic and Monetary Union.  Why do we need structural reforms? Potential output growth in the euro area, as in other advanced economies, has been on a steady downwards trajectory for several decades. There are however a few things that make our situation even more problematic than that of other large economies. First, the decline in trend growth has gone much further here than in, for instance, the US: the European Commission estimates potential output growth in the euro area to be about 1% this year, half 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  of the equivalent figure for the US. In contrast, the difference in 1992 was small: euro area potential output growth was estimated at 2.6%, compared with 2.8% for the US.[5] Although this is already a serious problem in itself[6], a close examination of the composition of potential output uncovers the full extent of the problem. Total factor productivity in the US has consistently outperformed the euro area for the last 15 years and is expected to continue doing also in the coming decade[7]. In other words, using Paul Krugman’s famous words, the euro area trend growth risks becoming a product of “perspiration rather than inspiration”[8].  There are two issues associated with this observation. First, as we know from the growth literature, input-based growth risks incurring diminishing returns. Second, in an imperfect monetary union, it raises the question of how those inputs are being allocated. Indeed, when it comes to allocating capital, we are still making a bad job of allocating and utilising existing resources[9]. The high-risk projects with high expected returns, which we would like to see giving a boost to potential growth, are more difficult to finance than in other parts of the world. This is mainly because of Europe’s bias towards bank and debt financing as opposed to equity[10], and the persistent fragmentation of our financial systems, not to mention high administrative burdens[11].  And the reallocation of labour is hampered by rigidities in national labour markets as well as obstacles to cross-border labour mobility, such as the lack of transferability of social rights, language barriers and cultural differences. And even when our firms have sufficient access to capital, they do not seem to be innovative enough and also do not fully exploit new technologies and working methods[12].  There are also several other reasons for the secular decline in Europe’s growth. Consider the demographic “handicap”. Over the next 15 years, the working age population will actually shrink substantially or at best plateau out in almost all euro area countries. Worse yet, in that same period, the most innovative segment of the population[13] will contract even more. Let me give you some data on this: according to the European Commission’s ageing working group[14], the population between 26 and 50 – which several studies identify as being the most innovative – will shrink by 12% in Germany, 2% in France, 11% in Italy and by a whopping 29% in Spain. Not only is the share of young people declining in the euro area, but unfortunately, despite being the best-educated generation ever, they have more trouble in entering the labour market. Youth unemployment exceeds overall unemployment in all countries and for the whole area the difference is a staggering 12 percentage points. This is already harming the economy, because the young who are willing to work but unable to find a job are prevented from developing their skills. To avoid creating a “lost generation” we need to act quickly. The younger generation is also being dragged down by the high level of debt it is set to inherit. A combination of negative demographics, weak productivity growth, poorly functioning labour markets and a steep increase in public and private sector debt burdens means that a dwindling number of young people in our societies will have to carry an increasingly heavy financial burden[15]. This limits their ability to be entrepreneurial, to innovate and compete in international markets.  The good news is that a lot can be done to improve that gloomy outlook[16]. Today, I won’t be talking much about fiscal reforms, or about policy initiatives that could improve the demographic outlook, but I will instead focus on reforms that could boost medium- to long-term growth and employment.  Comprehensive and well-sequenced reforms When you look at a range of OECD structural indicators, it is clear that most euro area countries are well down the league table for best international practice in one or several policy areas. Measured against the OECD’s top three performers, the euro area is lagging far behind in both product and labour market efficiency, with no euro area country in the top three and with the largest euro area countries often underperforming the euro area average[17]. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  In recent years we have seen a number of important reforms, particularly in those countries that carried out economic adjustment programmes. The main focus has been on reforms in the labour market. The nominal and real labour market rigidities that we have traditionally lived with in Europe have resulted in what is being called the “European unemployment disease”: persistently high unemployment rates and a limited ability to adjust to economic shocks. You get a very telling picture if you plot the unemployment rate in the euro area and in the US over several decades – say, from the 1970s. Every time there is a downturn in economic activity, the unemployment rate goes up in both regions. However, whereas the US quickly readjusts when the economy picks up, the euro area takes much longer to do so and once the unemployment rate actually starts falling it almost never seems to return to that previous low. The end result is that euro area unemployment has risen steadily for 40 years.[18] That said, there is solid theoretical and empirical evidence showing that greater flexibility results in much lower equilibrium unemployment rates[19]. It is therefore very welcome that labour market reforms have recently been implemented in several countries where rigidities were considered to be particularly onerous, such as Spain[20], Italy, Portugal and Greece, and here in Germany too, some years ago. France is still lagging behind and although a labour market reform is now being discussed, whether it is sufficiently ambitious to significantly lower the equilibrium unemployment rate remains to be seen.  Although increased flexibility in labour markets will produce a better outcome in the medium term, some reforms may create losers in the short term[21]. It is only natural that such reforms are opposed by those fearing short-term personal losses, even when the reforms are eventually beneficial for society as a whole. We should take such concerns seriously. There are policies, however, that can help to mitigate or compensate for the negative short-term effects.  First, labour market reforms should be sequenced carefully, in such a way that a negative short-term effect on employment is ideally felt only when the recovery is gaining momentum. This could in practice mean that employment protection is liberalised only when reforms to increase nominal wage flexibility have been carried out. This can have a quick effect on reducing unemployment even shortly after its implementation[22]. Second, active labour market policies can help to reallocate workers across sectors of the economy while an adjustment is taking place. Third, expansionary fiscal and monetary policy can also dampen the negative short-term impact of labour market reforms. The current low interest rate environment and the mildly expansionary fiscal stance on aggregate in the euro area provide a good opportunity for governments to minimise the short-run costs of labour market reforms. Finally, there are reforms in other areas of the economy that can compensate for some of short-term loss in disposable income that households might suffer in bad times[23]. Indeed, having the right sequence is a point often made: if you have to implement product and service market reforms as well as labour market reforms, then hold back with the latter[24]. The underlying reason is partly that the short-term negative macroeconomic effects are much greater when a liberalisation of, say, employment protection leads to a spike in unemployment than when product market reforms decrease excessive rents margins, to the immediate benefit of consumers. Another argument made is that product market reforms should be prioritised since they boost output regardless of the overall economic situation, and because they do not weigh on public finances.  Why then have we seen exactly the opposite sequence in the euro area countries that have gone through significant reform in recent years, that is, labour market reforms before product and service market reforms? It’s because, unlike in the labour market, where a few changes can often produce major results, product and service market reforms are in practice made up of a huge array of small reforms. Moreover, many product and service sectors are represented by powerful lobby groups with vested interests that sometimes conflict with the interests of consumers and society as a whole. The Greek programme is one example; the authorities there faced strong resistance from pressure groups[25]. I have absolutely no doubt that one 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  would meet similar obstacles when reforming, say, the German or French product and service markets. In fact, both these countries have been opposed to wider service sector reform at European level. And Germany is one of the countries that has realised the smallest share of potential benefits from the Services Directive according to the European Commission[26].  Strengthening the single market and governance If we view the euro area as a single economy and not as the sum of its 19 national members, we must have a common growth strategy based on identifying our structural weaknesses. The key words must in my view be “productivity” and “employment”, which are positive-sum games – not “competitiveness”, which could end up as a zero-sum game. The Member States will not lend much support to euro area growth by merely competing for their neighbours’ market shares. We have to act together to raise productivity and employment.  Improving the functioning of the service market in the euro area is therefore important not only because of its large share of overall gross value added, 65% on average in the euro area, but also because 75% of the total labour force is employed in this sector. Even though there has been a steady shift towards more service production, we are still lagging behind other advanced economies such as the US and, to a lesser extent, Japan, which have higher production of services per capita. In particular, it is striking that service sector output per capita (in PPP terms) is 33% higher in the US than in the euro area, which is the main reason for a smaller difference in overall GDP per capita levels (26%)[27].  To a large extent this is due to old-fashioned restrictions that prevent competition in many countries in the euro area. The European Commission has estimated that an ambitious implementation of the 2006 Services Directive would have the potential to increase euro area GDP by around 2.5%. The latest estimates show that only around 0.8 percentage point of this has been realised – and this is ten years after the Directive entered into force. Also, bear in mind that these figures significantly underestimate the gains from a wider service market reform, given that some of the most important sectors – for instance health care – are completely excluded from the Directive. Another factor in services that is sometimes overlooked is that of scale. In today’s fragmented service market in Europe, there is insufficient pooling of resources to drive large-scale R&D initiatives, new distribution platforms and to increase competition between market participants. We therefore need to take a step back and consider what can be done to complete the European Single Market for services. To give an example, the original idea of applying the so-called country of origin principle should be reconsidered. This would mean that the regulation of the exporting country is applied. The benefits from such a change are straightforward: first, it becomes easier for a service provider that no longer has to deal with the regulations of 28 countries when exporting across the Union. Second, it would incentivise countries to put in place efficient and well-functioning legislation. In addition, the Single Market for services should be expanded to additional sectors: there is, for instance, no good economic reason for excluding health care. As I said earlier, reforms are also about improving economic governance. When the first European Semester was launched in January 2011, it marked a sea change in the economic governance of the euro area. With this new tool, Europe recognised that ex ante coordination of economic policies – and not only fiscal policies – at European level was necessary. Later in the same year, the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (MIP) strengthened the European Semester further. For the euro area, the corrective arm of the MIP even foresees sanctions in case of non-compliance.  The European Semester and the MIP are powerful tools that no doubt have made the euro area stronger. Yet – five years later – we have to admit that the sun does not shine everywhere. The implementation record for country-specific recommendations (CSRs) was not very high from the start and has declined further recently. In 2015 only 4% of CSRs were fully implemented, down from 7% in 2014. In some countries excessive economic imbalances 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  persist and could harm other Member States. More can be done to improve national implementation and I see a lot of merit in the IMF's proposal that CSRs should be linked to outcome-based benchmarks that are concrete, measurable, and clearly linked to the ultimate reform objective[28]. The dismal implementation record of the CSRs nevertheless suggests that a governance framework that envisages European economic policy priorities being legitimised and implemented at national level has its limits. Looking forward, we will need to engage in a process at European level, based on shared institutions, that provides both economic resilience and the appropriate legitimacy. In such a process, consensus would be needed on (i) the policy areas that are crucial to preserve the resilience of the euro area, and on (ii) designating those policy areas as shared competences with democratic legitimisation at European level. And as I have said before, getting there will require both economic and political convergence.  The success of the Single Market is one of the few uncontroversial achievements of the EU. It has shown that shared competences can be used to implement economic policies that lead to greater prosperity in each country and, at the same time, ensure greater resilience of the euro area and the EU as a whole. We should build on it if we want to make further progress. Conclusion It is sometimes argued that the current expansionary monetary policy discourages governments from undertaking the necessary structural reforms in the euro area. But that begs the question: why weren’t these reforms carried out when interest rates were higher? We have to stop searching for reasons why structural reforms are not being addressed. To lift potential growth and strengthen the underpinnings of our Economic and Monetary Union, we need comprehensive, well-sequenced structural reforms in national Member States, as well as at European Union level. And we need them now. European citizens started losing trust in the European Union and its institutions when they started losing sight of their tangible benefits, that is, the impact of the integration process on their jobs and standards of living. Rapidly vanishing trust in turn prevents those steps towards European integration from being taken which are indispensable if we want to meet today's challenges. The burden of breaking this deadlock cannot be borne by the people of Europe: the burden must be borne by the EU and its institutions and by European governments. Indeed, the best way to respond is to identify a sequence of reforms for creating jobs and growth. If carefully designed, such a sequence can gradually recreate trust and lead us to where we want to be: to the point where a discussion on the future of Europe, and the degree of sovereignty which needs to be shared to secure it, is again possible. This is not low-hanging fruit. Overcoming entrenched scepticism and resisting vested interests will always be challenging, all the more so as the reforms are comprehensive. But such an approach would hit several birds with one stone. It would provide a positive impulse for employment and growth. And it would form the basis for future institutional change which would put our Economic and Monetary Union on a solid and permanent footing. I thank you for your attention.  [1] See last year’s discussion at the “ECB Forum on Central Banking” in Sintra, Portugal. https://2015.ecbforum.eu/en/content/programme/overview/programme-overview.html. [2] See Cœuré, B. (2016), “Time for a new Lamfalussy moment”, Lamfalussy Commemorative Conference, Budapest, 1 February 2016. [3] See Cœuré, B. (2013), “The three dimensions of the euro area crisis”, Asia-Europe Economic Forum conference on “European troubles, Asian worries”, Brussels, 21 January. [4] See Blanchard, O., and F. Giavazzi (2003), “Macroeconomics effects of regulation and deregulation in goods and labor market”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118, No. 3, pp. 879–907.  
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  [5] See European Commission (2013), “The growth impact of structural reforms”, Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, Vol. 12, No. 4. This report provides a good overview of productivity developments in Europe and in the US. [6] See Cœuré, B. (2014a) “Structural reforms: learning the right lessons from the crisis”, speech at the Economic conference, Latvijas Banka, Riga, 17 October. [7] According to European Commission estimates, the average annual contribution from TFP to growth in potential output was 0.6 p.p in the euro area and 0.9 p.p in the US between 2001 and 2015. The equivalent figures for capital accumulation are 0.5 and 0.8 p.p., while labour contributed by 0.2 p.p. in both cases. [8] For a similar argument made in a different context, see: Krugman, P. (1994), “The Myth of Asia’s Miracle”, Foreign Affairs, 73:6. [9] See Cœuré, B. (2014b), “Credit and Investment in the European Recovery”, speech at the IMF/Banka Slovenije high-level seminar on “Reinvigorating Credit Growth in Central, Eastern and Southern European Economies”, Portoroz, 26 September. [10]  See Hege et al. (2009), “Venture Capital Performance: The Disparity Between Europe and the United States”, The paper provides evidence for the existence of a gap between the value generated by US venture capital investments and European investments that is statistically significant and very large in economic terms. [11] See ECB (2016): “Financial Integration in Europe”, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ financialintegrationineurope201604.en.pdf. [12]  See, for instance, Pellegrino and Zingales (2014), “Diagnosing the Italian Disease”, available at http://www.haas.berkeley.edu/groups/finance/Diagnosing.pdf. The paper says that the slowdown in Italy’s labour productivity is also associated with its failure to take full advantage of the ICT revolution. [13]  See Jones, B.F (2005): “Age and Great Invention”, NBER Working Paper No. 11359. [14]  See European Commission (2015), 2015 Ageing Report. [15]  For a thorough analysis of the crisis- and demographics-based burden of young generations, see the European Commission’s 2015 Fiscal Sustainability Report: http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/eeip/pdf/ip018_en.pdf. [16] See for an overview ECB (2015), “Progress with structural reforms across the euro area and their possible impacts”, ECB Monthly Bulletin, February.  [17]  See Koske, I., I.Wanner, R. Bitetti and O. Barbiero (2015), “The 2013 update of the OECD product market regulation indicators: policy insights for OECD and non-OECD countries”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1200, and “Protecting jobs, enhancing flexibility: A new look at employment protection legislation”, Chapter 2 of the 2013 edition of the OECD Employment Outlook (2013) [18]  The official Eurostat aggregate for the euro area unemployment rate is unfortunately only available from 1998, but back-data can be estimated based on individual country data. A good analysis, based on a long historic sample is given in the IMF’s “Chronic Unemployment in the Euro Area: Causes and Cures”, WEO 1999:1. [19]  See IMF (2016a), “Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market Reforms in Advanced Economies”, World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, April, pp. 101-142 [20]  See Font, P., Izquierdo, M. and Puente, S. (2015) “Real wage responsiveness to unemployment in Spain: asymmetries along the business cycle”, IZA Journal of European Labor Studies, Springer, 4:13, June.  [21]  See Cacciatore, M., R. Duval, and G. Fiori (2012), “Short-Term Gain or Pain? A DSGE Model-Based Analysis of the Short-Term Effects of Structural Reforms in Labour and Product Markets”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers No. 948, OECD Publishing. This study provides useful insights into the short-term effects on structural reforms. [22]  See Vansteenkiste, I. (2016), “Did the Crisis Permanently Scar the Portuguese Labour Market?: Evidence from a Markov-Switching Beveridge Curve Analysis”, forthcoming. [23]  See OECD (2016) “Going for growth”. Chapter 2 of the report gives a good overview of the literature on reform priorities in a difficult macro context. [24]  See IMF (2016a), op. cit. [25]  A good example of the depth and detail of the Greek reform programme is given in “The Second Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece Fourth Review – April 2014”, European Commission Occasional Papers, 192, April 2014. [26]  See Monteagudo et al.: “The economic impact of the Services Directive: A first assessment following implementation, European Commission Economic Papers 456”, June 2012. [27]  According to European Commission AMECO database. The latest observation is 2013. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  [28] See IMF (2016b), "Euro Area: Staff Concluding Statement of the 2016 Article IV Mission", 16 June, and Banerji, A. et al. (2015), "Building a Better Union: Incentivizing Structural Reform in the Euro Area", IMF Working Paper, WP/15/201, September. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  François Villeroy de Galhau: Europe at a crossroads – how to improve economic governance and growth performance of the Eurozone? Presentation by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the German Institute for Economic Research – DIW Berlin, Berlin, 8 June 2016. *      *      * I am delighted by the opportunity, kindly offered by DIW, to share some remarks on Europe here in Berlin. As you may know, I have strong ties with Germany. In particular, I completely share the German culture about the importance of responsibility and long-term vision. At this juncture we probably all agree on two things – and my focus today will be that these two things are closely intertwined: • Monetary policy cannot be the only game in town. • Although Monetary Union is a success, Economic Union remains to be built. I want to pay tribute to Helmut Schmidt, who said in October 2011: “There was a failure to set the economic rules of the game for the currency union. A powerful authority with responsibility for fiscal and economic policy was not set up.”1 I will first argue that monetary policy has been doing its fair share (I). I will then discuss the need for a “full coordination” of national economic policies in the Euro area, and discuss what concrete progress can be made (II). Finally, turning to private risk-sharing in the Eurozone, I will focus on the importance of building an efficient Financing and Investment Union (III). I. Monetary policy is doing its duty, and has already done a lot I am well aware that some recent monetary policy decisions of the Governing Council are hotly debated in Germany. The expression of such criticism reflects, at a minimum, the need to explain our monetary policy decisions better. However, I’d like to argue that our recent monetary policy decisions are very much in line with the principles of stability that German culture incarnates so well. Let me elaborate on three of these principles. First, independence. The divergent inflation performance of the major industrialized economies after the collapse of the Bretton Woods system had a profound effect on the subsequent conduct of central banks. On the practical side, Germany was seen to have navigated the so-called stagflation episode of the 1970s considerably better than others. The Bundesbank was role model for the independence of other central banks. Second, a clear mandate for price stability. The Eurosystem was built on these foundations as enshrined in the Maastricht treaty. We also adopted, as early as 2003, a transparent quantitative definition of price stability as an inflation rate close to but below 2% over the medium term – very close to the present definition of the US Fed, the BoE or the BoJ: so this is nothing new or specific to the ECB. From 1999 to 2011, the HICP inflation rate averaged 2% in the euro area, remarkably consistent with the objective.                                                 1 Helmut Schmidt; Remarks at the Farewell event for the ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet; October 19, 2011. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches   But since then, the Eurosystem has struggled to match this performance. Inflation has been well below 2% for 3 years now – with exactly the same phenomenon in Germany itself – and this fall cannot be explained completely by the decline in oil prices. At the same time, inflation expectations have gradually drifted down over the last three years. Our mandate imposes a duty to react, in order to protect the Eurozone economy – including the German one – from the lethal danger of deflation. Third, patience within a medium to long-term perspective. In this volatile world we live in, our policy reactions are not the result of short-term economic fluctuations, market overreactions, media headlines or poll results. Our credibility is also symmetric. If we tolerate long deviations of inflation under 2% now, there is a risk that in the future, when inflation wanders above 2%, our determination to bring it back to close to but below 2% lacks credibility. As Romer and Romer, two US monetary economists, forcefully argued in a recent paper2, the most dangerous idea for central bankers is to indulge in the idea that monetary policy can do little against shifts in the output gap, be they negative or positive. In retrospect, there is sound evidence now that the Great Depression in the 30’s and the Great Inflation of the 70’s were sustained by this belief. Credibility and anchored inflation expectations require that we do not give credit to the past “toothpaste” view of monetary policy – contractionary policy cannot fight inflation once it is out – nor symmetrically to the current “string” view of monetary policy – whereby accommodative policy cannot fight deflation. So, our results have to be judged over the medium term. We are only fifteen months after the real start of QE in the Eurozone but we can already see some positive effects. According to Eurosystem staff assessments, without the APP (Asset Purchasing Program) inflation would have been negative in 2015, more than half of a percentage point lower in 2016, and around half of a percentage point lower in 2017. If we pursue our program, what should we expect down the road? The US Federal Reserve has shown us the way, taking a series of very important steps to increase monetary stimulus even after it brought its policy interest rate to zero. The Fed issued forward                                                 2 C. Romer and D. Romer “The Most Dangerous Idea in Federal Reserve History: Monetary Policy Doesn’t Matter” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 2013, 103(3): 55–60. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  guidance to signal a protracted period of low interest rates and began QE. The US logically leads the way as it was the first epicenter of the Great recession.  The US QE began in November 2008 and core inflation troughed in October 2010. Unemployment has steadily fallen since then and the inflation rate has returned towards 2%, which is the Federal Reserve’s inflation target. Only then could the FOMC stop increasing its balance sheet, raise the Federal Funds rate from its floor and so initiate an exit strategy. Obviously we, in the Eurozone, are not at the same point of the business cycle but we are travelling along the same road for monetary policy.  Some consider these unconventional policies in the euro area are counterproductive because ultra-low interest rates hurt savers and banks. However, we have monitored closely banks’ profitability and – taking into account ALL elements of monetary policy 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  – there is in 2015 no evidence that this is doing harm overall. Moreover, the global long-term real rate of interest has been falling for around 30 years reflecting an imbalance between a strong desire to save and a relative scarcity of those willing to borrow to invest. As we all know, this imbalance is extremely acute in Germany where this surplus is in the order of 8 % of German GDP. Above all, we cannot base our decisions on their outcomes for particular groups but on the common good. Economic activity does not depend only on savers but also on entrepreneurs, workers, homebuyers and borrowers who benefit from low interest rates. Eventually, these policies will lead to levels of inflation more consistent with our mandate and will call for higher interest rates both in nominal and in real terms. In order to have sustainably higher interest rates tomorrow, we must have them low today. That being said, not all unconventional instruments are legitimate. There are limits on how negative interest rates can go, as Mario Draghi stressed it. So this type of unconventional measure, although useful, should be used with care. And I think that so-called “helicopter money” would bring more harm than good: we do not need it and it is not on the table. The real issue is that monetary policy cannot do everything. We have done our bit but cannot create the lasting economic growth which underpins prosperity, including for savers. For this we need other policy makers to act. At a time when the euro area is experiencing both a negative output gap and a large external surplus – i.e. an excess of savings over investment, we must reflect on how abundant European savings could be put to the most productive use for investment in Europe.  This is why we need to foster more extensive private risk-sharing in the Eurozone, which requires a more integrated financing and investment framework. As the so-called Fratzscher report on Increasing investment in Germany puts it: “the key to a sustainable recovery in Europe lies in faster growth that must be bolstered first and foremost through a joint investment and modernization campaign “. I will come to this issue. But we also need to achieve better coordination of public policies. To that effect, we need to think through the concrete role of a euro area Finance Minister could play. AbundantSavingsin the Euro AreaCurrentaccountbalance(% of GDP)Source : Eurostat, Banque de France-10,0-7,5-5,0-2,50,02,55,07,510,0-10,0-7,5-5,0-2,50,02,55,07,510,020012003200520072009201120132015SpainFranceItalyGermanyEuro area
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  II. Why we need a “full coordination” institution in the euro area, embodied by a finance minister Clearly, monetary policy cannot be a substitute for economic policy coordination or for the lack of reforms. If only for that reason central bankers need to take part in this debate, although taking action will obviously remain a decision for political leaders. This is why our focus should be on the Eurozone economic governance and coordination. We know there is deep political resistance to sharing fiscal resources and sovereignty, as well as a rising Euroscepticism. This is why we need to make the economic case. This discussion is not about “more Brussels”, but it is very concretely about more growth and jobs in Europe. The euro crisis has revealed how unprepared we were. The absence of coordination has indeed a genuine economic cost. Several approaches point to a significant cost of non-coordination, in the order of 2 to 5 % of GDP since the crisis, and therefore millions of jobs. To bring the debate forward, some principled choices have to be made. First: making parallel progress on both domestic reforms and, [not “or”], European coordination. This is the cornerstone of, for instance, any French-German agreement: to be fair, the French call for Germany to support coordination, and the German doubt about French reforms, have been and are still well-founded. This requires overcoming distrust between countries and bringing together both aspects under the same umbrella, namely a common institution. Second, we must recognize that institutions with a mandate are superior to rules without institutions, as underlined by Mario Draghi while discussing the fundamental difference between a monetary policy institution and fiscal rules. To bolster policy consistency and coordination, we admittedly need simpler rules. But they should be supported by strong institutions with discretionary powers. Third, there is room for an intermediate level of integration, as shown in a simple but illustrative matrix:    
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  I would call it “full coordination of national policies”, a presently missing link between integration, as we have for monetary policy decision-making, and rule-based surveillance, as it is currently the case for national fiscal policies in Europe and which is clearly lacking teeth. And I don’t think we are ready for a fully-fledged fiscal union with a common fiscal capacity and the great mutual trust it requires. In addition to the completion of banking union, the needed part of EMU reform is to set up a strong institution to fully coordinate national fiscal and structural policies. It would help to make the euro area more than the sum of its parts. Jean Monnet famously declared that “nothing is possible without men, but nothing lasts without institutions.” The idea of a Finance Minister of the Euro area is not new: Marcel Fratzscher and the DIW for instance recently advocated for “a joint finance minister”, aware that a single currency “requires an economic convergence process and close coordination of economic policy with common rules”3. But let me specify her/his concrete tasks. I see four of them. First, the Minister would be in charge of preparing the euro area-wide collective strategy to fulfill its sustainable growth mandate and collectively agreeing the division of tasks through the setting of individual performance targets for Member States. Nobody seriously disputes that a collective strategy involving more structural reforms in some countries including France, and more public investment in others including Germany would make for a better policy mix for sustainable growth and employment in Europe. Second, the Finance Minister would be responsible for supervising the implementation of the collective strategy, using adequate instruments to provide symmetric incentives. Negative incentives would include the existing sanction mechanisms, and could be broadened in contractual procedures, already put forward in the 2013 Franco-German contribution on EMU, or in Chancellor Merkel’s4 “binding reform contracts” proposal. A positive incentive could be for instance the access to a euro area ”Convergence Fund”, through which Member States could benefit from common funding. Third, the Finance Minister would be responsible for implementing centralized crisis management. A Finance Minister for the euro area would naturally be in charge of overseeing European Stability Mechanism operations. Last, while moving towards further integration, the Minister could be given the authority for managing a euro area Convergence Fund, progressively evolving towards a euro budget. Further integration and democratic accountability should move forward in parallel. These institutional changes obviously require a new Treaty.                                                 3 Marcel Fratzscher, Lessons for Europe from German Monetary Union, DIW Economic Bulletin 27.2015 4 Angela Merkel’s first parliamentary speech of the third term, December 18 2013.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7   First, we need a legitimacy-enhancing appointment process. The Finance Minister could thus be appointed for a five-year period by the European Council acting by qualified majority on a proposal from the president of the EU Commission. The new appointment would be subject to the formal approval of the European Parliament, and the Finance Minister would be member of the Commission, as well as chair of the Eurogroup. Second, the euro area Finance Minister would need to be backed by a genuine Treasury administration. Such a civil service would also benefit from the public advice of two independent bodies, the European Fiscal Board and the Competitiveness Council. Last, if we succeed in implementing further integration, we will need stronger democratic control over euro area affairs. To this end, we will need to consider a euro area format of the European Parliament. Relationships between euro area MPs and national parliaments will also need to be enhanced. As I said, not only do we need to better coordinate public policies, but we also have to foster private risk-sharing throughout the Eurozone. To recall Wolfgang Schaüble, European leaders need to show “that balanced budgets, growth and investment are not mutually exclusive, but rather go hand-in-hand”5.                                                   5 Wolfgang Schaüble, “Managing Europe – What is Germany’s responsibility?”, speech at the LSE, March 3 2016. Alegitimate institution with genuine admin. capacityLegitimacy:Appointmentprocessand international roleCapacity:Treasuryadministration and advisorycouncilsAccountability:Strongerdemocraticcontrol over  euro area affairs
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  III.  Building an efficient financing and investment union for tomorrow We need to improve investment financing in the EU. Our efforts should be directed towards financing growth and innovation, and towards finding the right mix between debt and equity financing, while still preserving financial stability and consumer protection. In the EU, the European Commission has launched the Investment Plan – so called Juncker Plan – and the Capital Markets Union (CMU). Until now, these initiatives have shown results, but they are not enough. A more ambitious approach would bring together the CMU, the Banking Union and the Juncker Plan. This is why I suggest to think of a Financing and Investment Union. It is essential to clarify two objectives: (i) the diversification of financing for firms, and (ii) the strengthening of the euro area. As we argued in our joint article with Jens Weidmann in February, this Financing and Investment Union – including more equity financing – seems to be the best way to match the abundance of savings and the lack of appropriate investment financing. First, let’s focus on the diversification of financing. The starting point should be firms’ needs. New financing of business investment, which is one of the keys to innovation, must be enabled. There should be above all, more equity financing.  • It is an essential fact that the equity share of corporate financing in Europe is half as large as in the United States: 52% of GDP in the EA, vs. 121% in the US. • This is unfortunate because equity financing is the best way to share risks and opportunities, as well as to support innovation. “Catch-up” growth, as in many Emerging Markets, can be financed by debt. But an economy standing at the technological frontier, as in the U.S. or hopefully as in Europe, is better financed by equity: as innovation is more risky, its funding must have an upside. • The Commission’s Innobarometer survey suggests that funding is the main barrier for promoting R&D and innovation in Europe. What can we actually do? Among others, taxation policies could be revised in favor of equity funding. Innovative schemes also need to be developed at European level, such as European venture capital funds, in order to support the creation and growth of new businesses. Furthermore, a Financing and Investment union is about strengthening the euro area. Short term banking flows have risen after the introduction of the Euro, but the financial crisis demonstrated that the capital markets’ channel of risk sharing was still underdeveloped in the 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  euro area. From the reality of financial fragmentation and its negative economic consequences, we can draw one obvious conclusion: equity financing is clearly the instrument that best allows to smooth asymmetric shocks in a Monetary Union. Its benefits are many (ECB Financial Integration Report 2016): it is less volatile that debt financing and it enhances the companies’ resilience to adverse conditions.  The integrated US equity market for instance cushions about 40% of a state-specific economic shock, as a company’s profits and losses are distributed to owners all over the US. In the euro area, this form of risk-sharing is virtually non-existent. *     *    * To conclude, let me quote Robert Mundell6, father of the theory of optimal currency areas. He did acknowledge that the euro area was far from optimal. Yet he remained confident, saying: “it will be achieved because, for Europe, it isn’t just the best game in town, it’s the only game.” Economic policy as a whole, not central banking alone, is indeed the only game in town. We cannot afford another missed opportunity for Europe, for the good of its citizens,  2016–2017 is a decisive time to act.                                                 6 Interview of Robert Mundell by Laura Wallace, « Ahead of his time » , Finance and Development, IMF, September 2006, vol 43, n°3. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jerome H Powell: Recent economic developments, monetary policy considerations and longer-term prospects Speech by Mr Jerome H Powell, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, Illinois, 28 June 2016. *      *      * The Footnotes can be found at the end of the speech. Thank you for this opportunity to speak here today. The Chicago Council on Global Affairs has been a thought leader for nearly a century, encouraging public discourse, education, and research on important global issues. The Council’s global focus is particularly important for understanding the challenges facing the U.S. economy today, as shown by last week’s referendum on the United Kingdom’s status in the European Union. In my remarks, I will review recent economic developments and the outlook for the economy. I will also discuss the economy’s longer-term productive potential. As always, the view I express here today are my own. The dual mandate and state of the economy As you know, the Federal Reserve, through the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), is charged by the Congress with achieving maximum employment and stable prices – the dual mandate. For price stability, the FOMC has adopted a goal of 2 percent for inflation, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures. Many other central banks in developed economies have adopted inflation goals centered around 2 percent. The FOMC has not set a numerical goal for maximum employment, because the long-run sustainable level of employment is determined mainly by non-monetary factors that are outside the Fed’s control, such as demographics, social change, and fiscal and regulatory policies. Nonetheless, four times a year, FOMC participants write down their estimates of the longer-run sustainable level of the unemployment rate (which many interpret as the “natural rate”); at the recent June FOMC meeting the median estimate of that rate was 4.8 percent. How should we evaluate our current performance against the dual mandate? I would say that we have made substantial progress toward maximum employment, although there is still some room for improvement. We have more work to do to assure that inflation moves back up to our 2 percent goal. Let’s start with the employment mandate. After several years of strong job growth, employment is now over 5 million higher than the pre-crisis peak in 2007. The unemployment rate has fallen from 10 percent in 2009 to 4.7 percent in May, essentially at the level that many observers identify as the natural rate. This rate is very far from a bright line – it cannot be observed directly, and estimates of its level are subject to great uncertainty.1 So we look to a wide range of labor market indicators to assess the overall health of the labor market. Many of those indicators suggest that the labor market is strong. To mention a few of these, job openings are at an all-time high by some measures. The “quits” rate – the rate at which employees voluntarily leave their jobs – is about at pre-crisis levels. Surveys of individuals and businesses suggest that the ease of finding and filling jobs is similar to that experienced in the mid-2000s. Even though we are near the natural rate of unemployment, there is still room for improvement on several margins. Important among these is the labor force participation rate. If someone leaves the labor force for any reason, even temporarily, that person is not counted as unemployed. So the labor force participation rate is also a key determinant of the unemployment rate. Labor force participation is influenced by many factors, including the age structure of the population and individuals’ perceptions of the availability of jobs. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Participation rose steadily from the 1970s through the 1990s as increasing numbers of women entered the formal workforce. That process ran its course, and, around the year 2000, participation began a gradual decline because of population aging and the continuation of other long-term trends, particularly the decline in participation among prime age males. From 2008 through 2013, participation dropped sharply by 3 percentage points, but has remained about flat, on net, since late 2013 in a context of strong job growth and declining unemployment. Economists estimate that, as the population ages, participation will naturally tend to decline at a trend rate of about 0.2 percentage point per year, so this period of flat participation actually represents an improvement against the post-crisis cyclical drop. Today, participation is near its longer-run trend as estimated by a group of Fed economists whose work is widely cited on these issues.2 Some other estimates suggest that there is still a shortfall in participation, and, of course, estimates of the trend participation rate are surrounded by fairly wide bands of uncertainty. I am inclined to believe that there are potential workers at the margins of the labor market who will return as the recovery continues, the labor market tightens further and wages increase. The U.S. participation rate for workers in the 25–54 age group is now below those of most other advanced economies, including the U.K., France and Germany, for example. The number of part-time workers who want full time work remains above pre-crisis levels, which suggests that there may be some remaining slack there as well. In addition, we should expect to see stronger wage increases as the labor market tightens. There are welcome signs of a firming in wages, seen most clearly in the data on average hourly earnings, which are rising faster than the sum of inflation and productivity growth. After several years of improving labor market conditions, recent data have been sending mixed signals on the level of momentum in the economy. Business investment has weakened, even outside the energy sector. Growth in gross domestic product (GDP) is estimated to have slowed to a rate of only 1-1/4 percent on an annualized basis over the fourth quarter of last year and the first quarter of this year. Incoming data do point to a rebound. For example, the Atlanta Fed’s GDPNow model, which bases its projection on a range of incoming monthly data, estimates growth of 2.6 percent in the second quarter. In contrast, the labor market data, especially the monthly increase in payroll jobs, after displaying considerable strength for several years right through the first quarter of 2016, weakened significantly in April and May. While I would not want to make too much of two monthly observations, the strength of the labor market has been a key feature of the recovery, allowing us to look through quarterly fluctuations in GDP growth. So the possible loss of momentum in job growth is worrisome. Turning to the inflation part of the mandate, the Fed’s preferred measure of inflation has consistently run below our 2 percent objective since the end of the financial crisis, with the exception of the “Arab Spring” period in 2011, when oil prices temporarily spiked. For the 12 months ending in April, total inflation was only 1 percent, while core inflation (excluding food and energy prices) was 1-1/2 percent. Core inflation has been held down by falling import prices, owing in large part to the rise in the dollar, as well as the indirect effects of lower oil prices. If the dollar and oil prices remain broadly stable going forward, inflation should move up over time to our 2 percent objective. When I was first exposed to macroeconomics in college, more than four decades ago, the view was that inflation was strongly influenced by the amount of slack in the economy. But the relationship between slack and inflation has weakened substantially over the years. In addition, inflation depends importantly on the inflation expectations of workers and firms. A widely shared view among economists today is that, unlike during the 1970s, expectations are no longer heavily influenced by fluctuations in inflation, but are fairly constant, or anchored. For both these reasons, inflation has become less responsive to cyclical changes in the economy. We measure inflation expectations through surveys of forecasters and the general public, and also through market readings on inflation swaps and “breakevens,” which represent inflation compensation as measured by the difference between the return offered by nominal Treasury securities and that offered by TIPS. Since mid-2014, these market-based measures have declined significantly to historically low levels. Some of this decline probably represents lower 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  risk of high inflation, or an elevated liquidity preference for much more heavily traded nominal Treasury securities, rather than expectations of lower inflation. Some survey measures of inflation expectations have also trended down. Given the importance of expectations for determining inflation, these developments deserve, and receive, careful attention. While inflation expectations seem to me to remain reasonably well anchored, it is essential that they remain so. The only way to assure that anchoring is to achieve actual inflation of 2 percent, and I am strongly committed to that objective. Looking ahead My baseline expectation has been that our economy is likely to continue on its path of growth at around 2 percent. I have also expected the ongoing healing in labor markets to continue, with healthy wage increases and job creation. As the economy tightens, I have expected that inflation will move up over time to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. For some time, the principal risks to that outlook have been from abroad. Global economic and financial conditions are particularly important for the U.S. economy at the moment. Weakness in economic activity around the world and related bouts of financial volatility have weighed on the performance of our economy. Given the stronger performance of the U.S. economy, the trade-weighted value of the dollar has risen roughly 20 percent since 2014. Such a large appreciation of the dollar means that we will “export” some of our strength to our trading partners and “import” some of their weakness. Growth and inflation remain stubbornly low for most of our major trading partners. European and Japanese authorities have limited scope to respond, with daunting longer-run fiscal challenges and policy rates already set below zero. In China, stimulus measures should support growth in the near term, but may also slow China’s necessary transition away from its export- and investment-led business model. Emerging market nations such as Brazil, Russia and Venezuela face challenging conditions. These global risks have now shifted even further to the downside, with last week’s referendum on the United Kingdom’s status in the European Union. The Brexit vote has the potential to create new headwinds for economies around the world, including our own. The risks to the global outlook were somewhat elevated even prior to the referendum, and the vote has introduced new uncertainties. We have said that the Federal Reserve is carefully monitoring developments in global financial markets, in cooperation with other central banks. We are prepared to provide dollar liquidity through our existing swap lines with central banks, as necessary, to address pressures in global funding markets, which could have adverse implications for our economy. Although financial conditions have tightened since the vote, markets have been functioning in an orderly manner. And the U.S. financial sector is strong and resilient. As our recent stress tests show, our largest financial institutions continue to build their capital and strengthen their balance sheets. It is far too early to judge the effects of the Brexit vote. As the global outlook evolves, it will be important to assess the implications for the U.S. economy, and for the stance of policy appropriate to foster continued progress toward our objectives of maximum employment and price stability. I am often asked why rates remain so low now that we are near full employment. A big part of the answer is that, at least for the time being, the appropriate level of rates is simply lower than it was before the crisis. As a result, policy is not as stimulative as it might appear to be. Estimates of the real interest rate needed to keep the economy on an even keel if it were operating at 2 percent inflation and full employment – the “neutral rate” of interest – are currently around zero. Today, the real short term interest rate is about negative 1-1/4 percent, so policy is actually only moderately stimulative. I anticipate that the neutral rate will move up over time, as some of the headwinds that have weighed on economic growth ease. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Longer-term considerations: potential output, productivity, labor market fluidity, and business dynamism I would like to take a step back from the current context and explore an issue that ought to receive more attention – the longer-run potential growth rate of our economy. One reason for the low neutral rate of interest is that potential growth appears to have slowed. Since the crisis ended, forecasters have broadly reduced their estimates of longer run growth by a full percentage point – from about 3 percent to about 2 percent.3 This seemingly modest reduction implies dramatically smaller increases in living standards over time. A growing body of research shows that deep recessions accompanied by severe financial crises often leave behind permanent damage.4 One recent analysis suggests that in about one-third of such cases there is no permanent damage; one-third of the time there is a permanent reduction in the level of potential output but not its subsequent growth rate; and one third of the time there is a reduction in both the level of potential output and in the growth rate.5 Unfortunately, many economies are currently in danger of falling into the third category, including the U.S. economy. Output growth can be broken down into increases in hours worked and changes in output per hour, or productivity. Most of the decline in estimated potential U.S. growth appears to be from lower productivity. Labor productivity growth began to slow around 2005 – before the crisis – and been only 1/2 percent annually since 2011 – the slowest five year period since World War II. The productivity slowdown has been worldwide, and has been seen in countries that were not as strongly affected by the crisis, so U.S. specific factors are probably not the main cause.6 Increasing productivity is necessary if living standards are to continue to rise over generations. So two important questions arise: Why has productivity growth been so slow? And what does the future look like? We have tentative answers to the first question. Labor productivity is a function of three things. The first two are the skills of the labor force, and the tools they have, particularly equipment, software and the like. These are inputs to production and are driven by private and public investment. The third determinant is called “total factor productivity,” or TFP, which refers to the ability of firms to produce more efficiently given the first two inputs. For example, as businesses learned how to incorporate advances in information technology into their production processes, there was a surge of productivity growth from roughly 1995 to 2005. The weak performance of productivity since the crisis appears to stem mainly from weak business investment and low TFP growth. Weak business investment has resulted from weak demand and uncertainty about the pace of the recovery. TFP is equally important and has generally accounted for most of the variation in productivity over time, but is less well understood and so more difficult to forecast. The second question – what will happen with productivity going forward – is the subject of intense debate. The range of forecasts is wide, and the historical record provides ample ground for humility. This summer, many will be carrying Robert Gordon’s massive The Rise and Fall of American Growth to the beach (or perhaps to the lake, here in the Midwest), which argues the pessimistic view.7 For balance, maybe bring along Brynjolfsson and McAfee’s The Second Machine Age, which take a more optimistic view and is a great deal shorter.8 One factor that may contribute to low productivity growth is the notable decline in recent decades in measures of the dynamism of our economy. Entrepreneurs start new firms; most of them fail, but a few of them succeed, grow very rapidly, and account for significant amounts of job formation. Older firms shrink or go out of business if they fail to keep up with innovation and advances in productivity. Workers change jobs and move around the country (or the world) as their careers evolve and as companies grow and shrink. These processes can be painful and messy for both workers and firms, but they are essential to the allocation of resources to their highest, most productive uses. The high levels of innovation and fluidity of our economy have long been thought to be among the principal reasons for our high and rising living standards. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  The slowdown in essentially all of these processes is seen in declining rates of creation and destruction of both firms and jobs. Start-ups: Start-ups are a key driver of productivity growth. Although it may feel that we are living in an age of disruption, the birthrate of startups has actually been in decline since the 1970s.9 New firms can be loosely grouped into two categories: those started by “lifestyle entrepreneurs” who want to be their own boss, but who have little prospect or desire for high growth; and those founded by transformational entrepreneurs who start businesses that aspire to grow dramatically and change their industry. Before 2000, the decline in new firm entry was mainly in the first sort; since 2000, it is also found among the so-called transformational firms. While the drop in the formation of lifestyle-type firms could be neutral or even a positive for productivity, as in the case of the U.S. retail sector, the reduction in the creation of high-performance new firms suggests that lower dynamism could be associated with slower productivity growth.10 Labor Market Dynamism: While changing jobs can be painful, job changes in the aggregate are associated with higher compensation, implying higher productivity. But the rewards to job change may have declined. Fewer start-ups has meant lower “job flows,” as measured by job creation and destruction, and fewer opportunities for workers to find better jobs. And labor market dynamism across many dimensions has declined by more than can be explained by the reduction in startups. Workers have become less likely to leave their jobs, change jobs, or move geographically to take new jobs.11 Dynamism is a relatively new field of inquiry, and there is no consensus yet on the reasons for, or implications of, these developments. Some plausible sources of these changes are benign, while others are more negative and suggest that the reduction in dynamism may be a factor behind the slower increases in productivity. For example, historically there has been a robust correlation at the firm level between productivity and growth, with high productivity levels being correlated with faster growth and low productivity levels being associated with contraction or exit. This relationship has weakened since 2000, particularly in the high-tech sector.12 High productivity firms are not growing as quickly, and low productivity firms are shrinking or exiting at a slower pace. It may be that some government policies, while well intended, have contributed to these trends. One example that may explain a small portion of the reduction in dynamism is the substantial increase in occupational licensing.13 By some estimates, the fraction of workers who are required to hold a government issued license or certification to perform their jobs has risen from 5 percent in the 1950s to close to 40 percent.14 Like many policies, licensing has benefits and costs. Among the costs are that it tends to reduce job switching and employment opportunities for excluded workers, and may restrict competition and thus increase prices faced by consumers. Among the benefits may be higher quality products and services and improved health and safety standards. Some researchers have advanced the view that licensing requirements have become overly burdensome and may have contributed to the secular decline in job and worker reallocation.15 Dynamism is a fast-developing field of research, and it will be important that public policy react appropriately as this work continues. It goes without saying that economic policymakers should use all available information and tools to create a supportive environment for growth. We need policies that support labor force participation and the development of skills, business hiring and investment, and productivity growth. For the most part, these policies are outside the remit of the Federal Reserve, but monetary policy can contribute by supporting a strong and durable expansion, in a context of price stability. Conclusion How should we think about the performance of our economy since the Crisis? The picture is mixed, and that question will no doubt be debated in the decades ahead. But here are some facts. Since 2011, job growth has been stronger and unemployment has declined faster than 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  most forecasts. On the other hand, economic growth has been consistently lower than almost all private- and public-sector forecasts, including those of FOMC participants. Growth has been slower in this recovery than in many previous recoveries; a growing body of research shows that weak recoveries are the norm after deep recessions and those associated with severe financial crises. Finally, our recovery has also been stronger than those of many other advanced economies following this crisis. I expect our economy to continue to make progress. Monetary policy will need to remain supportive of growth, as we work through the challenging global environment. As always, it will be important to carefully monitor economic developments in order to assess the stance of policy appropriate to foster continued progress toward our objectives of maximum employment and price stability.  1.  Confidence intervals around statistical estimates of the natural rate are routinely estimated to be quite wide, reflecting both uncertainty about the correct model specification as well as uncertainty about the parameter estimates given the model. The canonical paper by Douglas Staiger, James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson (1997), “How Precise are Estimates of the Natural Rate of Unemployment?,” in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds., Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press) puts the 95 percent confidence interval at 1-1/2 percentage points on either side of the point estimate.  2.  See Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF),” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 197–275.  3. The long-range consensus U.S. economic projections for real GDP growth reported by Blue Chip Economic Indicators moved down from 2.9 percent in March 2007 to 2.1 percent in March 2016.  4.  See Robert F. Martin, Teyanna Munyan, and Beth Anne Wilson (2014), “Potential Output and Recessions: Are We Fooling Ourselves?“ IFDP Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 12).  5.  See Olivier Blanchard, Eugenio Cerutti and Lawrence Summers (2015), “Inflation and Activity – Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications,” IMF Working Paper WP/15/230, 2015 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).  6.  See, for example, “New OECD indicators trace productivity growth slowdown pre- and post-crisis.”  7.  See Robert J. Gordon (2016), The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).  8.  See Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee (2014), The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies (New York: W.W. Norton).  9.  See Ryan A. Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin and Javier Miranda (2016), “Declining Business Dynamism: What We Know and the Way Forward,” Amercian Economic Review, vol. 106 (May), pp 203–07; Ryan Decker, John C. Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (forthcoming), “Where Has all the Skewness Gone? The Decline of High-Growth (Young) Firms in the U.S.” European Economic Review; and Jorge Guzman and Scott Stern (2016), “The State of American Entrepreneurship: New Estimates of the Quantity and Quality of Entrepreneurship for 15 US States, 1988-2014,” NBER Working Paper Series 22095 (Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic Research, March).  10.  See Lucia Foster, John Haltiwaner and C. J. Krizan (2001) “Aggregate Productivity Growth: Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence” in New Developments in Productivity Analysis, Charles Hulten, Ediwn Dean and Michael Harper, eds. (Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic Research, March).  11.  See Steven Davis and John Haltiwanger (2014) “Labor Market Fluidity and Economic Performance,” NBER Working Paper Series 20479, (Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic Research, September); Raven Malloy, Christopher Smith, Riccardo Trezzi and Abigail Wozniak (2016), “Understanding Declining Fluidity in the Labor Market,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, March 3; and Henry Hyatt and James Spletzer (2013) “The Recent Decline in Employment Dynamics.” 12.  See Decker and others, “Declining Business Dynamism,” in note 5.  13.  Licensing restrictions increase the costs of switching occupations and potentially reduces interstate mobility. The evidence linking licensing to labor market fluidity is inconclusive, with some researchers finding a linkage and others not.  14.  Davis and Haltiwanger (2014).  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  15.  See, for example, The Department of the Treasury Office of Economic Policy, the Council of Economic Advisers, and the Department of Labor (2015), “Occupational Licensing: A Framework for Policymakers (PDF),” (Washington: The White House, July).  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Stefan Ingves: Norges Bank 200 years Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the celebrations to mark Norges Bank’s (Central Bank of Norway) 200th anniversary, Oslo, 16 June 2016. *      *      * Sweden and Norway have a lot in common. We understand one another’s languages. We have a common labour market, though it is nowadays mainly Swedes who travel to Norway to work. And we get a little irritated when our ski champions lose to our neighbours. But above all, we have in many respects a common history. Today we are celebrating the 200th anniversary of Norges Bank. However, the monetary history of Norway starts even further back in time, 1000 years earlier, when the Vikings spread fear throughout Europe. Coins first arrived in Nor-way with Vikings returning from raids in England. In 995 AD the first Christian king, Olav Trygvason, came to power in Norway. He is also important in numismatic history since the first known Norwegian coin is a penny attributed to him. Around the same time, the first Swedish coin was minted by Sweden’s first Christian king, Olof Skötkonung. There have been many links between Sweden and Norway throughout the centuries, from the Kalmar Union of Norway, Denmark and Sweden in the late Middle Ages to the union between Sweden and Norway in the 19th century. During the Napoleonic war, Sweden lost Finland to Russia and in the Kiel peace treaty of January 1814 it was decided that Norway, which was then a part of the Danish kingdom, should instead join Sweden. The treaty was of course op-posed by the Norwegians, and during the spring of 1814, when Sweden was occupied with wars on other fronts, the Norwegians took action. They declared their independence, drew up a constitution and appointed a committee to plan a new Norwegian central bank. But in July Swedish soldiers arrived. After a brief battle, Norway accepted the Swedish king as king of Norway. However, the union created was fairly loose. Except for the foreign service, Norway retained all state institutions that characterize an independent state. In June 1816, exactly 200 years ago, Norges Bank was established. The bank was located in Trondheim far from the politicians in Kristiania (which we now know as Oslo) and even further away from Stockholm and the Swedish king. Norges Bank was founded in a challenging environment where the economy was in a state of chaos following the Napoleonic wars, and confidence in the monetary system was low. The previous joint currency with Denmark had col-lapsed, and attempts to restore it had failed. It took a long time before the newly established Norges Bank managed to create credibility for the Norwegian currency. In the first years of its existence, the bank’s main tasks included managing silver tax payments and handling receipts, printing and distributing banknotes and bookkeeping. In January 1817 it was the only bank in the country. It received deposits, but charged a fee for that service. Thus, today’s situation with depositors having to pay for keeping their money in the bank is not entirely a new phenomenon. In the 1870s Norway joined a currency union with Denmark and Sweden that lasted until the outbreak of the First World War. The Scandinavian countries enjoyed strong economic growth during this period. Large cross-border capital flows supported the industrialization of the Scandinavian countries, and financial integration driven by the gold standard and the currency union was probably a contributing factor to the favourable development. Both Sweden and Nor-way were relatively poor countries situated on the outskirts of Europe when Norges Bank was founded 200 years ago, but with the advent of industrialization in the late 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  19th century both countries began their journeys to become two of the richest nations in the world. Economic and political developments in Norway and Sweden have also showed similar patterns in the period since the Second World War. The role of the central banks was very limited in both Sweden and Norway. The monetary policy decisions were made by the government and Norges Bank became more of a technical implementer of government policy. For much of the 1970s and 1980s, economic policy in both Norway and Sweden lacked a long term strategy and credibility. Inflation and wages soared, and lost competitiveness resulted in repeated devaluations. In 1982, after a large devaluation of the Swedish krona, it was declared that there would be no more devaluations. The same thing hap-pened in Norway in 1986, when the Norwegian krone was devalued for the tenth time in a decade. Interest-rate setting once again became the genuine responsibility of Norges Bank. We have also shared similar problems regarding the lending spree that started in the mid-1980s, and ended in a systematic banking crisis and in the worst re-cession since the 1930s. Both countries experienced solid economic growth and very rapid credit and asset price growth, followed by a cyclical downturn and heavy loan losses that exhausted the capital of many banks that had over-ex-tended themselves. The strong credit growth was partly due to the earlier de-regulation. Borrowing was also encouraged by the generous tax deductions for interest payments. While the crisis was certainly aggravated by external shocks, such as the currency crisis in Europe in the early 1990s, it was mostly homemade through a bad policy mix and bad timing of reforms. However, prompt and broad-based government intervention helped the banking sector to recover relatively quickly. The fiscal costs of solving the banking crisis were also comparatively low. Nevertheless, the negative impact on the real economy was severe, particularly in Sweden, and unemployment soared. Sweden had to pay a high price for its defence of the krona in the early 1990s, and a return to a fixed exchange rate regime was not a realistic option at the time. Instead, a new monetary framework took form. An inflation target was adopted and the krona was allowed to float free. In Norway, the situation was somewhat different. The Norwegian krone had not depreciated as much when Norway left the exchange rate mechanism. Norway therefore returned to a fixed exchange rate regime, although this regime gradually changed and in 2001 Norges Bank also formally adopted an inflation target and a new fiscal framework was introduced. So our two countries have had a similar strategy for monetary policy based on an inflation target and a floating exchange rate since 2001. During this period there have been frequent and deep contacts between our staff, and I am thankful for all that we at Sveriges Riksbank have learned from these exchanges of methodologies and other experiences. However, the emergence of Norway as an oil nation has made Norges Bank unique in many respects, not least in managing a sovereign wealth fund. Norges Bank is one of very few central banks charged with such a task. In fact, this fund is one of the largest investors on the Swedish stock exchange. When Norway became an oil nation in the 1970s, the country started its journey to become one of the richest nations in the world. We Swedes have some-times been a little envious of this, and perhaps even thought it was a shame we no longer have the union! Huge oil revenues also create major challenges, and many countries have not managed so well. But Norway has. By creating the petroleum fund, Norway has managed to save the revenues and keep them separate from its domestic economy. Furthermore, the fund managed by Norges Bank is now seen as a model showing the way for other sovereign wealth funds. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Even though monetary policy in Norway – and Sweden – is geared towards an inflation target, the development of the exchange rate cannot be ignored. It is also worth noting that both the Riksbank and Norges Bank pursue their monetary policy in the shadow of the ECB. Both central banks have to take into ac-count the effects on the exchange rate of its monetary policy, since the value of the krona greatly influences import prices and ultimately inflation. This may imply a monetary policy stance that is not optimal in terms of stabilizing the domestic economy and its financial system. In fact this is one of the main issues in economic policy in Sweden and Norway these days. Central banking is not limited to finding and optimal strategy for monetary pol-icy. What central banks can and need to do is shaped by the developments in the whole world economy, and largely influenced by political circumstances, in-side and outside our own countries. Both formal cooperation and informal ex-changes of ideas is now intense between central banks in many countries, and in particular between Norges Bank and the Riksbank, who continue to face very similar challenges. So to round off: Norway and Sweden have followed one another through the centuries, in war and peace, through crises and growth. And we can be thankful that we have succeeded in moving from poverty to wealth and becoming two of the world’s wealthiest nations. Often the central banks have been able to contribute to higher welfare, but sometimes monetary policy has unfortunately been destabilizing. Our joint history is continuing, we have common challenges to face going for-ward. Higher capital and labour mobility throughout the world opens new possibilities to raise welfare even further, but globalisation also require that we try to find common strategies across countries. We can also enjoy our similarities and continue teasing one another when we meet on the sports field. As Sweden now follows its team in Euro 2016, we can’t help but ask, oh where’s Norway? But on the other hand we can expect a lot of teasing from you in the next world cup ski event!  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Andreas Dombret: Opt-in or opt-out? The future of the European Union in light of the UK referendum Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Atlantik-Brücke, Hamburg, 23 Juni 2016. *      *      * 1. Introduction Mr Schwenker Mr Kracht Ladies and gentlemen Yet again, Europe finds itself at a crossroads, at least it does from the UK’s perspective. 41 years on from the UK referendum in which the country came out in favour of becoming a member of what was then the European Economic Community, the people of Great Britain and Northern Ireland are, as I speak, once again voting on the “European question”. Though this decision is quite clearly one for the UK alone to take, voices in all quarters have been sounding a note of caution right up to the last minute. One very notable example is the IMF’s Christine Lagarde, who recently underscored the many benefits that the European partnership brings for the UK after an IMF paper sketched out a distinctly bleak future for a post-Brexit UK economy. Echoing Ms Lagarde’s remarks, Federal Reserve chair Janet Yellen warned that a UK vote to leave the EU could have “significant economic repercussions”. UK voters alone will now have to make of these scenarios what they will. Now is neither the time nor the place to pass judgement on the decision to hold a referendum or the pros and contras of the respective standpoints from a UK angle. I will instead look at matters from a European vantage point and invite you to discuss what today’s referendum means for the European Union. In doing so, I will take a look at both the direct challenges we will face in the event of a Brexit and the long-term outlook for the EU. 2. Standing firm in the face of uncertainty: the direct repercussions of a Brexit for the EU Ladies and gentlemen, half of the UK’s exports go to other EU countries. 46% of foreign direct investment in the UK comes from the EU; the other way around, the figure is 43%.1 Thanks to the UK’s long-standing membership of the EU, its economy now enjoys closer ties than ever before with its European partner countries. Figuratively speaking, a Brexit, then, would set in motion highly complex divorce proceedings and herald a protracted spell of uncertainty. What a Brexit would mean in practice depends to a large extent on what’s hammered out in Brexit negotiations. While the mechanics of leaving the EU are now codified in Article 50 of the Treaty of European Union, that article only maps out the process and preliminary two-year timeframe within which an agreement is to be negotiated between the Union and the withdrawing member state. Both sides would undoubtedly be interested in maintaining the existing trade links. But at the same time, there should be no doubt that the EU should resist any efforts by the UK to cherry-pick the most advantageous terms.                                                 1 C Fuest, Der Brexit ist ökonomisch irrational (in Wirtschaftswoche, 27 May 2016). 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  A glance at the agreements that exist with other countries makes it plain that sharing a market always means sticking to a common set of standards as well. The European Free Trade Association (EFTA) for Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, for instance, is tied up with membership of the European Economic Area (EEA). But this also means applying the full set of EU legislation, a notable component of which is the freedom of movement – an issue that “Brexiteers” have cited in the run-up to the referendum as one of the reasons why they think the UK should leave the Union. By contrast, the alternative model used by Switzerland, which is not part of the EEA, does not initially envisage the country having freedom to access the common market. In all likelihood, individual arrangements which grant access won’t be possible without concessions. And with a jungle of contractual small print to contend with, time constraints will mean that the negotiating parties will be unable to repeatedly redraft proposals in their efforts to hammer out an agreement. So it’s anything but certain how the legal situation will ultimately pan out. The terms of the EU Treaty would remain in force during the negotiation period. But businesses on both sides of the Channel would be unable to forge out any longer-term plans as long as these conditions haven’t been clarified – so planning uncertainty is bound to be costly. And it’s very much up in the air whether the spell of uncertainty will be over after two years or whether the negotiating parties will have agreed by mutual consent to extend the negotiating period. Putting aside the tall order of gauging the economic fallout of a Brexit decision, there is naturally another question which arises from a European angle and for me personally as a central banker – given that a “leave” vote might spark a turbulent market response, how far will Europe’s banking and financial system remain stable and continue to function properly? Financial markets have already started to price in a Brexit scenario, and heightened volatility and climbing risk premiums are coming to the fore in the lead-up to the referendum. It’s a safe bet that markets will remain in turmoil if the UK chooses to leave the EU. For example, the pound is open to exchange rate risk, as it could devalue again strongly should there be a vote to leave the EU. Effects can also be expected on the stock markets. In particular, British bank shares could come under pressure if the markets expect a Brexit to push up banks’ wholesale funding costs to the detriment of their profitability. Seeing as the financial sector accounts for a much greater share of the UK economy, at 6.7%, than it does in the rest of Europe,2 UK bank shares will be at the epicentre of market jitters. So it’s not surprising that Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England, has spoken out, as part of the BoE’s monetary and financial stability mandate, on the repercussions of a Brexit and points to the likelihood of negative short-term effects.3  That’s why European supervisors wasted no time in urging euro-area credit institutions to precisely quantify and continuously review their forex, credit, equity and bond market risks, simulate scenarios and draw up “contingency plans”. The vast majority of banks have treated the Brexit scenario with the seriousness it deserves and are rigorously prepared to face the aftermath – in some cases, their preparations have required a great deal of time and effort. The same goes for central banks, too, of course. They’re ready to face up to the real risk of a “leave” vote. As things stand today, I think the risk that might emerge, say, from a theoretical UK rating downgrade or a possible revaluation of the UK property sector is manageable overall, but of course, no one really knows for sure. As for the EU, a Brexit would also cause some fallout in the medium term. European banks based on the continent operate in the UK market and have branches in London. The UK capital is also home to a great number of non-European institutions which use the EU’s                                                 2 Financial and insurance activities expressed as a share of UK GDP; the equivalent for the EU as a whole is 4.7% (source: OECD.Stat). 3 Bank of England Inflation Report Q&A (12 May 2016). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  passporting regime to conduct business in any other EU country – that makes London a hub for the entire European market. If the UK voted to leave the EU, institutions in Germany and the other EU countries that operate branches in the UK would face the prospect of losing access to this passporting regime or seeing it be changed. This would force institutions to either convert their London branches into standalone subsidiaries and to apply for them to be licenced by the Bank of England or shift their operations out of the UK and into the euro area – two immensely costly options, might I add. But saying that, it is also true that if the UK opts to leave the EU, we will have to wait for the outcome of post-referendum negotiations before anything can really be said on the EU’s passporting regime that will stand up in court. But for financial centres elsewhere in the EU, the Brexit scenario opens up a number of opportunities over the medium term. Also, a larger number of foreign banks look set to switch from the UK to mainland Europe – and that’s something that might even benefit the Frankfurt financial centre. London’s pulling power as a venue for European bond and forex trading would shrivel. For even today, supervisors take a critical view of the fact that euro trading is based mostly in London, and therefore outside the euro area. This criticism would intensify if the UK chose to leave the EU, of course. The same can be said for clearing business and central securities depository services, at least for euro-denominated business – supervisory authorities will need to be a lot more tolerant if this business is to be allowed to be conducted not just outside the euro area but outside the EU as well. If truth be told, that’s a level of tolerance I can barely imagine. Looking at the medium-term horizon, the European Union also needs to consider how, given the close links between financial agents in the UK and continental Europe, it intends to safeguard financial stability in Europe if a more national brand of regulation and supervision is reintroduced on the other side of Channel. While UK banks aren’t currently affected by the Single Supervisory and Resolution Mechanisms of the banking union, they do need to comply with the Single Rulebook. Incidentally, the European Banking Authority plays an important role in this regard. Not only does the EBA ensure a harmonised interpretation of the rules, it also promotes interaction and dialogue on supervisory practices in the member states. And as I’m sure you all know, it is currently headquartered in London. So if the UK voted to leave the EU, the EBA wouldn’t only have to find a new home; it would also have to rebuild the prudential cooperation with the UK from scratch. So a “leave” vote throws up a vast number of planning issues and raises considerable uncertainty. But even if the electorate came out in favour of “remain”, there would still be some loose ends to deal with in the relationship between the UK and the rest of the European Union. Just consider, for instance, the question as to how the revision of the EU rules that were agreed in the event the UK remains in the EU actually affects economic and political dynamics within the EU. 3. Strengthening crisis resistance: the long-term outlook for the EU Ladies and gentlemen, the outcome of the referendum is something that Britain will have to resolve on its own – it is not something we will be able to influence. What we can influence, though, is the EU itself, and its ability to function. And this is where I see the far more consequential issues affecting Europe’s future. For the UK referendum should be understood less as the result of the anticipated benefits of exiting – earlier on, I gave you an insight into some imponderables and risks of leaving the union – but more as the outcome of widespread dissatisfaction with the European Union. And, should the UK vote to remain in the union, the referendum will most likely not represent a resounding commitment on the part of Britons to the EU. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  In addition, as we all know, dissatisfaction with the EU is not a purely UK phenomenon, but instead has grown significantly in many member states. Support for Eurosceptic parties is mounting. A UK vote in favour of Brexit could also launch a movement in other member states to look into ways of leaving the EU. Moreover, even if the UK votes today to remain, we cannot expect underlying attitudes towards the European Union to change overnight. Motives for dissatisfaction may partly be found in domestic politics. On the other hand, however, a search for causes also needs to include the European Union’s specific actions, such as how it has dealt with refugees, the euro crisis, and the general cost-benefit considerations of harmonised rules and an “ever closer union” – at this juncture, I will not go into detail on individual topics, as that would be beyond the scope of my mandate. What reverberates everywhere, however, is the question of whether the European Union is capable of taking decisions effectively and efficiently. The EU has yet to demonstrate its ability to deal with diversity – cultural or economic – and to channel it in the right directions. Let me explain this now in view of the euro area and outstanding reforms. The challenge of channelling diversity in the right directions has come up quite prominently in monetary union. In a large economic area, it is quite natural for individual regions to evolve in a variety of different ways; owing to the structures of their economies and societies, they will not respond to change in the same way. The underlying question is this: how can the system as a whole respond to such asymmetrical shocks? Put differently: how can the EU be made more crisis-resistant? In a single monetary area such as the euro area, there are no more exchange rates to adjust; therefore, other channels are needed to cushion imbalances, such as adjustments to prices in the factor markets, sufficient labour force and capital mobility, or also, of course, a stability-oriented economic and fiscal policy. Despite a variety of efforts at harmonisation, there are still 19 different sets of economic and fiscal policy in the euro area. Yet these states are not all necessarily addressing their respective structural problems in an appropriate manner because EU-level sanctioning mechanisms are either non-existent or, to put it mildly, being underused. It has also occurred in the past that, in dealing with their structural issues, governments have fobbed off part of the negative fallout of national policy measures on the rest of the euro area. Over the course of the euro crisis, this became clear in connection with sovereign debt. Other policymaking areas, too, are exposed to the threat that other member states will be forced to pay the consequences for individual member states’ policy errors. The European Union is consequently increasingly being viewed as a synonym for a lack of will to reform and as a dumping ground for national risks. Let me frame the reform problem this way: Europe is facing the challenge of overcoming obstacles to reform along the route to a sustainable and coherent community order. There is certainly more than just one solution. The option of reforming the common economic and financial framework towards stronger European liability, however, is predicated upon transferring more national sovereignty to the European level. If we look at the discontent about “ever closer union,” it appears as if this option is currently a political non-starter. However, another way for the European order to ensure synchronicity between actions and liability for their consequences is that these consequences are borne where the vast majority of scope for action is located: by national decision-makers. This means that they need to take responsibility for their actions and have convincing incentives to eliminate the structural problems. I would like to illustrate this now by citing two topical areas of financial reform: first, sovereign debt, and second, European deposit insurance. Both reforms are related to the nexus between sovereigns and their domestic banks. And, in both cases, as obviously apparent as the problem is, enthusiasm for reform still remains to be demonstrated. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  The excessively close sovereign-bank nexus is a primary example of a factor which can make sovereign debt a structural problem, as it can engender an unhealthy mutual interdependence. It is precisely the large stocks of sovereign bonds on the books of domestic banks which is creating dependencies. The Bundesbank was one of the first to point out the role of the preferential regulatory treatment of government bonds as a key aspect of the problem. Banks are currently not required to set aside any capital against loans to euro-area sovereigns, unlike loans to enterprises or households. Nor are there any caps or ceilings on their lending to these borrowers. Banks therefore have, at least in the short term, a huge incentive to invest in government bonds. Sovereigns likewise benefit over the short term since they can easily obtain funding through the artificially inflated demand for government bonds – yet at the same time this lessens the pressure to reform, to consolidate government finances and achieve debt levels which are sustainable over the long term. The crisis showed more than clearly that even euro-area government bonds may be exposed to risk. This is why, in my view, risk-based capital requirements need to be extended to cover banks’ on-balance-sheet lending to sovereigns. I also believe it still makes sense to limit banks’ exposures to individual sovereigns – much like the large exposure limits for private-sector borrowers. That way, even if these borrowers were to default, banks would still have enough capital at their disposal. If the preferential regulatory treatment of sovereign debt were done away with, this would also increase investors’ incentives to take greater account of the differing risk profiles of the individual states, which in turn would thus strengthen the disciplinary function of capital markets. Countries that pursue unsustainable policies would then face rising risk premiums. Where political action needs to be taken is known – however, the EU now needs to demonstrate that it is, in fact, willing to act. There is a similar political constellation regarding the topic of deposit protection. Under the European Commission’s current proposal, existing national protection schemes – which are already operating under standards which have been harmonised across Europe – will gradually be replaced by a European deposit protection scheme. Although we have a Single Supervisory Mechanism in Europe under which banks are supervised according to uniform European guidelines and harmonised rules, as well as a Single Resolution Mechanism to go with it, the financial situation of the supervised institutions hinges on the state of the economy, as well as, of course, the legal framework of the affected country. Insolvency, for instance, is still governed by a patchwork of very different national regimes. Rushing all too madly to introduce a European deposit insurance scheme would not only create an unfair situation in which some banks would be more likely to dig quite deeply into the shared pot; it would also tend to reduce the pressure on member states to conduct reforms. Let me once again reiterate the guiding theme of my foregoing remarks: there is an in-built conflict between short-term relief and the balance between actions and responsibility for their consequences, and thus also the basis for a rules-based order that can function in the long run. It is not only at the EU level but also, and in particular, member states where unpleasant structural reforms have to be undertaken in order to make the EU less vulnerable to crises. Time is of the essence and, given the challenges we are facing in the EU, should not be wasted. 4. Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen, at this hour, the UK’s future in the EU is balanced on a knife edge. We won’t have to wait longer than tomorrow to learn how the UK has voted: whether it wishes to remain a member 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  of the EU or to leave. However, we should not worry only about the immediate impact of the referendum – be it “Brexit” or “Bremain”. What will be more decisive over the medium to long term, however, will be to find good solutions to the problem of chronic dissatisfaction with Europe’s institutions. We have to confront the detected deficiencies in a decisive manner. Europe must demonstrate its ability to conduct credible political reforms. This task is necessary irrespective of today’s referendum in the United Kingdom. Should the UK vote to leave the EU, however, one thing is certain: Europe’s political landscape will be missing a voice of caution and a proponent of stability and the market economy. That is something I would highly regret; however, it is my hope that Britain’s known penchant for pragmatism will prevail this evening. Thanks you very much for coming, and I would now be pleased to join you in a discussion. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jerome H Powell: Introductory comments – Roundtable on the Interim Report of the Alternative Reference Rates Committee Introductory comments by Mr Jerome H Powell, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Roundtable on the Interim Report of the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 21 June 2016. *      *      * I want to thank you all for coming today, and I also want to thank the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC) for all its work in developing its interim report. This report marks a new stage in reference rate reform.1 Reference benchmarks are a key part of the financial infrastructure. About $300 trillion dollars in contracts reference LIBOR alone. But benchmarks were not given much consideration prior to the recent scandals involving attempts to manipulate them. Since then, the official sector has thought seriously about financial benchmarks, conducting a number of investigations into charges of manipulation, publishing the International Organization of Securities Commission’s (IOSCO) Principles for Financial Benchmarks and, through the Financial Stability Board (FSB), sponsoring major reform efforts of both interest rate and foreign exchange benchmarks.2 The institutions represented on the ARRC have also had to think seriously about these issues as they have developed this interim report. Now, we need end users to begin to think more seriously about how they use benchmarks and the risks they are taking on by relying so heavily on a reference rate – in this case U.S. dollar LIBOR – that is less resilient than it needs to be. In saying this, I want to make it clear that LIBOR has been significantly improved. ICE Benchmark Administration is in the process of making important changes to its methodology, and submissions to LIBOR are now regulated by the United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority. However, the term money market borrowing by banks that underlies U.S. dollar LIBOR has experienced a secular decline. As a result, the majority of U.S. dollar LIBOR submissions must still rely on expert judgement, and even those submissions that are transaction-based may be based on relatively few actual trades. This calls into question whether LIBOR can ultimately satisfy IOSCO Principle 7 regarding data sufficiency, which requires that a benchmark be based on an active market. That Principle is a particularly important one, as it is difficult to ask banks to submit rates at which they believe they could borrow on a daily basis if they do not actually borrow very often. That basic fact poses the risk that LIBOR could eventually be forced to stop publication entirely. Ongoing regulatory reforms and changing market structures raise questions about whether the transactions underlying LIBOR will become even scarcer in the future, particularly in periods of stress, and banks might feel little incentive to contribute to U.S. dollar LIBOR panels if transactions become less frequent. Market participants are not used to thinking about this possibility, but benchmarks sometimes come to a halt. The sudden cessation of a benchmark as heavily used as LIBOR would present significant systemic risks. It could entail substantial losses and would create substantial uncertainty, potential legal challenges, and payments disruptions for the market participants that have relied on LIBOR. These disruptions would be even greater if there were no viable alternative to U.S. dollar LIBOR that market participants could quickly move to.                                                 1  See Alternative Reference Rates Committee (2016), Interim Report and Consultation (PDF) (New York: ARRC, May). 2  For more information on the IOSCO principles, see Board of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2013), Principles for Financial Benchmarks: Final Report (PDF) (Madrid: IOSCO, July). 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  These concerns led the FSB and Financial Stability Oversight Council to call for the promotion of alternatives to LIBOR, and led the Federal Reserve to convene the ARRC in cooperation with the U.S. Treasury Department, U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and Office of Financial Research. LIBOR is currently the dominant reference rate in the market because of its liquidity. We are not under any illusions that moving a significant portion of trading to an alternative rate will be simple or easy. But I believe the ARRC has provided a workable and credible plan for creating liquidity in a new rate and beginning the process of moving trading to it. We need input from end users and others to finalize the ARRC’s plans, and I look forward to hearing the views of those in attendance. Successful implementation will require a coordinated effort from a broad set of market participants. This effort will certainly entail costs, but continued reliance on U.S. dollar LIBOR on the current scale could entail much higher costs if unsecured short-term borrowing declines further and submitting banks choose to leave the LIBOR panels, especially if there were no viable alternative rate. Simply put, this effort is something that needs to happen, and if the ARRC members, the official sector, and end users and other market participants all jointly coordinate in finalizing these plans, then a successful transition can be made with the least disruption to the market, leaving everyone in a better place.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Yannis Stournaras: The impact of the Greek sovereign crisis on the banking sector – challenges to financial stability and policy responses by the Bank of Greece Keynote speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the London Business School Greek Alumni Association and Stanford Club of Greece event titled “Breaking the Bottlenecks – Steps towards Sustainable Growth”, American School of Classical Studies, Athens, 8 June 2016. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, It is a great pleasure to be here today and have the chance to share with you my thoughts on the impact of the Greek sovereign crisis on the Greek banking sector, outlining the challenges to financial stability and the policy initiatives taken primarily, but not only, by the Bank of Greece. At the outset, it is important to highlight that financial stability is a necessary condition for achieving the goals of prosperity and sustainable growth. That these goals are shared by all is amply reflected in the current mandates of central banks with their emphasis on price stability, support for the general economic environment and, more recently, the safeguarding of financial stability. I will begin by briefly outlining the global landscape on which the effort to safeguard financial stability has been taking place. Then, I will discuss developments in the Greek banking sector. In particular, emphasis will be placed on: (i) first, the significant worsening of the macroeconomic environment and the subsequent deterioration of Greek banks’ fundamentals, in general, and their asset quality, in particular; (ii) second, euro area monetary policy initiatives and their limited impact on Greece; (iii) third, the new role for the Bank of Greece that stems from its mandate that has been revised to address the current challenges. Finally, I conclude by outlining the challenges ahead and providing some thoughts on the way forward. A. The setting – a broader context Over the last seven years, the European Union has faced a series of unprecedented challenges; challenges that have tested the international financial system and the coherence and stability of the Union. The response to these challenges has shown that the EU is built upon solid ground as the bonds among Member States have become ever stronger. The global financial crisis, triggered in 2008, provided a first challenge to stability and raised major issues related to “too-big–to-fail”, “too-big-to-save” or “too-complex-to-resolve”. The euro area sovereign debt crisis rapidly followed and real economic activity deteriorated considerably in certain parts of the euro area. A key lesson of that crisis has been that the establishment of a banking union is a vital prerequisite to make a monetary union sustainable. More recently, with the recovery in the euro area still fragile, new geopolitical tensions have led to an unprecedented refugee crisis and increased uncertainty. Finally, matters such as the probability of Brexit, different approaches among Member States regarding banking union and the slow progress in establishing a single European deposit insurance scheme, have been hindering further progress towards securing a financial system architecture appropriate to ensure stability. B. The sovereign crisis in Greece caused the Greek banking sector crisis Unlike other recent experience with financial instability, the origins of the Greek crisis were not to be found in the banking sector. In the context of the unfavorable international 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  economic and financial landscape that I outlined above, Greece has been undergoing a serious sovereign crisis that has required three adjustment programmes, including, inter alia, substantial reforms and tough austerity measures. The rapid deterioration in the macroeconomic environment, reflected in a cumulative loss of more than 25% of the GDP, has shown that the crisis facing Greece is both deeper and more protracted than initially expected. In terms of the overall deterioration of key macroeconomic aggregates and the duration of the crisis, one could say that the Greek crisis has proved to be more severe than even the Great Depression. At the outset, the deterioration in the macroeconomic environment, sovereign debt downgrades and rising sovereign spreads rendered access to international capital and money markets impossible for both the banks and the sovereign. Extremely tight liquidity conditions ensued and pressures on the banking sector grew. In this adverse macroeconomic landscape, unemployment increased to historic (post-war) levels, and disposable income dropped substantially. As a consequence, the adverse developments in the banking sector were unprecedented; in particular, Greek banks’ fundamentals and asset quality ratios deteriorated substantially. The extent of the deterioration may be described in terms of the impact of the restructuring of Greek government bonds held by the private sector (the so-called Private Sector Involvement or PSI): Greek banks suffered losses of about €38 billion in 2011, about 170% of their total Core Tier I (CT1) capital at that time. Due to the liquidity squeeze, the intermediary role of banks has been undermined and the channels for financing the real economy have been restricted. In addition, deposits declined by €117 billion (i.e. a drop of –44%) between September 2009 and December 2015. Mainly, this decline reflected depositor uncertainty regarding the prospects of Greece within the euro area. But additionally, the decline in deposits reflects the negative loan growth throughout the period. In normal times, deposits do not just create loans, but loans also create deposits via the money multiplier; declines in loans analogously lead to endogenous declines in deposits. The significant deleveraging that Greek banks have undertaken – between end-2010 and end-2015, loans to the private sector fell by €54 billion – was partly a response to tight funding conditions and partly a consequence of the need to set aside more capital since the potential for unexpected risks rose considerably. As a consequence it became ever more difficult for banks to play their natural role, that of financing the real economy. The considerable decline in household disposable income, a consequence of both wage cuts and the rise in unemployment, resulted in a significant increase of non-performing loans and impairments, thus undermining the prospects for bank profits. Banks from 2010 onwards began to experience losses, which eroded their capital base. Despite efforts to support profitability by reducing costs, the high level of loan loss provisions resulted in a series of loss-making results right up until the first quarter of 2016. C. European policy initiatives The response of Europe to the global and European financial crisis has been effective despite the initial lack of crisis mechanisms and the unfavorable and challenging environment – an environment in which fires were often being fought simultaneously on a number of fronts. The initial response came in the form of monetary policy and a significant easing of the monetary policy stance. Indeed, in October 2008, six major central banks, including the ECB, implemented a coordinated and simultaneous cut in interest rates. Additionally, at that time euro area Member States set out an action plan of coordinated measures (including, inter alia, the granting of government guarantees to bank debt issuance and the recapitalization of banks) to restore confidence and improve financial conditions. With the eruption of the euro area sovereign debt crisis the malfunctioning of the monetary transmission mechanism led the ECB to resort increasingly to nonstandard monetary tools. Additionally, Europe set up the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) to provide 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  financial assistance to distressed Member States. The EFSF was replaced by the more powerful European Stability Mechanism (ESM) in October 2012. The sovereign debt crisis also revealed strong negative feedback loops between banks and sovereigns, irrespective of whether the crisis originated with the sovereign or the banks, as well as contagion among national financial markets. In response to these developments, in 2012, European leaders initiated the creation of a banking union – which is a complementary and integral part of a genuine Economic and Financial Union. Its three pillars are: the Single Supervisory Mechanism, the Single Resolution Mechanism and the still-to-be completed common deposit guarantee system. Apart from the elements of the banking union, a number of important regulatory initiatives have been taken, covering almost all aspects of financial sector and activities (namely the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive – BRRD, Capital requirements regulation and directive – CRR/CRD IV for the banking sector, Solvency II for Insurance, European Market Infrastructure Regulation – EMIR for financial markets and infrastructure and so on). Turning to monetary policy initiatives, the ECB has been addressing the severe and persistent disinflationary forces in the euro area economy with a broad set of measures. Initially, it moved to refinancing operations at a fixed rate and with full allotment. It also extended the time horizon of refinancing operations, providing for 3-year maturities instead of the usual 3-month. More recently, with the so-called Targeted Long-Term Refinancing Operations (TLTROs), it seeks to incentivize banks to on-lend to the private sector by providing finance for up to 4 years. Finally there are the various asset purchase programmes where the Eurosystem purchases marketable assets including public sector/government bonds, corporate bonds, ABSs, uncovered bank bonds, etc. These non-standard measures are being implemented to meet a variety of goals. First, to support financial markets which are malfunctioning. Second, to provide liquidity to banks for longer periods. It should be recalled that in the wake of the international financial crisis, the interbank market dried up completely as counterparty risk rose; to this day, it remains fragile. Third, to kick-start lending to the real economy. Ultimately, of course, the goal is to prevent deflation and raise inflation in the euro area to target. To a great extent, these measures have helped to improve financial conditions in the euro area. Work done at the Bank of Greece shows that financial conditions have responded positively to the non-standard measures, even if the measures have not yet restored inflation to its target of below, but close to, 2 per cent. However, with respect to Greece, the anticipated positive effects of the expansionary monetary policy stance have yet to be realized. Financial conditions in Greece, whilst not at their lows of 2012, are still extremely tight by historical standards. Moreover, conditions have been virtually unchanged since the beginning of 2013, despite all the non-standard measures employed by the ECB. What factors might account for this outcome? The Eurosystem lends to commercial banks against collateral. The collateral framework defines what is eligible and this is related to an asset’s rating. Greek banks have often found themselves constrained by the amount of eligible collateral. Moreover, haircuts are applied to eligible collateral. That is, a €100 bond will not necessarily give a bank access to €100 of refinancing. Greek assets are now rated much lower than they were before the crisis. Thus some assets have become ineligible and, for those assets that are still eligible, the haircuts have increased. This has, on occasion, restricted access to refinancing operations. Since February 2015, Greek banks were unable to use Greek government bonds in refinancing operations, since they have a rating that is lower than the minimum acceptable under the collateral framework. A waiver was introduced for countries that are in an adjustment programme and completing the associated reviews successfully. In February 2015, the Governing Council decided that Greece did not meet these criteria and hence the waiver was withdrawn. Furthermore, Greek banks have at various times been suspended as eligible counterparties with the Eurosystem. This occurred after the PSI and before the banks were recapitalized. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Under such circumstances, banks turn to the Emergency Liquidity Assistance provided by the Bank of Greece. But ELA carries a stigma, is more expensive and banks, through what are known as funding plans, have to explain how they plan to reduce their recourse to ELA over a reasonably short period. Suspension, for example, prevented Greek banks from participating in the second LTRO. Finally, Greece does not benefit from the asset purchase programmes. The covered bond and ABS programmes are aimed at banks. But Greek banks cannot issue covered bonds or ABSs that meet the rating criterion. Similarly Greek corporates issue limited bonds which again do not meet the rating criterion. With respect to the public sector asset purchase programme, Greek government bonds have been ineligible since the country was not “in a programme”. Thus financial conditions in Greece have not benefited significantly from the raft of non-standard measures that have been introduced during the crisis. Conditions, however, can be expected to improve with the passing of the 1st review and the reinstatement of the waiver. D. The response of the Greek authorities, including the Bank of Greece I now turn to the response of the Greek authorities. The role of central banks throughout the EU has been considerably increased due to the challenges faced by banking systems in the wake of the Lehman Brothers’ failure. One manifestation of this increased role is that mandates have been amended to explicitly refer to financial stability as a core central bank task. At the same time, the toolbox available has been expanded to include macro-prudential policy tools and enhanced micro-prudential policy tools both for the SSM and the national authorities. The Greek authorities are no exception to this trend. Throughout the crisis, the Bank of Greece has been the guardian of financial stability, protecting fully all depositors (regardless of type and size) and supporting the economy and the public interest. Initially, this was accomplished through the 2008 Law which provided capital support to Greek banks and allowed banks to issue government guaranteed bonds which could be used in refinancing operations. Similar laws were enacted throughout the EU. With the onset of the sovereign debt crisis, however, the situation intensified requiring continuous action by the Bank of Greece on two broad fronts: ensuring adequate provision of liquidity and managing recapitalization, resolution and restructuring. With respect to liquidity provision, the Bank has been critical in ensuring continuous liquidity provision to banks using one of the oldest macro-prudential tools available, that of the lender of last resort. On various occasions, the Bank of Greece has extended ELA to the banking system. This has helped preserve financial stability by ensuring that liquidity problems do not turn into solvency problems. With respect to managing recapitalization, resolution and restructuring, the Bank’s strategy, in the context of the adjustment programmes, aimed at strengthening viable institutions and winding down non-viable institutions whilst safeguarding financial stability. To this end, viability assessments and capital needs assessments were undertaken. Those banks deemed viable were recapitalized. The first round of recapitalization, following the losses incurred from PSI, was completed in June 2013. A combination of both private capital and resources from the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund were used. The second recapitalization took place in 2014, following a macro-prudential stress test, but involved only private equity capital injections. A further recapitalization took place at the end of 2015, mainly due to the uncertainty that prevailed in the first half of that year, which had a negative impact on macroeconomic and financial fundamentals. Following agreement on the third adjustment programme, a financial envelope of €25 billion was provided for the banking system. In August 2015, the ECB launched an Asset Quality Review and stress-test exercise for the four systemic Greek 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  banks. The ECB was the appropriate authority because, since November 2014, the four systemic banks have been supervised by the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). The Bank of Greece undertook a similar exercise for the smaller banks. The result of this exercise was identification of capital needs under both a baseline and an adverse macroeconomic scenario. The actual amount of capital raised was that identified under the adverse scenario, namely €14.4 billion. Thanks to the coordinated efforts of the Greek authorities and the Bank of Greece, successful rights issues resulted in the full coverage of the shortfall by December 2015, with private investors subscribing about €9 billion. These efforts minimized HFSF participation and helped to restore confidence in the longer-term viability of Greek banks. As a consequence, Greek banks now have among the highest capital ratios of banks in the euro area. Those deemed non-viable were resolved with their ‘good’ part absorbed by systemic banks. The resolution tool used had to meet two main criteria. First, resolution had to be done in such a way as to ensure continued stability of the financial system. To that end, all deposits from resolved banks were transferred to systemic banks. This process also ensured a minimum of disruption for customers of resolved banks. The second criterion was to minimize the costs of restructuring for tax-payers. The Bank of Greece assessed that the costs of using the purchase and assumption resolution tool were lower than any alternative. With 14 such resolutions having successfully taken place since 2011, this process has also facilitated considerable restructuring of the banking system, eliminating excess market capacity. E. Challenges ahead, the way forward and concluding remarks Ladies and gentlemen, With the successful completion of the first review, a number of positive benefits are likely to ensue for the banking system. The reinstatement of the waiver will allow Greek government bonds to once again be eligible collateral in Eurosystem refinancing operations. Greek banks are expected to participate in the coming targeted long-term refinancing operation. These developments will considerably reduce funding costs for Greek banks. At the same time, later this year, Greek government bonds could also become eligible for the public sector asset purchase programme. Falling spreads will impact positively on the banking system since the sovereign effectively acts as a floor on the interest rates at which banks can do business and on their ratings. However, there is no room for complacency. The system still faces challenges. The SSM has identified banks’ business model and profitability as a top priority for its supervisory action plan for 2016. Yet the background against which this priority takes place is a challenging one. The macroeconomic environment is still fragile, market sentiment is volatile and capital controls are still in force. A large part of the challenge in addressing a new business model relates to the increasing stock of Non-Performing Exposures (NPEs) and their management. These exposures are acting as a significant impediment to banks’ reorienting their business model as well as, more broadly, to growth and financial stability, particularly in the countries of the European South. It should be highlighted, however, that we are in a good position to deal with this challenging issue. Thanks to the work that has been done over the past few years, we are fully aware of problems’ analytics and important knowledge has been accumulated both for the monitoring and managing of troubled assets. Moreover, as a recent Bank of Greece study indicates, domestic NPEs are primarily driven by recession. This finding leads us to the inevitable conclusion that pro-active loan restructuring and immediate involvement of loan servicers and private equity funds (gaining from the upside in the EBITDA) may add value. The Bank of Greece’s key priority at present is to contribute towards a sustainable solution for the management of NPEs. A number of initiatives are underway with the goal of setting up an accelerated and efficient framework of private debt resolution. These elements, 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  amongst others, include: (a) the recently voted amendment of Law 4354/2015 which paved the way for the development of a secondary market for non-performing loans; (b) the establishment of an enhanced framework for out-of-court workouts and the pre-bankruptcy process; (c) the elimination of a series of taxation driven obstacles both for borrowers and lenders; (d) the re-drafting of the Code of Conduct to address issues identified in the early implementation phase; (e) amendments in legislation, which would ensure the cooperation of old shareholders in the restructuring of the underlying businesses; and, finally, (f) the launch of a comprehensive monitoring framework in relation to banks’ non-performing exposure resolution activities. The ultimate aim in meeting these challenges is to shape a banking system which will be in a position to undertake efficiently its main task, namely the financing of the real economy. To this end, the Bank of Greece and the SSM have to ensure an appropriate policy mix. Central banks today undertake monetary policy, macro-prudential policy and micro-prudential supervision. Macro-prudential policy bridges the gap between the micro-prudential supervision of individual banks and monetary policy. It is imperative that all these different policy areas are adequately coordinated. In the same context, it is important that the macro-prudential toolbox be further enhanced with innovative tools beyond those focused on capital requirements. For instance, cyclical systemic risk can arise not only as a result of excessive credit expansion (an issue that can be addressed with the countercyclical capital buffer) but also due to inadequate channeling of credit that keeps the real economy under-financed for significant periods. I have focused in my remarks today on the banking system and the policy role of central banks. Other policy-makers, however, also have to recognize their responsibilities. I could refer to the completion of the banking union, the proposal for shared fiscal responsibility outlined in the Five Presidents’ Report and the continued implementation of structural reforms to enhance product market competition, improve educational systems, raise the efficiency of the judicial system, promote financial literacy and so on. The objective to restore confidence and enhance the resilience of credit institutions to withstand shocks in an uncertain economic environment has always been a challenging task. Yet we should not forget that this is a prerequisite to fulfill the ultimate objective of financing the real economy to promote sustainable economic growth, create jobs and ensure better standards of living for all citizens. Financial stability is a prerequisite for sustainable growth; it is also true, however, that financial stability on a sustainable basis cannot be achieved without growth. Failure to maintain strong growth has been the biggest threat to long-term stability in the EU. The appropriate balance between managing risk and enabling investment needs to be struck and it is crucial that the regulatory framework does not impede growth. The key to a sustainable recovery is higher investment, yet a significant investment gap exists. The financial system and its stability have a crucial role to play in closing this gap, and central bankers and supervisory authorities have a catalytic responsibility in shaping a system that can deliver future prosperity. Sources 1. Angelopoulou, E. Balfoussia, H. and Gibson, H. D. (2014) “Building a Financial Conditions Index for the Euro Area and Selected Euro Area Countries: what does it tell us about the crisis?”, Economic Modelling, vol. 38, pp.392–403, 2014. Also available as a Bank of Greece Working Paper: http://www.bankofgreece.gr/BogEkdoseis/Paper2012147.pdf. 2. Bank for International Settlements (2015) “Making supervisory stress tests more macroprudential: Considering liquidity and solvency interactions and systemic risk”, BCBS Working Papers No 29, https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/wp29.htm , November 2015. 3. Banque de France and Bank for International Settlements (2016) “Ultra-low interest rates & challenges for central banks”, Farewell Symposium for Christian Noyer, Paris, https://www.banque-france.fr/en/economics-statistics/research/seminars-and-symposiums/ 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  symposium-a-loccasion-du-depart-de-christian-noyer-banque-de-france-et-banque-des-reglements-internationaux.html, January 2016. 4. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2015), Finalising post-crisis reforms: an update, A report to G20 Leaders, http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d344.pdf, November 2015. 5. Carney, M. (2015) “Fortune favours the bold”, Speech given to honour the memory of The Honourable J. M. Flaherty, P.C., Iveagh House, Dublin, http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ publications/Documents/speeches/2015/speech794.pdf, January 2015. 6. Cœuré, B. (2016) “Time for a new Lamfalussy moment”, Speech at the Professor Lamfalussy Commemorative Conference, Budapest, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/ date/2016/html/sp160201.en.html , February 2016. 7. Cœuré, B. (2016) “From Challenges to Opportunities: Rebooting the European Financial Sector”, Süddeutsche Zeitung, Finance Day, Frankfurt, March 2016. 8. Constâncio, V. (2015) Interview with Börsen-Zeitung, “We need more integration in Europe”, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/inter/date/2015/html/sp151230.en.html, December 2015. 9. Constâncio V. (2016), International headwinds and the effectiveness of Monetary Policy, ECB Vice-President Speech at the 25th Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference on the State of the U.S. and World Economies at the Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, Blithewood, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York, April 2016, http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/ 2016/html/sp160413.en.html. 10. Draghi, M. (2015) Monetary policy and structural reforms in the euro area, Prometeia40, Bologna, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp151214.en.html , December 2015. 11. Draghi, M. (2016) Introductory statement during the Hearing at the European Parliament’s Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, Brussels, http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160215.en.html, February 2016. 12. Draghi M. (2016), Statement by the ECB President at the thirty-third meeting of the International Monetary and Financial Committee, Washington DC, April 2016, http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160415.en.html. 13. EBA (2015) Risk Assessment of European Banking System, https://eba.europa.eu/ documents/10180/1315397/EBA+Risk+Assessment+Report.pdf, December 2015. 14. ECB Financial Stability Review (2016), http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ financialstabilityreview201605.en.pdf?b7c4d8d8e66d1c7c4851d64c37c72f38 , May 2016. 15. ECB Financial Stability Review (2015), https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ financialstabilityreview201511.en.pdf?24cc5509b94b997f161b841fa57d5eca, November 2015. 16. Five Presidents’ Report sets out plan for strengthening Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union as of 1 July 2015 (2015), Press release, Brussels, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15–5240_en.htm, June 2015. 17. Hill, J. (2015) “For a financial sector that promotes investment”, London, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–5380_en.htm, July 2015. 18. Hill, J. (2015) Keynote speech at European Banking Federation, “A Brave New World for Banks”, 2015 Annual High Level Conference, Brussels, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–5624_en.htm, September 2015. 19. Hill, J. (2015) Speech at the European Central Bank Forum on Banking Supervision, “Bank Supervision: Europe in global context”, Frankfurt, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–5985_en.htm, November 2015. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  20. Hill, J. (2015) Press Conference on the EDIS Proposal at the European Parliament, Strasbourg, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–6154_en.htm, November 2015. 21. Hill, J. (2015) Opening statement on Structured Dialogue – European Parliament: Economic & Monetary Affairs Committee, Brussels, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–6206_en.htm, November 2015. 22. Hill, J. (2015) Speech at the launch of the Commission’s Green Paper on Consumer Finance, Brussels, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–6293_en.htm, December 2015. 23. Hill, J. (2015) Speech at the CRR Review Conference, DG FISMA, “The Impact of the CRR and CRD IV on Bank Financing of the Economy”, Brussels, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–6310_en.htm, December 2015. 24. Hill, J. (2016) Keynote speech at the European Banking Authority’s 5th Anniversary Conference, London, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-16–250_en.htm, February 2016. 25. King, M. (2016) “The End of Alchemy: Money, Banking and the Future of the Global Economy” Little, Brown. 26. Praet, P. (2016) Interview with Público, “Monetary policy can’t do it alone”, http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/inter/date/2016/html/sp160523.en.html, May 2016. 27. Praet, P. (2015) Interview with La Libre Belgique, “Europe must show it can bring prosperity”, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/inter/date/2015/html/sp151221.en.html, December 2015 28. Stournaras, Y. (2016) “Financial stability and policy intervention by Central Banks in Europe: where do we stand and what challenges lie ahead”, Speech at the Croatian National Bank in Zagreb http://www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx? Item_ID=345&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166-9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b, March 2016. 29. Vickers, J. (2016) “Equity buffers are in the public interest” Letter to the Editor, Financial Times, 18 February 2016. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Manuel Sánchez: Mexico in an unfriendly world economy Remarks by Mr Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the 2016 Mexico Opportunities Conference “Harvesting Growth”, organized by J.P. Morgan, Mexico City, 21 June 2016. *      *      * It is a pleasure to be here with you this morning. I would like to thank J.P. Morgan for the invitation to participate in this annual conference devoted to opportunities for attaining higher economic growth in Mexico. In my talk, I would like to focus on the challenges and prospects for the Mexican economy in the current difficult international environment. To this end, I will touch first on Mexico’s economic developments and outlook; then, I will briefly analyze the impact of widespread uncertainty on the country’s financial markets; and finally, I will make some comments on inflation and monetary policy. Before I begin, I should note that my remarks are entirely my own and do not necessarily reflect the positions of the Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. Economic developments and outlook A natural starting point for my comments is found in international economic conditions, which during the last couple of years can be characterized as less favorable for emerging markets. In particular, advanced nations continue to witness a slow recovery amid decelerating growth in emerging economies and stagnant global trade. Added to this condition are doubts and concerns over monetary policy stances and expected monetary divergence among developed countries. Worries over the health of the Chinese economy, in turn, persist amid uncertainty growing on geopolitical issues, with Brexit currently the number-one fear. In addition, commodity prices are expected to remain low for some time. Finally, this environment has fueled heightened risk aversion, which has hit emerging economies especially hard. In this complicated world, the Mexican economy has maintained relatively stable and moderate growth since 2014, reaching 2.8 percent in the first quarter of 2016 on a year-on-year basis. The main driver has been an expanding services sector, as industrial production had decelerated somewhat, although picking up recently. Three factors behind softer industrial growth are clear. First and foremost, oil extraction has seen a longstanding decline. Construction activity, for its part, has slowed and is somewhat erratic, apparently still affected by the restructuring process to which this sector has been subject in the last few years. To round out the list, manufacturing production, which holds a tight relationship with industry and manufacturing in the United States, has been less dynamic. Given significant vertical integration between the two countries, slower U.S. industrial activity, reflecting the downsizing of the oil sector amid low prices, has capped the expansion of Mexican manufacturing. As a result, manufacturing exports have lost steam, with declining rates of annual growth falling into negative territory in recent quarters. This deceleration has taken place in spite of significant real peso depreciation, which has occurred along with that of other emerging-market currencies. This fact highlights the 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  dominant negative effect stemming from a decline in external demand, notably from the United States, Mexico’s main trading partner, but also from other nations as well.1 In short, the main engine of recent Mexican economic expansion has been domestic spending, largely by the private sector, including both consumption and investment. Yet it is worth noting that, although representing a smaller weight in total aggregate demand, government consumption was expanding, thereby supporting spending as well. In the 2016 first quarter, however, this trend changed. Additionally, public investment, an even smaller contributor to aggregate demand, continues to contract. As with the global economy and most world regions, Mexico’s economic outlook has been subject to downward revisions, with a modest recovery projected for this and the following year. Even in this lackluster scenario, Mexico distinguishes itself, with expected expansion higher than the average pace foreseen for Latin America.2 This does not mean we should be satisfied with only middling growth. As an emerging economy, Mexico should eventually enjoy much higher rates of economic expansion, breaking out of its previous long-term, not excessively encouraging, record. To be sure, in the short term, real challenges prevail. Specifically, Mexico’s scenario of modest improvement faces risks, among which the downside forces seem more numerous. Let me mention three. In the first place, U.S. imports and industrial output may slow further, potentially not only inhibiting the country’s manufacturing production, but also generating spillover effects on the services sector and private investment. Second, producer and consumer sentiment could deteriorate due to less favorable international financial events. Finally, a larger-than-anticipated fall in Mexican oil extraction could occur. On the upside, however, recent structural reforms could start to yield greater-than-expected benefits.3 Financial markets International financial markets have been affected by uncertainty on the implications of the extraordinary lax monetary stances undertaken in advanced nations and the normalization process in the United States. As central banks in these regions are navigating unchartered waters, the consequences are impossible to predict. Meanwhile, portfolios have been adjusted away from emerging markets, with lower capital inflows and even outflows in some cases. Asset prices, at the same time, including those of emerging market bonds and currencies, have seen downward pressure.4 Also, spikes in financial volatility have hit amid geopolitical jitters, including fears over Brexit. These developments reflect tensions and headwinds against emerging markets, testing the strength of their fundamentals. In Mexico, the unprecedented shrinkage of the oil balance has resulted in a larger current account deficit. This gap still remains, however, only slightly below 3 percent of GDP.                                                 1  For an econometric estimation of the effects of U.S. manufacturing production and the bilateral real exchange rate on Mexico’s manufacturing exports to that country, see Banco de México (2016). Quarterly Report October – December 2015, Box 1. 2  Analysts’ estimates for GDP in Latin America and Mexico are, respectively, –0.6 and 2.4 percent in 2016, and 2.0 and 2.8 percent in 2017. See Consensus Economics Inc. (2016). “Latin American Consensus Forecasts,” May. 3  For an online progress report of Mexico’s structural reforms, see Presidencia de la República, Reformas en Acción, http://reformas.gob.mx/. 4  See Koepke, R. and Farnham, S. (2016). “May 2016 EM Portfolio Flows Tracker,” Institute of International Finance, June. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  The enlargement of the current account deficit has caught the attention of many observers, perhaps not so much because of the sheer magnitude of the total balance, but likely because of the underlying trends, which may eventually trigger external financing restrictions. This type of concern should not be neglected, and must be properly assessed. One fact is precisely the weakening of the oil trade balance, reflecting lower extraction and a significant deterioration of the oil terms of trade. A second is that the other component, the nonoil balance, has been improving, partly aided by real exchange rate depreciation. Nevertheless, this performance has not been sufficient to completely offset trends in the oil balance. In a word, recent less favorable balance-of-payments developments reflect Mexico’s oil situation. To preclude the continuation of these tendencies and support financial stability, an adjustment in public-sector spending, already underway, is obviously called for. The necessity is clearly confirmed by rising Pemex credit risk perception, where higher CDS spreads beginning in mid-2014 and coinciding with lower oil prices should not be surprising, with slightly less pressure since last February. An important consequence is the contamination that Pemex credit risk perception has exerted on Mexico’s sovereign debt. Inaction from the state oil company is definitely not acceptable, if for nothing else, because of the danger of further contagion on country risk perception. Additionally, the share of nonresident holdings of peso-denominated government securities in the total outstanding has decreased, with a change of composition away from short-term zero coupon instruments (cetes) and in favor of long-term bonds. These portfolio changes could be interpreted as a natural investor reaction to less optimistic views on emerging markets. Hence, so far, those seeking the exit have been mainly holders of short-term securities, while holdings of long-term bonds have risen in absolute terms during the year. In any case, developments of foreign funds in Mexico must continue to be monitored. As in other emerging-market economies, heightened risk aversion since the taper tantrum has widened interest-rate spreads. It is worth noting that current spreads are not unprecedented, as they are similar to those observed at the beginning of 2012, when fears surrounding the sustainability of the euro area also fed risk aversion. As in other countries, a flexible exchange rate has performed the crucial role of buffering markets in an adverse financial environment. The Mexican peso has depreciated significantly since mid-2014, hurt more than other emerging-market currencies in the present year. These difficult developments underscore the importance of ongoing fiscal strengthening, a necessary and welcome development to face external headwinds. Adjustment already includes at least four measures, starting with financial and business restructuring being implemented in Pemex. Additionally, cuts to 2016 budgeted public expenditures are in process, with an initiative sent to Congress for a positive primary balance in 2017. Finally, in the aim of keeping the public finances sustainable, a commitment is in place for the stabilization and decline of the total balance of public-sector borrowing requirements over GDP in the medium term.5 Inflation and monetary policy Annual inflation has continued to be benign at unprecedented low levels. Specifically, for 13 months in a row, inflation has remained below the permanent 3 percent target. This is quite an achievement, as convergence to this objective assumes inflation to fluctuate                                                 5  See SHCP (2016). “Documento Relativo al Cumplimiento de las Disposiciones Contenidas en el Artículo 42, Fracción I, de la Ley Federal de Presupuesto y Responsabilidad Hacendaria,” April. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  sufficiently close to 3 percent, sometimes above and sometimes below. Before 2015, inflation persistently ran around an average above 4 percent. Lower inflation has resulted from both relatively contained core price increases and declining noncore inflation. A surge in core merchandise inflation reflects a modest effect from peso depreciation on tradable goods prices. At the same time, the core services component has remained subdued, benefiting from persistently falling telecom tariffs resulting from competition enhanced by reforms in that sector. It may also suggest the absence of significant overall aggregate demand pressures to date. Falling noncore inflation reflects reduced agricultural price increases, as well as contractions in the index for energy and government-determined prices. Short- and medium-term inflation expectations, as reflected in analysts’ surveys, are gradually moving towards the 3 percent permanent target, while those extracted from market instruments seem to have converged to the target, a significant advance in light of a history of high inflation.6 Some threats to the consolidation of inflation convergence to the target prevail. Upward risks are particularly substantial in view of the relatively short time inflation has remained anchored on the target. The biggest menace may come from further peso weakness, which could result in greater pass-through and misalignment of inflation expectations. Another risk could emerge in aggregate demand pressure, as total absorption has increased. Agricultural price rises may also pick up, reverting to the medium-term average, carrying second-round price effects. Thus, monetary policy must avoid complacency, remaining on watch to consolidate inflation convergence. Results, although recently positive, include no guarantee for the future. In addition, exchange rate considerations have to be viewed from the perspective of the Bank of Mexico’s price stability mandate. For time-consistency considerations, the relative monetary stance vis-à-vis the United States should continue to be a factor. However, challenges to price stability may surface whatever the U.S. Federal Reserve does. Hence, monetary policy actions can be independent of the Fed. In any case, the Bank of Mexico will continue to act in a timely and decisive way to consolidate price stability. Conclusions Let me conclude by saying that Mexico’s economic fundamentals are being tested. Structural reforms, an improved rule of law, and better security could produce more rapid growth in the medium to long term. With the financial state of Pemex weak and posing contamination risks to the Mexican sovereign, meanwhile, adjustment of the fiscal stance is a welcome development. Fortifying economic fundamentals is an ongoing challenge for policy makers. As recent good inflation performance is not guaranteed, complacency cannot be allowed to seep into monetary policy. Pursuit of permanent convergence to the target must continue.                                                 6  See Banco de México (2016). “Encuesta sobre las Expectativas de los Especialistas en Economía del Sector Privado: Mayo de 2016,” June. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Takahide Kiuchi: Recent developments in economic activity, prices and monetary policy Speech by Mr Takahide Kiuchi, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Ishikawa, 23 June 2016. *      *      * I. Economic activity and prices in Japan A. The Bank of Japan’s view The Bank of Japan explains its assessment of the current situation and outlook for Japan’s economic activity and prices in the Statement on Monetary Policy, which is released after each Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM), and in the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (the Outlook Report), which is published four times each year. Therefore, I will first give you an overview of its assessment of the current situation and outlook based on the latest Outlook Report and Statement on Monetary Policy. Japan’s economy has continued its moderate recovery trend, although exports and production have been sluggish, due mainly to the effects of the slowdown in emerging economies. The outlook through fiscal 2018 envisages that, although sluggishness is expected to remain in exports and production for the time being, domestic demand is likely to follow an uptrend, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending being maintained in both the household and corporate sectors, and exports are expected to increase moderately. Thus, Japan’s economy is likely to be on a moderate expanding trend. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food) is likely to be slightly negative or about 0 percent for the time being, due to the effects of the decline in energy prices, and thereafter accelerate toward 2 percent. Meanwhile, assuming that crude oil prices will rise moderately from the recent level, the timing of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) reaching around 2 percent – the price stability target – is projected to be during fiscal 2017. Thereafter, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is likely to be around 2 percent on average. B. My personal view I believe that Japan’s current growth rate and inflation rate are generally stable, in light of the economy’s growth potential, and that there is a relatively high probability of this situation continuing during the projection period in the April 2016 Outlook Report. However, when expressed in figures, my view is fairly cautious compared with the medians of the Policy Board members’ forecasts. This is mainly because I believe that (1) there is not a driving force from the demand side – including in terms of the effects of monetary easing – that will bring about economic growth at a pace clearly higher than its potential; (2) there are downside risks to the medians of the Policy Board members’ forecasts in terms of demand both at home and abroad; and (3) as a result of these factors, the output gap is expected to remain more or less at a neutral level, making it difficult to expect that the underlying trend in inflation will rise markedly. Next, I will mention several points of attention regarding the outlook for economic activity and prices based on my view. 1. Stagnant potential growth rate According to the Bank’s estimates, the potential growth rate of Japan’s economy, which represents from the supply side – the pace of growth that is consistent with the economy’s 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  growth potential, is still at a low level in the range of 0.0–0.5 percent. No notable improvement has been observed in the past several years, either. In particular, in line with the sluggish rate of increase in total factor productivity (TFP), which reflects technological advances, the rate of increase in labor productivity – which considerably affects firms’ wage-setting behavior, which in turn impacts private consumption and prices – has continued to be stagnant. However, the output gap, which represents the degree of utilization of capital and labor, has generally maintained a neutral level over the past several years. This means that Japan’s economy has continued to show stable growth that is more or less consistent with its growth potential. 2. Medium- to long-term growth expectations and business fixed investment Although business fixed investment has been on a moderate increasing trend, it has not grown as strongly as had been expected when considering the high levels of corporate profits. I think that the fact behind this situation is that, while the high levels of profits in recent years had been brought about largely by improvement in price factors that cannot necessarily be considered sustainable – namely, improvement in the terms of trade reflecting changes in the exchange rates and commodity prices – the prospects for future sales volume have not improved. In this respect, the potential growth rate is still at a low level and is expected to improve only very moderately; therefore, firms may not significantly change their cautious stance on business fixed investment in the domestic market. 3. Sluggish private consumption Private consumption has been resilient, but I think that it is still sluggish. It seems that price-related factors that once curbed private consumption, such as the consumption tax hikes and price increases for food and daily necessities, have been fading away recently. However, wages have not improved by as much as had been expected, as seen in the fact that the base pay increase resulting from the labor-management wage negotiations this spring seems to have been somewhat lower than the level in 2015. This has led to households’ cautious outlook for wages, which might be one factor restraining private consumption. I would note that these developments in wages might be attributable to persistent concerns among firms that a rise in labor costs, including an increase in base pay, may undermine the future situation for corporate profits amid the lack of a rise in the expected productivity growth rate and in the expected medium- to long-term economic growth rate. In addition to households’ cautious outlook for wages arising from firms’ stance of curbing labor costs, future concerns that are rooted in the fiscal condition and the social security system may be another factor restraining private consumption among a broad range of age groups. 4. Overseas economies and downside risks to Japan’s exports The expectations for a global economic downturn that mounted at the beginning of 2016 have receded somewhat recently, reflecting improvements in U.S. and Chinese economic indicators and the stabilization of crude oil prices. However, it is difficult to expect the U.S. economy in its current status to act as a strong driving force of the global economy. Therefore, the scenario of advanced economies leading the global economic recovery has remained unrealized. In emerging economies, business fixed investment has been weak due to excess production capacity and excess debt, eroding the global economy’s current recovery potential. These problems could destabilize global financial markets, particularly through adjustments in the corporate bond markets in emerging economies that may be triggered by, for example, changes in the flow of funds caused by the U.S. monetary policy. Moreover, I am paying attention to the possibility that, if the global economy shows signs of a slowdown again, 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  resulting in a decline in energy prices, there will be growing risks on the financial front, including (1) adjustments in the markets for high-yield bonds, mainly those issued by energy-related firms, and (2) heightened credit risk involved in financial institutions’ exposure to these firms. In light of this export environment, I have continued to regard developments in overseas economies and global financial markets as the most serious downside risks to Japan’s economy. 5. Developments in the underlying trend in inflation Since the beginning of fiscal 2016, the year-on-year rate of change in retail prices of consumer goods – mainly processed food – has tended to shift downward. Presumably, this is because at the beginning of the fiscal year, the price increases did not spread as much as in the past two years owing to (1) the depreciation of the yen having come to a pause, (2) private consumption having been sluggish, partly due to the effects of irregularly warm weather, and (3) the pace of wage increases having remained only moderate. Under these circumstances, I expect that the year-on-year rates of change in the indicators of the underlying trend in prices, such as the CPI (all items less fresh food and energy) and the CPI (all items less food and energy), will decelerate somewhat over the next several months. Moreover, I do not assume that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) will reach the price stability target of 2 percent by fiscal 2018, the last year of the projection period in the April 2016 Outlook Report. Even so, as the expected decline in the underlying trend in inflation for the time being is largely attributable to the disappearance of temporary factors such as the depreciation of the yen, I expect that prices will generally stay stable. While the level of the underlying trend in inflation – represented by, for example, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food and energy) – is lower than the price stability target of 2 percent, I do not believe that this is causing any particular problem for current economic activity because the rates do not deviate widely from firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term inflation expectations. II. Conduct of monetary policy The Bank introduced Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) in April 2013 and then QQE with a Negative Interest Rate in January 2016, with a view to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI at the earliest possible time. Against these decisions, I have been insisting on a change to QQE – including a reduction in the pace of the Bank’s asset purchases – and a review of the negative interest rate policy, based on an examination and a comparison of positive effects and side effects of these measures. Furthermore, I think that enhancement of facilities to provide liquidity is important, in order to maintain financial system stability through securing the smooth functioning of financial markets and financial intermediation. I would like to explain the organization of the thinking behind my policy stance. A. Rebalancing of Two Mandates of the Bank’s Policy The two mandates of the Bank’s policy are to ensure price stability and financial system stability. Monetary easing measures in recent years – such as QQE and the negative interest rate policy – have proceeded with emphasis placed on price stability, based on the recognition that financial system stability has been sufficiently secured. I admit that the financial system can be assessed as being generally stable at present. However, potential vulnerability in the financial system has increased under the prolonged 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  low-interest rate environment, and this trend has been augmented by the large-scale monetary easing. Therefore, I think that the outlook is by no means optimistic. From this viewpoint, I have continued to cast a dissenting vote on the negative interest rate policy since its introduction through the most recent MPM held in June 2016. I have considered that negative interest rates would decrease the functioning of financial markets and financial intermediation, as well as impair the stability of the JGB market and smooth conduct of the Bank’s JGB purchases, and therefore an interest rate of 0.1 percent – the same rate as before – should be applied to all current account balances excluding the amount outstanding of the required reserves held by financial institutions at the Bank. Moreover, I think it is time for the Bank to shift the focus of its policy from price stability to financial system stability. I believe that such a shift will eventually benefit the Bank in pursuing the ultimate goal of contributing to the sound development of the national economy through achieving the intermediate objectives, i.e., the Bank’s two mandates, in a well-balanced manner. B. Necessity to maintain the sound functioning of financial intermediation In recent years, financial institutions’ profitability – represented by operating profits from core business – and loss-absorbing capacity have been declining, particularly among regional financial institutions. Downward pressure on their net income also seems to have increased recently, due in part to the fact that profit taking, mainly through sales of investment trusts, has become difficult in a situation where changes have been observed in the depreciating trend of the yen and the increase in stock prices that continued to be seen over the past several years. Furthermore, there is concern that the profit environment for financial institutions might become increasingly severe, mainly due to a further narrowing of interest rate margins on loans and a greater reduction in yields on securities – both of which followed the introduction of the negative interest rate policy – as well as to a rise in credit costs. In this situation, banks may take excessive risks at a time of profit deterioration in an attempt to increase their profits, but they may become excessively risk averse in the future, mainly because losses will be incurred by a possible worsening of economic and financial developments. This could negatively affect economic activity and financial markets by exacerbating firms’ and households’ borrowing constraints and through banks’ fire sales of assets. Furthermore, from a longer-term perspective, the impairment of banks’ financial soundness might also have negative effects on the efficiency and productivity of the economy. To give an example, banks with declining loss-absorbing capacity might postpone appropriate treatment of borrowers with weak performance amid a continued decline in banks’ profitability. This may cause a situation in which capital and labor are being allocated to inefficient firms, and thus result in pushing down the rate of increase in TFP in the overall economy over the long term. With these points taken into account, the malfunctioning of financial intermediation through the impairment of banks’ financial soundness might further push down the potential growth rate of the economy, which is currently at a low level in the range of 0.0–0.5 percent. Monetary policy is usually thought to affect the demand side of the economy. However, if the policy impairs financial system stability, the supply side of the economy – for example, the productivity growth rate and the potential growth rate – may also be adversely affected, causing losses in social welfare. C. Concerns about the stability of the JGB market and smooth conduct of the bank’s JGB purchases Since the introduction of the negative interest rate policy, the JGB market has been increasingly unstable – as evident from heightened volatility of JGB yields. I consider that this has exerted negative effects on the stability of financial markets as a whole. In this situation, 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  there have been adverse effects on the smooth conduct of the Bank’s JGB purchases. For example, the bid-to-cover ratios of its JGB purchasing operations have declined somewhat and there is a growing tendency for the bid rates to fall below the market rates. Before the introduction of the negative interest rate policy, financial institutions did not face particular problems in selling JGBs to the Bank and in turn increasing funds in their current accounts at the Bank to which an interest rate of 0.1 percent was applied without their taking interest rate risk. However, given that many financial institutions attach more importance to obtaining stable income gains rather than having temporary capital gains, I consider that they have become significantly discouraged to sell JGBs to the Bank and increase funds in their current accounts at the Bank. This is because the difference between the yields of JGBs held by financial institutions and the interest rates applied to current accounts at the Bank has widened with the introduction of the negative interest rate policy. In addition, with the introduction of the negative interest rate policy, the Bank adopted a multiple-tier system in which the outstanding balance of each financial institution’s current account at the Bank is divided into tiers, with different interest rates – including a negative interest rate – being applied to each tier. Because of this, financial institutions, particularly at the beginning of the introduction of the policy, have tended to reduce or not increase the Policy-Rate Balance, to which a negative interest rate is applied. As a result, they are proceeding with purchases of JGBs, particularly those with super-long maturities that are still offered with positive yields, and I think that this is one of the factors behind further tightening of the JGB market conditions and somewhat unstable conduct of the Bank’s JGB purchases. Given this, I consider that the decline in JGB yields, particularly those on JGBs with super-long maturities, since the introduction of the negative interest rate policy is not necessarily evidence that the policy has been exerting positive effects stably. I would like to note that, with the increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings, the Bank is also increasing the amount of reinvestment in JGBs resulting from redemption. Thus, even though the target for the pace of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings remains the same, the gross amount of the Bank’s JGB purchases has been increasing. Also, fiscal 2016 marks an important point in considering the supply-demand balance of JGBs. It is the year in which the gross amount of the Bank’s JGB purchases is expected to almost reach the gross amount of JGB issuance by the government. This implies that it is becoming difficult for the Bank to maintain the pace of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings solely by purchasing from the market the equivalent amount of JGBs issued by the government. It is considered that the Bank increasingly will need to purchase JGBs from financial institutions before redemption of such JGBs up to the amount needed for it to maintain the pace of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings. Given this, it is necessary to sufficiently recognize that it was at this exact timing that the negative interest rate policy – which discourages financial institutions to sell JGBs – was introduced. D. Future conduct of monetary policy My assessment is that QQE, which focuses on JGB purchases, already has exerted a considerable effect, as evidenced by the closing of the negative output gap at an early stage and the subsequent correction of the weak prices. However, I consider that the additional effects of QQE have been diminishing, given that the continued decline in long-term real interest rates, which is considered to be the main source of policy effects, already has come to a halt. On the other hand, numerous side effects of QQE arising from the Bank’s JGB purchases have not diminished; rather, they seem to be increasing steadily. These side effects include (1) various problems stemming from the distortion of the JGB market – for example, a risk of instability in the financial system caused by impairment of the proper functioning of the JGB market in terms of liquidity and the price-discovery function, and a risk that drastic fluctuations in JGB prices will cause revisions to prices of other financial products and assets; (2) a limit to the Bank’s JGB purchases and increased volatility in the market in case of arising concerns among market participants about 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  such a limit; and (3) deterioration in the Bank’s financial soundness in the course of normalizing monetary policy. Under these circumstances, I believe that, by reducing the pace of the Bank’s JGB purchases – or the annual pace of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings – the balance between the positive effects and side effects of QQE could be improved while ensuring stability in the JGB market. In the meantime, if the Bank does not reduce the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings, it will be possible to avoid a rise in long-term real interest rates – a factor that leads to a decline in policy effects – thereby firmly ensuring the accumulated effects of the Bank’s JGB purchases. On this basis, I have been proposing since April 2015 to reduce the annual pace of increase in the amount outstanding of the Bank’s JGB holdings. In proceeding with the reduction, I think that it is possible to diminish its effects on financial markets by providing a thorough explanation, or forward guidance, to the markets that the reduction will actually enhance the stability and sustainability of the Bank’s JGB purchases. Moreover, I think that measures such as the review of the negative interest rate policy give due consideration to the stability of the functioning of financial markets and financial intermediation, which are critical infrastructures of economic activity. Implementation of such measures will bring about efficient resource allocation through appropriate operation of said functioning, and thereby support positive efforts by the government and firms toward increased productivity so that such efforts lead to a higher potential growth rate and ultimately to an improvement in people’s lives. Lastly, I believe that improving communication with financial markets and enhancing flexibility are the immediate challenges for the Bank in the conduct of monetary policy. As the Bank has emphasized its stance of achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, overly heightened expectations for additional monetary easing tend to be observed in financial markets whenever there is an expectation that the Outlook Report will present a delay in the projected timing of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) reaching around 2 percent. In addition, since the introduction of the negative interest rate policy, views have become increasingly widespread that the Bank will launch unforeseen easing measures at an unexpected timing. I presume that these phenomena not only have become one of the factors behind reduced predictability of monetary policy and increased volatility in financial markets, but also have led to impairment of the credibility of the Bank’s monetary policy conduct. For this reason, I consider it important that the Bank thoroughly communicate with financial markets regarding its conduct of monetary policy and bear in mind the need to provide a detailed explanation so as to narrow the perception gap between them. In order to achieve the 2 percent price stability target, I think that it is vital to have a positive change in economic structure that would increase the underlying trend in inflation – through, for example, efforts by the government and firms – and that a considerable period of time will be required for this to take place. Therefore, rather than aiming to achieve the 2 percent price stability target through monetary policy alone in the short term, I believe that resetting the time frame for achieving the target to the medium to long term and conducting monetary policy in a flexible manner – coupled with an improvement in communication with financial markets – will lead to maintaining economic and financial market stability. This will result in reaching the Bank’s ultimate goal of contributing to the sound development of the national economy. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Raghuram Rajan: The fight against inflation – a measure of our institutional development Text of the Foundation Day Lecture by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, 20 June 2016. *      *      * I thank the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research for inviting me to give this Foundation Day lecture. I have always seen TIFR with awe from afar. Some explanation is in order. My roommate in my first year at MIT was Dr. Renganathan Iyer, who is one of the smartest mathematicians I know – he used to help me understand my tutorials in real analysis. And he never missed an occasion to tell me how much smarter everyone else at TIFR was. Perhaps Renga was being modest, but I half expected on coming here today to see everyone with gigantic heads housing enormous brains. It is a relief to find that, outwardly, you all look normal. Seriously, however, I think the continuing success of TIFR suggests to us that when India wants to set up world class institutions, it can. While the Institute was fortunate to have a visionary like Dr. Homi Bhabha as its founding director, the institution has been built by the collective efforts of dedicated researchers like you all. Congratulations on a job well done! In my speech today, I thought I would describe our efforts to build a different kind of institution, not one that delves into the deepest realms of outer space or into the tiniest constituents of an atom, but one that attempts to control something that affects your daily life; inflation. There are parallels between the institution building you have done, and what we are setting up to control inflation, though clearly our efforts are much less tied to investigating the very fabric of the universe and more towards influencing human behavior. Ultimately, both require a fundamental change in mindset. The costs of inflation High inflation has been with us in India for the last four decades. Most recently, we have experienced an average of more than 9 percent inflation between 2006 and 2013. What are the costs of having high inflation? Clearly, everyone understands the costs of hyper-inflation, when prices are rising every minute. Money is then a hot potato that no one wants to hold, with people rushing straight from the bank to the shops to buy goods in case their money loses value along the way. As people lose faith in money, barter of goods for goods or services becomes the norm, making transacting significantly more difficult; How much of a physics lecture would you have to pay a taxi driver to drive you to Bandra; moreover would the taxi driver accept a physics lecture in payment; perhaps you would have to lecture a student, and get the student to sing to the taxi driver…you get the point, transacting becomes difficult as hyperinflation renders money worthless. Hyperinflation also has redistributive effects, destroying the middle class’ savings held in bonds and deposits. The horrors of hyperinflation in Austria and Germany in the 1920s still make scary reading. So clearly, no one wants hyperinflation. But what if inflation were only 15 percent per year? Haven’t countries grown fast over a period of time despite high inflation? The answer is yes, but perhaps they could have grown faster with low inflation.1 After all, the variability of inflation increases with its level, as does the dispersion of prices from their fundamental value in the economy. This makes price signals more confusing – is the price of my widget                                                 1  In fact, in a seminal paper, Fischer (1993) presents cross-country evidence to show that growth is negatively associated with inflation, and the causality runs from inflation to growth. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  going up because of high demand or because of high generalized inflation? In the former case, I can sell more if I produce more, in the latter case I will be left with unsold inventory. Production and investment therefore become more risky. Moreover, high and variable inflation causes lenders to demand a higher fixed interest rate to compensate for the risk that inflation will move around (the so-called inflation risk premium), thus raising the cost of finance. The long term nominal (and real) interest rates savers require rises, thus making some long-duration projects prohibitively costly. These effects kick in only when inflation is noticeably high. So it is legitimate to ask, “At what threshold level of inflation does it start hurting growth?” Unfortunately, this question is hard to answer – developing countries typically have higher inflation, and developing countries also have higher growth. So one might well find a positive correlation between inflation and growth, though this does not mean more inflation causes more growth. For this reason, the literature on estimating threshold effects beyond which inflation hurts growth is both vast as well as inconclusive. Most studies find that double digit inflation is harmful for growth but are fuzzier about where in the single digits the precise threshold lies.2  The inflation target Nevertheless, given the limited evidence, why do most countries set their inflation goal in the low single digits – 2 to 5 percent rather than 7 to 10 percent? Three reasons come to mind. First, even if inflation is at a moderate level that does not hurt overall growth, the consequences of inflation are not evenly distributed. While higher inflation might help a rich, highly indebted, industrialist because his debt comes down relative to sales revenues, it hurts the poor daily wage worker, whose wage is not indexed to inflation.3 Second, higher inflation is more variable. This raises the chance of breaching any given range around the target if it is set at a higher level. To the extent that a higher target is closer to the threshold, this makes it more likely the country will exceed the threshold and experience lower growth. Third, inflation could feed on itself at higher levels – the higher the target, the more chances of entering regions where inflation spirals upwards. The received wisdom in monetary economics today is therefore that a central bank serves the economy and the cause of growth best by keeping inflation low and stable around the target it is given by the government. This contrasts with the earlier prevailing view in economics that by pumping up demand through dramatic interest rate cuts, the central bank could generate sustained growth, albeit with some inflation. That view proved hopelessly optimistic about the powers of the central bank. There is indeed a short run trade-off between inflation and growth. In layman’s terms, if the central bank cuts the interest rate by 100 basis points today, and banks pass it on, then demand will pick up and we could get stronger growth for a while, especially if economic players are surprised. The stock market may shoot up for a few days. But you can fool all of the people only some of the time. If the economy is producing at potential, we would quickly see shortages and a sharp rise in inflation. People will also start expecting the central bank to disregard inflation (that is, be hopelessly dovish according to the bird analogies that abound) and embed high inflationary expectations into their decisions, including their demand for higher wages. If contrary to expectations, the central bank is committed to keeping inflation under control, it may then be forced to raise interest rates substantially to                                                 2  For example, Bruno and Easterly (1995) suggest 40 percent as a danger point, beyond which increases in inflation are very likely to lead to a growth crisis. In contrast, Khan and Senhadji (2000) estimate that the threshold above which inflation significantly slows growth is 1–3 percent for industrial countries and 7–11 percent for developing countries. 3  According to Easterly and Fischer (2001), “a growing body of literature on balance-but not unanimously-tends to support the view that inflation is a cruel tax”. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  offset that temporary growth. The boom and bust will not be good for the economy, and average growth may be lower than if the cut had not taken place. This is why modern economics also says there is no long run trade-off between growth and inflation – the best way for a central bank to ensure sustainable growth is to keep demand close to potential supply so that inflation remains moderate, and the other factors that drive growth, such as good governance, can take center stage.4  Put differently, when people say “Inflation is low, you can now turn to stimulating growth”, they really do not understand that these are two sides of the same coin. The RBI always sets the policy rate as low as it can, consistent with meeting its inflation objective. Indeed, the fact that inflation is fairly close to the upper bound of our target zone today suggests we have not been overly hawkish, and were wise to disregard advice in the past to cut more deeply. If a critic believes interest rates are excessively high, he either has to argue the government-set inflation target should be higher than it is today, or that the RBI is excessively pessimistic about the path of future inflation. He cannot have it both ways, want lower inflation as well as lower policy rates. At the same time, the RBI does not focus on inflation to the exclusion of growth. If inflation rises sharply, for instance, because of a sharp rise in the price of oil, it would not be sensible for a central bank to bring inflation within its target band immediately by raising interest rates so high as to kill all economic activity. Instead, it makes sense to bring inflation back under control over the medium term, that is, the next two years or so, by raising rates steadily to the point where the bank thinks it would be enough to bring inflation back within the target range. Let me emphasize that this is not a prediction of either the path of oil prices or a forecast of our monetary actions, lest I read in the paper tomorrow “RBI to raise rates”. More generally, the extended glide path over which we are bringing inflation in check appropriately balances inflation and the need for reasonable growth. Arguments against what we are doing There are many who believe we are totally misguided in our actions. Let me focus on four criticisms. First, we focus on the wrong index of inflation. Second, we have killed private investment by keeping rates too high. Somewhat contradictorily, we are also hurting the pensioner by cutting rates too sharply. Third, monetary policy has no effects on inflation when the economy is supply constrained, so we should abandon our attempt to control it. Fourth, the central bank has little control over inflation when government spending dominates (what in the jargon is called “fiscal dominance”). The wrong index Historically, the RBI targeted a variety of indicators, putting a lot of weight on the Wholesale Price Inflation (WPI). Theoretically, reliance on WPI has two problems. First, what the common citizen experiences is retail inflation, that is, Consumer Price Inflation (CPI). Since monetary policy “works” by containing the public’s inflation expectations and thus wage demands, Consumer Price Inflation is what matters. Second, WPI contains a lot of traded manufactured goods and commodity inputs in the basket, whose price is determined internationally. A low WPI could result from low international inflation, while domestic components of inflation such as education and healthcare services as well as retail margins                                                 4  I am being a bit loose here. The short run tradeoff works because economic actors can be surprised by unexpected loosening, and the surprise can have positive growth effects. In the long run, the central bank loses its power to surprise, and the public embeds its correct forecast of how much inflation the central bank will create into all nominal variables such as interest rates. To the extent that high inflation is harmful for growth and welfare, a central bank that continuously tries to give short run positive surprises will entrench long run high inflation, which will be bad for growth. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  and non-traded food are inflating merrily to push up CPI. By focusing on WPI, we could be deluded into thinking we control inflation, even though it stems largely from actions of central banks elsewhere. In doing so we neglect CPI which is what matters to our common man, and is more the consequence of domestic monetary policy. The effective real interest rate, investments, and savings Of course, one reason critics may advocate a focus on WPI is because it is low today, and thus would mean low policy rates. This is short-sighted reasoning for when commodity prices and global inflation picks up, WPI could well exceed CPI. There is, however, a more subtle argument; the real interest rate is the difference between the interest rate a borrower pays and inflation – it is the true cost of borrowing in terms of goods like widgets or dosas. If policy interest rates are set to control CPI, they may be too high for manufacturers who see their product prices appreciating only at the WPI rate. I am sympathetic to the argument, but I also think the concern is overblown. Even if manufacturers do not have much pricing power because of global competition, their commodity suppliers have even less. So a metal producer benefits from the fall in coal and ore prices, even though they may not get as high a realization on metal sales as in the past. The true measure of inflation for them is the inflation in their profits, which is likely significantly greater than suggested by WPI. A second error that is made is to attribute all components of the interest rate paid by the borrower to monetary policy. For heavily indebted borrowers, however, a large component of the interest rate they pay is the credit risk premium banks charge for the risk they may not get repaid. This credit risk premium is largely independent of where the RBI sets its policy rate. So when someone berates us because heavily indebted industrialists borrow at 14% interest with WPI at 0.5%, they make two important errors in saying the real interest rate is 13.5%. First, 7.5% is the credit spread, and would not be significantly lower if we cut the policy rate (at 6.5% today) by another 100 basis points. Second, the inflation that matters to the industrialist is not the 0.5% at which their output prices are inflating, but the 4% at which their profits are inflating (because costs are falling at 5% annually). The real risk free interest rate they experience is 2.5%, a little higher than elsewhere in the world, but not the most significant factor standing in the way of investment. Far more useful in lowering borrowing rates is to improve lending institutions and borrower behavior to bring down the credit risk premium, than to try and push the RBI to lower rates unduly. The policy rate in effect plays a balancing act. As important as real borrowing rates for the manufacturer are real deposit rates for the saver. In the last decade, savers have experienced negative real rates over extended periods as CPI has exceeded deposit interest rates. This means that whatever interest they get has been more than wiped out by the erosion in their principal’s purchasing power due to inflation. Savers intuitively understand this, and had been shifting to investing in real assets like gold and real estate, and away from financial assets like deposits. This meant that India needed to borrow from abroad to fund investment, which led to a growing unsustainable current account deficit. In recent years, our fight against inflation also meant the policy rate came down only when we thought depositors could expect a reasonable positive real return on their financial savings. This has helped increase household financial savings relative to their savings in real assets, and helped bring down the current account deficit. At the same time, I do get a lot of heart-rending letters from pensioners complaining about the cut in deposit rates. The truth is they are better off now than in the past, as I tried to explain in a previous lecture, but I can understand why they are upset when they see their interest income diminishing. The bottom line is that in controlling inflation, monetary policy makers effectively end up balancing the interests of both investors and savers over the business cycle. At one of my talks, an industrialist clamored for a 4% rate on his borrowing. When I asked him if he would deposit at that rate in a safe bank, leave alone invest in one of his risky friends, he said “No!” 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Nevertheless, he insisted on our cutting rates significantly. Unfortunately, policy makers do not have the luxury of inconsistency. Supply constraints Food inflation has contributed significantly to CPI inflation, but so has inflation in services like education and healthcare. Some argue, rightly, that it is hard for RBI to directly control food demand through monetary policy. Then they proceed, incorrectly, to say we should not bother about controlling CPI inflation. The reality is that while it is hard for us to control food demand, especially of essential foods, and only the government can influence food supply through effective management, we can control demand for other, more discretionary, items in the consumption basket through tighter monetary policy. To prevent sustained food inflation from becoming generalized inflation through higher wage increases, we have to reduce inflation in other items. Indeed, overall headline inflation may have stayed below 6 percent recently even in periods of high food inflation, precisely because other components of the CPI basket such as “clothing and footwear” are inflating more slowly. Fiscal dominance Finally, one reason the RBI was historically reluctant to lock itself into an inflation-focused framework is because it feared government over-spending would make its task impossible. The possibility of fiscal dominance, however, only means that given the inflation objective set by the government, both the government and the RBI have a role to play. If the government overspends, the central bank has to compensate with tighter policy to achieve the inflation objective. So long as this is commonly understood, an inflation-focused framework means better coordination between the government and the central bank as they go towards the common goal of macro stability. I certainly believe that the responsible recent budget did create room for the RBI to ease in April. Pragmatic inflation focus As you will understand from all that I have been saying, monetary policy under an inflation focused framework tries to balance various interests as we bring inflation under control. In doing so, we have to have a pragmatic rather than doctrinaire mindset. For example, emerging markets can experience significant capital inflows that can affect exchange rate volatility as well as financial stability. A doctrinaire mindset would adopt a hands-off approach, while the pragmatic mindset would permit intervention to reduce volatility and instability. Nevertheless, the pragmatic mind would also recognize that the best way to obtain exchange rate stability is to bring inflation down to a level commensurate with global inflation. Similarly, while financial stability considerations are not explicitly in the RBI’s objectives, they make their way in because the RBI has to keep growth in mind while controlling inflation. So if the RBI’s monetary policies are contributing to a credit or asset price bubble that could lead to a systemic meltdown and growth collapse, the RBI will have to resort to corrective monetary policy if macro-prudential policy alternatives are likely to prove ineffective. The transition to low inflation The period when a high inflation economy moves to low inflation is never an easy one. After years of high inflation, the public’s expectations of inflation have been slow to adjust downwards. As a result, they have been less willing to adjust their interest expectations downwards. Household financial savings are increasing rapidly as a fraction of overall 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  household savings, but not yet significantly as a fraction of GDP.5 Some frictions in the interest rate setting market do not also help. Even while policy rates are down, the rates paid by the government on small savings are significantly higher than bank deposit rates, as are the effective rates on tax free bonds. I am glad the government has decided to link the rates on small savings to government bond rates, but these rates will continuously have to be examined to ensure they do not form a high floor below which banks cannot cut deposit rates. All in all, bank lending rates have moved down, but not commensurate with policy rate cuts. The wrong thing to do at such times is to change course. As soon as economic policy becomes painful, clever economists always suggest new unorthodox painless pathways. This is not a problem specific to emerging markets, but becomes especially acute since every emerging market thinks it is unique, and the laws of economics operate differently here. In India, at least we have been consistent. Flipping through a book of cartoons by that great economist, RK Laxman, I found one that indicated the solution for every ill in 1997 when the cartoon was published, as now, is for the RBI to cut interest rates by a hundred basis points. Arguments change, but clever solutions do not. Decades of studying macroeconomic policy tells me to be very wary of economists who say you can have it all if only you try something out of the box. Argentina, Brazil, and Venezuela tried unorthodox policies with depressingly orthodox consequences. Rather than experiment with macro-policy, which brings macro risks that our unprotected poor can ill afford, better to be unorthodox on microeconomic policy such as those that define the business and banking environment. Not only do we have less chance of doing damage if we go wrong, but innovative policy may open new paths around old bottlenecks. Specifically, on its part the RBI has been adopting more liberal attitudes towards bank licensing, towards financial inclusion, and towards payment technologies and institutions in order to foster growth. Institution building Let me return to institution building. We had gotten used to decades of moderate to high inflation, with industrialists and governments paying negative real interest rates and the burden of the hidden inflation tax falling on the middle class saver and the poor. What is happening today is truly revolutionary – we are abandoning the ways of the past that benefited the few at the expense of the many. As we move towards embedding institutions that result in sustained low inflation and positive real interest rates, this requires all constituencies to make adjustments. For example, if industrialists want significantly lower rates, they have to support efforts to improve loan recovery so that banks and bond markets feel comfortable with low credit spreads. The central and state governments have to continue on the path of fiscal consolidation so that they borrow less and thus spend less on interest payments. Households will have to adjust to lower nominal rates, but must recognize that higher real rates make their savings more productive. They will find it worthwhile to save more to finance the enormous investment needs of the country. Adjustment is difficult and painful in the short run. We must not get diverted as we build the institutions necessary to secure a low inflation future, especially because we seem to be making headway. The Government has taken the momentous step of both setting a CPI based inflation objective for the RBI as well as a framework for setting up an independent                                                 5  Data from household surveys also suggest that household financial savings are moving up. For example, two recent financial inclusion surveys for selected states in India – Financial Inclusion Insights survey conducted by InterMedia and the FinScope survey implemented by the Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) – suggest that among individuals “who have a bank account”, the fraction who saved through bank deposits increased from 60% in 2013 to 98% in 2015. Of those who “save money”, the fraction saving through a bank increased from 67% in 2013 to 93% in 2015. Of those who “save money”, the fraction “saving at home” has declined dramatically from 90% in 2014 to 6% in 2015. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  monetary policy committee. In the days ahead, a new governor, as well as the members of the committee will be picked. I am sure they will internalize the frameworks and institutions that have been set up, and should produce a low inflation future for India. The rewards will be many. Our currency has been stable as investors have gained confidence in our monetary policy goals, and this stability will only improve as we meet our inflation goals. Foreign capital inflows will be more reliable and increase in the longer maturity buckets, including in rupee investments. This will expand the pool of capital available for our banks and corporations. The government will be able to borrow at low rates, and will be able to extend the maturity of its debt. The poor will not suffer disproportionately due to bouts of sharp inflation, and the middle class will not see its savings eroded. All this awaits us as we stay the course. Thank you very much for your patience in listening to me. References Bruno Michael and William Easterly. 1995. “Inflation Crises and Long-Run Growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 5209 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research). Easterly William and Stanley Fischer. 2001. “Inflation and the Poor.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking. Volume 33, Issue 2. May. 160–178 Fischer Stanley 1993. “The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth”. Journal of Monetary Economics. Volume 32, Issue 3, December 1993, Pages 485–512 Khan, Mohsin S., and Abdelhak S. Senhadji. 2000. “Threshold Effects in the Relationship Between Inflation and Growth,” IMF Working Paper 00/110 (Washington: International Monetary Fund). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Rodrigo Vergara: The Monetary Policy Report and the Financial Stability Report Presentation by Mr Rodrigo Vergara, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, before the Finance Commission of the Honorable Senate of the Republic, Santiago de Chile, 6 June 2016. *      *      * Both the Monetary Policy Report of June 2016 and the Financial Stability Report of the first half of 2016 can be found at http://www.bcentral.cl. Introduction Mr. President of the Senate’s Finance Commission, Senator Andrés Zaldívar, senators members of this Commission, ladies and gentlemen, Thank you for your invitation to present the Central Bank of Chile’s vision on the recent macroeconomic and financial developments, prospects and implications for monetary and financial policy making. This vision is contained in detail in our Monetary Policy Report of June 2016 and our Financial Stability Report of the first half 2016. Over the last few months, the economy evolved in line with estimates in our March Report. Inflation declined to 4.2 percent annually and our new baseline projections – which I will share with you in a moment – indicate that it will return to the tolerance range within a few months. On economic activity, first-quarter GDP growth outperformed our March forecast. However, this year’s outlook foresees that it will remain below potential still for some quarters. The world economy continues to be marked by expectations about the Federal Reserve (Fed)’s decision on the trajectory of its monetary policy normalization, and by the risks coming from the Chinese authorities’ efforts to meet the country’s target growth rates. During most of the quarter, the markets’ assessment of these phenomena resulted in a loosening of financial conditions compared with the beginning of the year. Most recently, however, these trends have been partly reversed. Thus, our new baseline scenario assumes that our trading partners will post similar growth rates to those of 2015, but external lending conditions will be tighter and commodity prices will remain below their long-term levels. In this context, we have held the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 3.5 percent annually and we foresee that, within our forecast horizon, further increases will be necessary. Of course, this will be contingent on incoming information about the projected inflation dynamics. Thus, if new indicators point at higher expected inflation, monetary policy will need to be tightened, and vice-versa. In any case, we have maintained a significantly expansionary monetary stance, which will remain so in the scenario we believe to be the most likely. Let me share with you the workings of our baseline scenario and the main risks we perceive, which are depicted in the Reports I am presenting now. Macroeconomic scenario As I said before, in recent months both headline (CPI) and core (CPIEFE) inflation have behaved as expected. By components of the CPIEFE, goods inflation began showing a more moderate expansion, with y-o-y variation going from nearly 5 percent at the end of 2015 to 4.4 percent in the latest figure. This responds largely to the fact that, despite important fluctuations, the exchange rate has not shown a comparable increase to the one between mid- 2013 and third-quarter 2015. CPIEFE services inflation has also slowed, but is still near 5 percent annually, reflecting past-inflation indexation and the effects of the depreciation. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Plus, gaps are still narrow and the labor market – despite a somewhat faster deterioration lately – still shows low unemployment rates and strong growth in nominal wages (figure 1). So, in our most likely scenario, annual CPI inflation will enter the tolerance range in the third quarter of this year and will approach 3 percent during the first half of 2017 (figure 2). This projection uses as a working assumption that the real exchange rate (RER) will hover around its current values throughout the projection horizon. Bear in mind that the RER has risen a little since the cutoff date of the last Report, to near 97 (index, 1986=100) (figure 3). The convergence of inflation is also linked to output gaps that are forecast to widen in the near future and with the labor market adjusting further during the year, especially helping drive a reduction – albeit moderate – of services inflation. Regarding output, first-quarter GDP and demand growth figures exceeded March expectations, influenced by improved figures in agriculture and, somewhat less, mining. Overall, our growth outlook is essentially unchanged. We expect the economy to continue to grow below potential for some quarters, due mainly to poor performance of those sectors with closer links with investment. Anyway, it is worth noting that retail trade and personal services have proven more resilient, reflecting a more gradual adjustment on the consumption side. The baseline scenario of this Report sees GDP growing between 1.25 and 2.0 percent this year and between 2 and 3 percent in 2017. This estimate is based on the assumption that the economy will resume near-potential growth towards the end of the projection horizon. Finally, it uses as a working assumption that public expenditure will follow a trajectory consistent with the fiscal rule and the Administration’s announced budgetary consolidation path. The process of growth normalization will be slow. Of particular concern is the behavior of investment, which the baseline scenario estimates will drop for the third year in a row. Indeed, this year several indicators, among which the survey of the Capital Goods Corporation, the levels of imports of capital goods and business confidence, anticipate a further drop in investment. Moreover, the housing sector will have a limited performance after being highly dynamic in 2015, and public investment will follow a trajectory consistent with the objectives of fiscal consolidation. However, towards 2017 non-mining investment should restart growing at a pace matching the recovery of the overall economy (figure 4). About the current account, we believe that this year’s deficit will be smaller than we thought in March and will show no big changes in 2017. In particular, the trade balance outperformed the March forecast in the first quarter, driven mainly by volume exports of goods, especially copper, and tourism-related services. Furthermore, a slowdown in capital goods imports is expected because of adjustments in investment. In addition, there are generally upward revisions to non-copper export prices. Consumption, meanwhile, continues to grow at around 2 percent. Details of the domestic economy’s baseline scenario are shown in table 1. In this context, we foresee further adjustments in the labor market in the coming quarters. Lately, annual growth in salaried employment slowed down significantly, to 0.5 percent in the last moving quarter. The national unemployment rate has adjusted more gradually, thanks to increased self-employment, so it is still low by historic patterns (figure 5). By regions, in the north of the country unemployment has risen more sharply than in other areas. Firms interviewed for May’s Business Perception Report – a quarterly publication of the Bank – reveal increased labor availability together with lower wage claims. Looking into the March survey of the University of Chile, we also see an increase in the unemployment rate in Greater Santiago, to 9.4 percent, confirming the weakening of the labor market. The evolution of employment and real wages, which have slowed down in annual terms in the last year, implies slower growth in the wage mass. This, coupled with still low household expectations, is consistent with positive, yet moderate, growth in consumption (figure 6). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Turning to the world economy, as I said, international financial markets have been marked by two situations. One, the US monetary policy normalization process, and two, the Chinese policy makers’ efforts to achieve their growth and financial stability objectives. Early in the quarter the market assumed that the Fed would take things extremely gradually and that the Chinese authorities had figured out the policy mix that would allow them to keep growth in line with its objectives. Thus, the calm of financial markets that had begun at the close of the last Report was prolonged. Capital flows returned to the emerging world, stock markets recovered, interest rates dropped and so did spreads, the dollar weakened and commodity prices improved. Nonetheless, the increasing doubts about the Chinese financial system and the perception that the US monetary policy will soon implement its adjustments – a still uncertain development – have tended to reverse these trajectories in recent weeks. This has been particularly visible in the depreciation of emerging currencies (figure 7). Consistently with the volatility we have been seeing and the risks inherent to the international economy, our baseline scenario assumes that in the coming quarters international financial conditions will be, on average, less favorable than they were in the past two months. Our growth outlook for the world economy and our trading partners changes little from March: 3.2 and 3.0 percent, respectively, for the 2016–2017 average. Still, there is a significant revision to expected US growth: 1.9 percent in 2016 (2.3 percent in March). This estimate inputs the low output figure of the first quarter, which has to do both with the drop in energy investment and the weak external sector. In any case, aside from one-time data, services and labor indicators show a recovering trend and the baseline scenario foresees the economy resuming higher growth in 2017. It also estimates that the Chinese economy will be able to carry on with its adjustment process without seriously compromising its growth rates. But this process will not be free of difficulties. The terms of trade will drop again in 2016, although not as sharply as we assumed in the last Report, owing mainly to the evolution of non-copper export prices. Considering its trajectory of the past few months, the baseline scenario assumes that the copper price will average US$2.15 and US$2.25 per pound in 2016 and 2017, respectively. For oil, our forecast for the same two years is raised to US$45 and US$52 per barrel the Brent-WTI average (table 2). About monetary policy, the baseline scenario just described uses as a working assumption that the MPR will follow a trajectory that is similar to the one that can be deduced from the financial asset prices at the statistical closing of this Report (figure 8). This means that monetary policy will advance in its normalization throughout the policy horizon, in line with the assumed economic outlook at that horizon, only a little more slowly than we thought in March. Under this assumption, monetary policy will continue to provide a boost to the economy. It is important to stress that monetary policy has kept a very expansionary stance, helping the economy to weather the changes in macroeconomic conditions as best it can. In this way it has succeeded in accommodating a significant depreciation of the peso and inflationary consequences without jeopardizing our monetary policy’s medium-term anchor: inflation expectations two years out. Unlike other economies, we have been able to sustain an expansionary monetary policy without driving inflation expectations away from the target (figure 9). This expansionary monetary policy is most notorious in market interest rates. On one hand, Chile’s long-term rates are low by historic standards and also in a cross-country comparison. The same is true for lending rates, which are now below their historic averages and, in the case of mortgage loans, even at or near record lows (figure 10). Risk scenarios As usual, the implementation of monetary policy will respond to incoming information about the projected inflation dynamics. Therefore, developments pushing in either direction will prompt the necessary adjustments in monetary policy. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  In the world economy, risks are pretty much the same we identified in the March Report. Still critical is the trajectory that the Fed will choose to follow to advance in its monetary policy normalization process. In particular, because market expectations are still misaligned with the most likely scenario defined by the Fed itself, especially at longer horizons. The situation in China poses a risk because of its possible impact on world growth, and because it might trigger new episodes of financial volatility. Latin America also poses significant risks to Chile, both because it is a major trading partner and investment destination, and because of its effects on the external financial conditions facing us. Its macroeconomic challenges are compounded by complex political situations. In Brazil, the markets took the changes in the political scene well, but there are important adjustments pending. Argentina returned to international financial markets, but it also faces significant challenges. There are several other factors that could cause new or intensify ongoing episodes of financial volatility, including the UK referendum to define whether it stays in or leaves the European Union, and a number of electoral processes under way around the world that could cause a shift towards protectionism. However, the consolidation of economic growth in Europe and the United States could contribute to boost world activity. The possibility of the oil price’s upward trend continuing or steepening is another risk to the baseline scenario, because of both its direct impact on local and world inflation, and its implications on global growth. But there are also reasons for this price to recede to its levels of earlier months. Actually, inventories are historically high. At home, although inflation has diminished as expected, its high level for many quarters already is still an important risk in the baseline scenario. In the short term, its evolution is still closely tied to the exchange rate and therefore to the risks coming from abroad. For activity, the risks outlined in previous quarters persist. Confidence remains pessimistic and the Chilean economy is receiving a milder impulse from the world economy than it did in earlier years. The recent evolution of the labor market stands out. If it deteriorates more sharply or if the world economy acquires a more adverse configuration, this might result in lower GDP growth than forecast. Conversely, if the labor market makes smaller adjustments and/or the external economy remains fairly calm, output may perform better than expected. This could translate into stronger consumption growth or more favorable investment, or both. Upon assessing these risks, we estimate that the risk balance is unbiased for both output and inflation. To sum up, the macroeconomic scenario is, broadly speaking, the same as March’s. Inflation will return to the target range in the coming months and output will continue to post bounded growth. Investment, however, will be worse than we expected before. The external scenario continues to present risks and new volatility episodes will probably occur in the financial markets. Now let me turn to our Financial Stability Report (IEF). Financial Stability Report Our Financial Stability Report is released in June and December of each year, containing recent macroeconomic and financial developments that might affect the Chilean economy’s financial stability. This Report’s external scenario includes the same risks I just described when examining the Monetary Policy Report, particularly with respect to the US monetary policy and the evolution of the Chinese economy. In the Financial Stability Report we also present the Brexit-related risks, as well as the difficulties of European banks to resolve their non-performing portfolio problems – legacy of the global financial crisis – in a scenario of weaker world growth estimates and the global banking industry adapting to new regulatory standards. Most 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  recently, this scenario has become more complex because of banks’ profitability being threatened by low interest rates. Another risk we need to monitor in the coming months has to do with the prices of commodities and their possible impact on the countries exporting them. Although lately these prices have tended to stabilize, they are still lower than they were only a few years back and might endanger the fiscal revenues of some economies. In this context, various risk-rating agencies have downgraded the sovereign ratings of oil exporting countries, and further revisions for other commodity exporters – Chile included – cannot be ruled out. Our rating being unchanged is certainly good news, but let’s not forget that this is a dynamic process and we must never let go. The risk exists and it is up to our own policies to mitigate it. On the domestic front, as I just said, local interest rates are low from a historical perspective, reflecting monetary policy and external financial conditions. Thus, the downsloping trend of long-term rates continues to encourage investment in medium- and long-term mutual funds, which have reached high stock volumes. Accordingly, a significant increase in long-term interest rates poses the risk of these agents becoming a magnifying channel if they react by hastily selling off the assets in their portfolios. As for the financial situation of companies, diverse indicators confirm the weakening described in previous Reports. As of the first quarter of this year, the debt-to-GDP ratio remained near 120 percent, which is relatively high compared to other emerging economies, although at the margin it has stabilized and even declined a little (figure 11). The financial indicators of companies reporting to the Superintendency of Securities and Insurance (SVS) presented no big changes at the close of 2015. However, by historical patterns, the debt level is high and profits are low. Still, exchange rate mismatch indicators continue to show a limited exchange rate risk (figure 12). The real-estate sector is adjusting after being very dynamic in 2015. New house sales in Santiago fell sharply in the first quarter of 2016, largely due to advanced purchases last year (figure 13). A substantial part of the sales of last year were accounted for by promised purchases of unfinished units, scheduled for delivery mainly this and next year. In this sense, one risk for real-estate companies stems from such promises not being honored if the economic outlook worsens. Finally, the vacancy rate in the office-space sector is around 10 percent, while rental prices showed a slight reduction at the end of 2015. In this context, the new house price index for Santiago as estimated by the Chilean Chamber of Construction rose 6.8 percent in real annual terms in the first quarter of 2016, slightly less than the 7.2 percent it showed in the third quarter of 2015. Meanwhile, in the third quarter of last year, the house price index for both new and used units calculated at the Bank rose by 9.4 and 9.7 percent in real terms nationwide and in the Santiago Metropolitan Region, respectively (figure 14). About households, aggregate borrowing – the debt to income ratio, RDI – continues to rise, in a context of weaker output and employment. The RDI reached 63 percent at the close of 2015, largely explained by an increased share of mortgage debt, which continues to expand at a real annual rate of nearly 10 percent. The aggregate financial burden stands at 15 percent of the sector’s disposable income (figure 15). Although non-performing indicators for bank consumer credits remain low, lately there has been some increase in the case of smaller amount loans. Here the risk arises of a more drastic deterioration of the labor market that could hinder the households’ repayment capacity. Any developments on this front will need to be closely monitored over the coming quarters. As for the banks’ lending activity, it is evolving in line with the state of the business cycle. Real growth in commercial loans is in line with lower demand for credit by firms, consistently 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  with the reduction in investment and the results of our Bank Lending Survey. Consumer credit growth recovered slightly and mortgage loans are still growing strongly, around 10 percent in real annual terms. Thus, the real annual growth rate of total banking credit is around 5 percent. At the same time, aggregate default indicators are stable, despite some deterioration in commercial loans. As we pointed out in the last Financial Stability Report, our banking system’s capitalization levels have decreased in recent years. At the closing of 2015, the capital adequacy ratio (CAR) was 12.6 percent. Although the announced capitalizations and accounting changes will push this indicator slightly above 13 percent, a declining dynamic has been observed in the past five years. This contrasts with the international trend, where banks have increased capitalization in several jurisdictions. Thus, in an OECD comparison, Chile is in the lower part of this ratio’s distribution (figure 16). Although the current capital levels are sufficient to absorb a possible severe stress scenario, gaps have narrowed. While every bank’s CAR exceeds the 8-percent regulatory minimum in the stress scenario, the share of banks having a CAR above 10 percent in such a scenario has dropped in recent years, to less than half the system’s assets in the latest test (figure 17). Let me conclude with some final thoughts. Concluding thoughts In the past several months the macroeconomic scenario has brought no big surprises, but that does not mean that challenges have been absent. Inflation has dropped in line with expectations, but remains above the tolerance range. Our projections indicate that in a few more months it will return to that range to then decline towards the 3-percent target. If this is so, we will have ended quite a long period during which inflation was at or above 4 percent and monetary policy-making has been particularly complex, as we have had to deal with a significant depreciation of our currency and the ensuing rise in prices, aside from the economic slowdown. Still we have been able to keep inflation expectations over the projection horizon well anchored to the 3-percent target. In the short term, there are obvious inflationary risks, which could again push back this convergence. As we have said time and again, the short-term evolution of the exchange rate is a very important determinant of the behavior of inflation, and therefore short-term inflation will be affected if some of the external risks we have identified in our Reports come true, namely: a trajectory for the fed funds rate well above what the market expects and a sharper deceleration of the Chinese economy which would hit the copper price. The medium-term impact of these events is harder to predict, and will depend on both the persistence of exchange rate movements and their effects on output. The medium-term effects are, no doubt about it, more important for monetary policy, because our policy framework defines short-term inflation deviations as tolerable, as long as projected inflation two years out does not depart from the 3-percent target. This approach is what allows us to keep inflation expectations well anchored while applying a counter-cyclical policy stance in situations like the present one. Not denying the importance of this, I must say that the greatest challenge facing our economy is growth. In our baseline scenario, 2017 will be the fourth year in a row with annual growth around 2 percent, which is far from satisfactory. However, our scenario also assumes that towards the end of next year the country will be approaching potential growth, which we estimate between 3 and 3.5 percent. This growth trajectory leans on three fundamental premises: First, the impulse we are receiving from abroad, although milder than we could have foreseen some years back, is not particularly low. Of course we would rather live in a world of higher copper prices and two-digit growth in China. But in hindsight, that was clearly 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  unsustainable in time. Nevertheless, the world growth figures we see today and project for the next two years, do not differ much from what we saw in 2015. The terms of trade should tend to stabilize towards 2017 and external financial conditions are good by historic patterns. Surely we face risks, but don’t we always. Second, from a macroeconomic standpoint, our economy is well balanced. The external accounts are in good order, our fiscal policy is sound, inflation expectations remain well anchored and, beyond the importance of mitigating the risks identified in the Financial Stability Report, local financial markets are well equipped to contribute to that recovery. The third premise is the return of confidence. On this point let me digress. It is not a good sign for a goal of 3.5 percent growth to seem so elusive. Just a couple of years ago we believed that growth between 4.5 and 5 percent was possible. After all, in the last thirty years, the Chilean economy grew by an average of 5.2 percent annually. Certainly many things have happened in the last thirty years that can explain this. On one hand, there is the so-called “convergence” in economic growth. I mean, countries with a higher per-capita income grow less on average than poorer countries, because the richer ones have more capital and are closer to the technological frontier, so they find it harder to sustain high growth rates. Therefore, it is only natural for a country that has achieved the level of development Chile has to grow at a slower pace than it did three decades ago. On the other hand are some more specific elements, like the end of the boom in commodity prices and mining investment. Also that the world is no longer what it was during that boom, and us being a small, open economy are touched by that. All of it affects and is consistent with our vision of lowering our trend growth to 3.5 percent. But, why are we having such trouble in achieving that level of growth? There are two – related – essential elements behind, where we are in debt: investment and productivity. If we cannot ensure stronger growth in investment, our projections of economic recovery will hardly be met and the labor market will deteriorate further. Obviously capital is a major production factor which by itself has significant effects. But not only that, investment is critical for us to be able to achieve productivity growth rates of close to 1 percent in our non-mining sectors, an essential element in our trend growth forecast. Without investment, technology becomes gradually obsolete and, very importantly, the kind of shock that has hit the Chilean economy in recent years requires us to reallocate resources from sectors that were very attractive in the past to others that must now pull the growth wagon, especially non-traditional exports. But this reallocation, which according to our research is an important source of productivity growth, can only be achieved if at the same time there is investment in these new sectors. Thus, both factors are clearly related to each other. The question we must all ask ourselves is, if we have done enough to promote these factors. I believe that the productivity agenda that was agreed on by different agents is a good starting point that must be deepened and carried forward. But we must also bear in mind that the loss in confidence affecting the country today, beyond specific causes, puts a brake to investment. Remember, our baseline scenario assumes that confidence will recover. As for monetary policy, it has done its bit, interest rates are today among the lowest ever and will remain expansionary throughout the projection horizon. Monetary policy can help smooth the business cycle and that has been our task, successfully I may add. However, the sources of countries’ long-term growth are in other areas of the economy that are clearly beyond the reach of monetary policy. It is important for us to understand, agree on and implement whatever is needed to take the leap towards being a more just developed country. We must not forget that our region has had failed experiences before. Countries that had all the conditions to become developed didn’t make it, and froze their economies exactly at that crucial moment. Today Chile is in a 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  state of anticipation. It is our duty to succeed and take the leap that is pending. On the part of the Central Bank, with monetary policy and our role as financial regulator, we will continue to work towards achieving the objectives we have been entrusted: to safeguard price stability and the normal functioning of internal and external payments. Thank you.  Figure 1Inflation indicators (*)(annual change, percent)Sources: Central Bank of Chile and National Statistics Institute (INE).(*)AsfromJanuary2014,thenewindexeswithannualbase2013=100areused,sothey are not strictly comparable with earlier numbers.CPICPIEFEGoods EFEServices EFE-6-4-202468-6-4-202468111213141516
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9        Figure 2(*) Gray area, as from second quarter of 2016, shows forecast.Sources: Central Bank of Chile and National Statistics Institute (INE).(annual change, percent)(annual change, percent)CPI inflation (*)CPIEFE inflation (*)012345601234561112131415161718June'16 Report012345601234561112131415161718March'16 ReportFigure 3Real exchange rate(index, 1986=100)Source: Central Bank of Chile.70809010011012070809010011012089929598010407101316RER1996-2015 avg2001-2015 avg
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches      Figure 4Real annual contribution to GFCF (*)(percentage points)(*)2015mininginvestmentisetimatedusinginformationfromlistedcompanies(FECU).HousinginvestmentusesdatafromtheChileanChamberofConstructionandNationalAccountsbyinstitutionalsector.Otherinvestmentcalculatedresidually.For2016,forecastingmodelsoftheCentral Bank and other sectoral sources are used, such as the Capital Goods Corporation's surveys and investment plans. (e) Estimate. (f) Forecast.Source: Central Bank of Chile.-16-12-8-40481216-16-12-8-4048121609101112131415 (e)16 (f)17 (f)HousingOtherMiningNon-mining-16-12-8-40481216-16-12-8-4048121609101112131415 (e)16 (f)17 (f)Table 1Domestic scenario(annual change, percent)201420152016 (f)2017 (f)Mar'16ReportJun'16ReportMar'16ReportJun'16ReportGDP1.92.11.25-2.251.25-2.02.0-3.02.0-3.0National income2.11.11.10.82.92.2Domestic demand-0.31.81.51.02.62.4Domestic demand (w/o inventory change)1.11.31.51.12.32.1       Gross fixed capital formation-4.2-1.50.5-2.41.00.9       Total consumption2.82.21.82.12.72.4Goods and services exports1.1-1.90.61.32.42.1Goods and services imports-5.7-2.8-0.6-1.62.12.2Current account (% of GDP)-1.3-2.1-2.5-2.2-2.0-2.1Gross national savings (% of GDP)20.920.419.919.520.219.5Nominal gross fixed capital formation (% of GDP)23.022.722.622.022.121.6(f) Forecast.Source: Central Bank of Chile.
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11      Figure 5Labor market(percent)Source: National Statistics Institute (INE).0246802468111213141516Salaried employment(y/y)UnemploymentrateFigure 6Contribution to annual growth in real wage mass (*)(percentage points)(*) Moving quarterly average.Sources: Central Bank of Chile and National Statistics Institute (INE).-30369-303690910111213141516WagesReal wage massEmployment
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches       Figure 7Sources: Central Bank of Chile, Bloomberg and Emerging Portfolio Fund Research.Net capital flows  (1)(accumulated change since May 2013 trough, percent)(billions of dollars, moving month)(1)LatinAmerica:Brazil,Chile,Colombia,MexicoandPeru;Asia:KoreanRep.,Indonesia,MalaysiaandThailand;Europe:CzechRep.,Hungary,Poland,RussiaandTurkey.(2)DottedverticallineshowsMarch2016MonetaryPolicyReport2016.(3)IncludesBrazil,Colombia,MexicoandPeru.(4)IncludesBrazil,Colombia,CzechRep.,KoreanRep.,Israel,Mexico,Philippines,Polandand Turkey. (5) Includes Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa. (6) WEO's April 2016 weights.Nominal exchange rate (2)-40-30-20-100102030-40-30-20-10010203013141516Latin AmericaAsiaEurope02040608010002040608010005.1305.1405.1505.16ChileComparablecurrencies (4) (6)Commoditycurrencies(5) (6)Latin America (3) (6)May.13         May.14May.15     May.16Table 2International baseline scenario assumptions20142015 (e)2016 (f)2017 (f)Mar'16ReportJun'16ReportMar'16ReportJun'16ReportMar'16ReportJun'16ReportTerms of trade-1.8-4.5-4.5-4.2-3.90.70.1Trading partners' GDP3.42.93.02.92.83.13.2World GDP at PPP3.43.13.13.13.03.33.4World GDP at market exchange rates2.72.42.42.42.32.72.7Developed ec's GDP at PPP1.71.91.91.81.71.91.9Emerging ec's GDP at PPP4.84.04.14.04.14.54.6United States2.42.42.42.31.92.42.3China7.36.96.96.46.56.16.2Eurozone0.91.51.61.51.51.61.6Latin America (excl. Chile)1.1-0.7-0.5-0.9-1.01.31.5External prices (in US$)-0.9-9.7-9.8-5.8-3.81.00.6LME copper price BML (US$ cents/lb)311249249220215230225WTI oil price (US$/barrel) 93494940454551Brent oil price (US$/barrel) 99525241454652Gasoline parity price (US$/m3)731467467398401420420Libor US$ (nominal, 90 days)0.20.30.30.70.91.51.6(e) Estimate. (f) Forecast.Source: Central Bank of Chile.
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 13       Figure 8MPR and expectations(percent)Source: Central Bank of Chile.(*) Built using interest rates on swap contracts up to 10 years.23456234561112131415161718MPREESFBSFinancialasset prices in June 2016 Report (*)Financial asset prices in March 2016 Report (*)Figure 9Sources: Central banks of Chile and respective countries.Nominal MPRTwo-year-ahead inflation's deviation from target (*)(percent)(percentage points)(*)Differencebetweentargetinflationandinflationexpectedfor2017(Peru),December2017(Mexico)andtwoyearsout(Chile and Colombia).-0,20,00,20,40,60,81,01,2-0,20,00,20,40,60,81,01,215Apr.Jul.Oct.16Apr.2468246813141516PeruColombiaMexicoChile
   14 BIS central bankers’ speeches       Figure 10Sources: Central Bank of Chile and Bloomberg.Nominal rates on 10-yr government bondsChile: Interest rates by type of loan (2) (percent)(index, 2006-2016=100)(1) Considers Central Bank and Treasury bonds. (2) Weighted average rates of all operations performed each month. 369121518369121518141516Brazil Mexico50751001251501755075100125150175060810121416HousingCommercialConsumerChile (1)ColombiaPerúFigure 11Total debt of non-banking enterprises (*)(percent of GDP)Source: Central Bank of Chile based on Achef, SBIF and SVS data.(*)Basedonfirm-levelinformationwiththeexceptionsoffactoringandleasing,securitizedbondsandcommercialpapers.Preliminary estimate for March 2016.025507510012502550751001250910111213141516DomesticExternal
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 15       Figure 12Currency mismatch (1) (2) (3)(percent of total assets)Source: Central Bank of Chile based on SVS data. (1)Mismatchiscalculatedasdollarliabilitiesminusdollarassetsminusnetderivativesposition,overtotalassets.(2)Annualdataupto2006;fromthenonwards,quarterlydata.(3)State-run,miningandfinancialfirmsnotconsidered.Firmsusingaccountingbooksindollarsareexcluded.(4)Averageexchangerateforthelastmonthofthequarter(oryear)onsecondaryaxis.400450500550600650700750800-4-20246810120104070809101112131415Mismatch (SVS)Exchange rate (right axis)(4)14      15      III.15          Figure 13New housing sales in Santiago(thousands of units)Source: Chilean Chamber of Construction.0246810121402468101214010203040506070809 10 11 12 13 141516TurnkeyOther
   16 BIS central bankers’ speeches       Figure 14Housing prices(index, base 2008 avg =100)Sources: Central Bank of Chile (BCCh) and Chilean Chamber of Construction (CChC).040801201602000408012016020004050607080910111213141516Previous FS ReportBCChBCChRMCChCFigure 15Household indebtedness (RDI) and financial burden (RCI)(percent of disposable income)Source: Central Bank of Chile based on SBIF, SuSeSo and SVS data.1015202530304050607006070809101112131415RCI (right axis)RDI
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 17       Figure 16Cross-country comparison of capital adequacy indexes (1)(2)(3)(percent)(3) Maximum means 90th percentile.Source: Central Bank of Chile based on SBIF and IMF data.(1) Effective equity over risk-weighted assets. 2016 figure uses effective capital increases in 2016 for Chile, ceteris paribus, plus the effect of the CCF reduction CCF (20bp).(2) Korean Rep. and Iceland with last available data for 2014. 5 10 15 20 255101520250910111213141516Median25th and 75th percentilesChileMín-MaxFigure 17Banks with CAR equal to or higher than 10% under stress scenario (*)(percent of system's assets)Source: Central Bank of Chile based on SBIF data.(*) Six-month figures. Results of stress tests presented in Financial Stability Reports. 020406080100020406080100111213141516
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Yves Mersch: Monetary policy in the euro area – scope, principles and limits Keynote speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the Natixis Meeting of Chief Economists, Paris, 23 June 2016. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, The past few years, not to speak of present days, have been challenging ones for central banks worldwide, and the euro area has been no exception. The ECB’s monetary policy decisions have come under greater scrutiny than ever before. Some commentators have argued that the ECB does not have sufficient tools to counter deflationary pressures in the euro area. Others contend that by using a wider range of instruments than in normal times, the ECB has exceeded its remit. Neither view is correct. Our Statute allows us to use a wide range of tools to meet our mandate, and those tools are sufficient for that purpose. But it is correct that there are limits on how far monetary policy can go. The ECB cannot, will not, and need not exceed these limits. Our framework requires that unconventional tools are used for no longer than necessary, and no more intensively than necessary. Within these limits we independently decide on how best to comply with our price stability mandate. Today, all major central banks have clear price stability mandates and can discharge them with a large measure of independence. In the ECB’s case, our price stability mandate is enshrined in the Treaty,1 and we have been given “instrument” independence in how we carry it out. We cannot decide whether we achieve our objective – we have to obey the law – but we can decide how we do so. This position has been confirmed by the European Court of Justice, which ruled that the ECB can deploy any available instrument which is explicitly mentioned in the Statute to ensure price stability. But the discretion we have over how we use our instruments, though wide, is not unlimited “whatever it takes” is qualified by “within our mandate”. Independence must not be confused with arbitrariness. The Treaties also set out a number of restrictions and principles that guide our monetary policy. There are three in particular that stand out. First is the prohibition on monetary financing laid down in Article 123, which prevents the central bank from taking actions which would directly finance government spending. We are prohibited from monetary financing for good reasons. If a central bank systematically finances government budgets, it can fall prey to so-called “fiscal dominance” and fail its price stability mandate. That is because, when inflation starts to rise, the central bank is in a lose-lose situation: it can either continue financing the deficit and risk overshooting its objective, or it can refuse to finance the deficit and risk a deflationary government default. But if the central bank is ex ante forbidden by law from monetary financing, the incentives are stronger for governments to run sound fiscal policies in the first place – and the independence of the central bank is preserved. “Monetary dominance” prevails over “fiscal dominance”. Fiscal soundness is an essential feature of a monetary union with a single monetary policy and national fiscal policies are necessary even if we were to achieve a fiscal union. What is more – and this is specific to the euro area – monetary financing could imply a redistribution of wealth among Member States, thus undermining the spirit of the “no bailout                                                 1  Article 127.1, Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  clause” (Art. 125 TFEU). If the central bank were to facilitate a regime of unsound fiscal policies and inflationary government deficits, it would inevitably expose itself to losses – either real losses through the inflation tax, or nominal losses through a reduction in the principal amounts it was owed. That would be tantamount to deliberate fiscal redistribution between different sets of taxpayers via the central bank’s balance sheet, which is not permissible in a monetary union that is not a fiscal union. In other words, the prohibition of monetary financing is the monetary counterpart of the “no bailout clause”. Second are the principles of judicial control: principle of conferral and principle of proportionality laid down in Article 5, which requires that our actions are limited to what is essential to achieve the objectives of the Treaties. Specifically, this means that our measures need to be suitable, necessary and proportionate stricto sensu.2  For an instrument to be suitable, it needs to be able to address the respective risk to price stability. For an instrument to be necessary, we must lack a viable alternative instrument. For an instrument to be proportionate stricto sensu, its expected benefits should outweigh its costs. Third is the requirement to act according to the principle of an open market economy favouring an efficient allocation of resources.3 All monetary policy measures have allocative and distributive effects. Cutting interest rates, for example, has a redistributive impact on savers and borrowers, since it encourages borrowing and discourages saving. Moreover, in certain situations – for instance a panic-induced freeze in interbank markets – central bank intermediation may be critical to restore market functioning and support an efficient allocation of resources. But this must always be embedded in the understanding, which underpins the Treaty, that general markets distribute resources more efficiently than public authorities, and hence central bank actions should not blunt price signals or overwhelm market forces. Indeed, central banks should be marginal actors, steering marginal decisions, not resource allocation mechanisms. That has to be reflected in the design and implementation of our monetary policy tools. In the pre-crisis period, when we used conventional measures, i.e. interest rate policy, nobody had doubts that it was straightforward for us to respect these three operating principles set out in the Treaty: • By mainly implementing our policy through refinancing operations with commercial banks, we were not accused of monetary financing. • Our track record shows that raising and lowering rates was effective to maintain price stability. • And though all monetary policy, including interest rate policy, has allocative and distributive effects, those effects were contained and predictable. Our recent monetary policy measures respect the law Since the onset of the crisis, however, we have had to adopt new, unconventional tools to fulfil our mandate – and this has naturally brought the question of the scope and limits of monetary policy more to the fore. Clearly, restricting ourselves only to the instruments used in normal times would have been a breach of our mandate. It could have had disastrous consequences for the euro area economy, and threatened our ability to achieve price stability. But that does not imply the reverse – i.e. that every conceivable tool would have been justified.                                                 2  Article 5 (4), Treaty on European Union. 3  Article 127.1, TFEU. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  In line with our mandate, we have used a broad range of our instrument independence to confront downside risks to inflation and achieve price stability. But equally, we have deployed only tools that are in line with our legal framework. And that has been possible because we have specifically designed our instruments so as not to exceed the three limits I outlined. Take our asset purchase programme (APP) – which includes both public and private sector bonds – as an example. First, the APP respects the prohibition on monetary financing, since we have placed a number of safeguards on our interventions. We do not buy government bonds in the primary market, which is explicitly forbidden under Article 123. And neither do we act in the secondary market in a way which could be perceived as equivalent to acting in the primary market. The Eurosystem has put in place a blackout period, and so does not buy in periods around the date of a new issuance. Purchases are also subject to an issue share limit and an issuer limit. These limits ensure that we would not constitute a blocking minority for collective action clauses if such clauses were ever triggered. The European Court of Justice explicitly highlighted these limits when deciding upon the lawfulness of our actions. Second, it is proportionate, in the sense that it is both necessary and suitable to secure our price stability objective. As short-term interest rates move closer to their effective lower bound, it inevitably becomes harder for central banks to steer the economy by means of conventional policy. So if inflation is too low for too long – as is the risk in the euro area today – other tools become necessary. Two years ago, the Governing Council introduced several non-standard measures to unclog the transmission mechanism and avoid a credit crunch. We coined these measures “credit easing package”. In January last year, we finally opted for large-scale asset purchases when faced with a period of weak growth, when already low inflation rates were falling further and we saw risks of inflation expectations destabilising. Like our previous measures, these purchases belong to the category of credit easing. To fulfil our mandate we need to make use of all instruments at our disposal. The APP is a suitable tool because it acts directly on financing costs in the real economy. Rather than attempting to boost the economy only through the short end of the curve, it directly lowers yields at longer maturities, decreasing them by compressing the term premium, which in turn influences the cost of credit for firms and households. Third, we have designed the programme to limit distortions in relative prices which might have unwanted allocative and distributional consequences. With our government bond purchases we “mirror the market”, which means that our interventions are spread across issuers from the various euro area countries on the basis of the ECB’s capital key. Together with the issuer limits, this ensures breathing space within and across markets for efficient price discovery. Indeed, even though yields are very low for certain sovereign issuers, issuers have been able to place new securities in the market in large volumes, which suggests that liquidity has not been materially affected by our actions. Thus the most difficult part of our programme is our corporate bond purchases, since they extend into less liquid markets and increase the risk of distortions in relative prices – in particular between larger and smaller firms. But our activities cannot be evaluated in separation; they must be judged in a holistic manner. Indeed, up to now the decline in bank lending rates for small loans to euro area companies – which are mainly for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) – has been stronger than for large loans to bigger companies. This suggests that bank lending conditions have improved disproportionately for euro area SMEs since the announcement of our credit easing measures two years ago. As a result, fewer SMEs are reporting that credit has been a limiting factor for their businesses. This should only continue as our measures are fully rolled out and reach their maximum 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  impact. In other words, the APP, coupled with our other credit easing measures, has reduced distortions caused by market fragmentation in the euro area. Still, we know that the longer unconventional policy lasts, the greater the risk of distortions appearing and diminishing its effectiveness over time. The principle of proportionality also implies that we should only use such measures for as short a time as is necessary to fulfil our mandate. That is why, when the economy improves and inflation returns to our objective, we will have to reassess, adjust and ultimately phase out our purchase programmes and other non-standard measures. But the surest way to reach that point is to stay true to the course we are on now. If we were to change speed or direction too soon, it would only set back the recovery of inflation and delay the day that interest rate normalisation can happen. We will decide upon this in full independence, in the interests of price stability, impervious to the wishes of any interest group with any partial agenda. Other policies can support the speed with which inflation returns to 2% Can other policies help in this endeavour? In the inflationary days of the 1970s, some central bankers were so hesitant about the scope of their responsibility that they let price stability depend on others. For example, in the late 1970s the then Fed Chairman reported to the FOMC that “inflation is going to be left to the Federal Reserve and that’s going to be bad news. An effective program to reduce the rate of inflation has to extend beyond monetary policy and needs to be complemented by programs designed to enhance competition and to correct structural problems”.4 But central banks have come a long way over the past half century. Today central banks take ownership of their mandates and we do not depend on others. For example, if we were to run into headwinds created by other policies, such as necessary fiscal consolidation, we could increase our policy stimulus to compensate. But if other policies undermined the effectiveness of our policy by disrupting or slowing down the monetary transmission mechanism, responding to that scenario would be more difficult. In such a situation we can only repeat that the support of other policies would speed up the return of inflation to 2%. But this must not be seen as a call for an ex ante policy mix with a monetisation of public debt or mutualisation of debt via Eurobonds under the present Treaty. This would mean giving up monetary dominance. Rather, economic and institutional policies can help accelerate the impact of our measures. Structural reforms can reduce the transmission lag of our policy, since a more flexible, more responsive economy is likely to transmit monetary impulses faster. And institutional reforms can reduce uncertainty about the future setup of the euro area, which weighs on expectations and holds back investment. Indeed, as we can see increasingly in Europe today, strengthening confidence in the future trajectory of our Union is perhaps the most decisive contribution we could make to growth. Conclusion Let me conclude. The Eurosystem has broad discretion over the tools it can use to deliver its primary objective of price stability. That objective guides the decision on which tools to use, and when to use them, and defines the boundaries set out in our legal framework.                                                 4  Federal Open Market Committee meeting, Transcript, 21 March 1978. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  The use of additional tools in recent times reflects the ECB’s commitment to delivering its mandate. Such tools have been suitable to achieve our objectives and have been necessary to combat deflationary headwinds. Still, we are aware that – while justified – our latest non-standard measures are on a significant scale. This is why our non-standard measures cannot last forever. They are defined as unconventional and not designed for the long term. The goal of these measures is that they make themselves redundant. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Vítor Constâncio: Introductory remarks at the fifth ECB conference on accounting, financial reporting and corporate governance for central banks Introductory remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the fifth ECB conference on accounting, financial reporting and corporate governance for central banks, Frankfurt am Main, 21 June 2016. *      *      * Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen, Welcome to the fifth ECB conference on accounting, financial reporting and corporate governance for central banks. This two-day conference is dedicated to the memory of Niall Merriman, Head of the ECB’s Financial Reporting and Policy Division, who unexpectedly passed away in September 2015. A special welcome and thank you to the distinguished speakers for sharing their thoughts on the topics covered today and tomorrow. This conference is by now well established, as demonstrated by the great interest among central banks around the globe, and the ever increasing participation. 1. The conference is organised along four main themes: 2. Developments in international accounting standards; 3. Impact of accounting on financial regulation and supervisory reporting; 4. Managing risks on central bank balance sheets; and 5. Governance and financial reporting issues at central banks. On the first topic, the ECB has stepped up its efforts in monitoring international accounting developments over the last two years. There are two reasons underlying this. First, as you certainly remember, the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) became operational in November 2014. Accounting information forms the basis for various elements of prudential regulation and supervision. As already highlighted in an ECB report published in December 2006, a harmonised and comparable accounting framework is an important element for consistent supervision.1 After the eruption of the financial crisis in 2008, the G20 called for a single set of high quality global accounting standards in order to strengthen credibility and comparability of financial information. The main aim of this request was to alleviate risks in the financial sector and to help prevent future financial crises. Therefore, the ECB supports the recent activities of the IASB which are geared towards achieving this objective. Second, the ECB has recently become more directly involved in the European process for adopting the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). This is a major consequence of the Maystadt report on how to reinforce the EU’s contribution to the IFRS Standards and improve the governance of the European institutions developing these standards.2 Since January 2015, the ECB has an observer status in both the new Board of the European Financial Reporting Advisory Group (EFRAG) and the related Technical Expert Group (TEG).                                                 1 ECB (2006), Assessment of accounting standards from a financial stability perspective. 2 Maystadt, P. ( 2013), Should IFRS Standards be more “European”? 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The EFRAG is a private association that provides technical advice to the European Commission on the endorsement of IFRS Standards, as well as related interpretations issued by the International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee (IFRIC). The ECB also participates in a number of other committees dealing with IFRS Standards, such as the IFRS Advisory Council, the Accounting Expert Group of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Accounting Subgroup of the European Banking Authority. Our aim is to ensure that coordinated positions of the ECB on relevant accounting matters are duly considered in the accounting standard-setting process. The colleagues in session one will provide insights into the current challenges in relation to international accounting standard-setting, the role of international accounting standards in the EU as well as their formal adoption and implementation in the Single Market. With respect to the second topic, the impact of accounting on financial regulation and supervisory reporting, I have already touched upon the mounting relevance of the interaction between international accounting standards and prudential regulation and supervision following the creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. I will confine myself to a few remarks on two related matters: • the issue of non-performing exposures (NPEs);3 and • the regulatory guidance on the new expected credit loss model and its interaction with prudential capital requirements. The year 2015 was the first full operational year of the SSM. One of the first items on the SSM’s task list was to follow up on the results of the 2014 comprehensive assessment. The comprehensive assessment helped us to identify problems on the balance sheets of the significant banks. One of the important outcomes was the scale of NPEs now classified using a harmonised definition. As you are aware, some euro area banks still have high levels of NPEs on their balance sheets. In the euro area, the average ratio of NPEs for significant institutions stood at 7.1% at the end of 2015, which is high by international standards.4 For instance, a proxy for the ratio of NPEs in the US has continued to decline in recent years and amounts to only 1.5% at the end of 2015. A comprehensive policy response to the high levels of NPEs in Europe is necessary, and as part of that, the SSM is working to take stock of supervisory best practices. More action is needed to address shortcomings in insolvency, collateral and taxation frameworks. Accounting standards are also important to address the issue. In the US, accounting standards require US banks to reduce, after six months, their NPEs to the market value of their collateral, if any. Balance sheets are therefore cleaned up of bad loans rather swiftly. This illustrates how accounting standards interact with supervisory concerns. Until now, the incurred loss model has been applied under IFRS which does not impose a timely treatment of NPEs by the banks. As a consequence, NPEs accumulate in banks’ balance sheets, consuming capital and not contributing to banks’ profitability. The introduction of IFRS 9 as from 2018 will change this situation. The ECB has already publicly expressed its support for a swift endorsement of IFRS 9. In our view, the new requirements for the classification, measurement and impairment of financial instruments, as well as the new general hedge accounting model, constitute an improvement over the previous requirements in IAS 39. Moreover, we believe that some aspects of the                                                 3 Non-performing exposures (NPEs) can be defined as impaired exposures and past due (> 90 days) exposures. 4 The ratio of non-performing loans refers to the ratio of non-performing loans to total gross loans. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  new standard may be an improvement from a financial stability perspective. The merits of the new expected credit loss model will clearly depend on its proper and consistent implementation in the financial sector. In this perspective, it is important that more granular instructions are given by the standard-setters and regulatory authorities in order to ensure that the implementation of the new standard is not subject to different interpretations that would not respect a proper level playing field. At the same time, it will be crucial to monitor the application of IFRS 9 in order to ensure that there are no unintended cyclical consequences of its implementation. In the US, the FASB just announced the approval of similar standards that nevertheless will only start to be applied in 2020. US banks have been critical of what will be a major change in frontloading provisions for credit risk. The introduction of both new standards will be a substantial change that will affect banks, already subject to more demanding regulation to which new features will continue to be added until year-end, albeit with the promise of not leading to a “significant increase in capital requirements”, as stated by the Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision (GHOS). In this same vein, regulators should monitor carefully the consequences of the new standards and, if need be, should consider an appropriate transition period from a prudential point of view. One must not forget the interaction of the new accounting rules under IFRS 9 and the solvency requirements for banks. The Basel Committee is currently doing some work in this area, to which the ECB contributes on an ongoing basis. Against this background, the ECB also welcomes the Basel Committee’s supervisory guidance on sound credit risk practices and the application of accounting impairment models based on expected credit losses.5 European banks will need to consider any possible impact of this guidance on their plans for the implementation of IFRS 9. Hence, we are confident that the guidance will achieve its stated objective and contribute to a consistent implementation of the expected credit loss model across European banks. The second day of this conference will be devoted to “traditional” central bank topics – risk management and governance. Proper risk management remains high on the agenda of central banks and is therefore the “guiding theme” of session three. Due to extraordinary circumstances, such as persisting low inflation and its potential effect on investment behaviour, central banks worldwide have been forced to take extraordinary measures. For example, in the last year and in an attempt to secure a return of inflation to levels closer to 2% over the medium term, the Governing Council decided to expand its asset purchase programme. Under this programme, the target level for the combined monthly purchases of public and private sector securities is now €80 billion. All these measures have and will continue to transform central bank balance sheets. In particular, central bank balance sheets have been expanded considerably which requires risk managers to pay special attention to possible medium- and long-term risks. For this reason, risk management is becoming an even more critical component of the ECB’s and other central banks’ daily activities. Against this background, I am happy to welcome speakers from around the globe that will provide first-hand information about these extraordinary measures and how they may affect risk exposures and risk management of central banks worldwide. Session four is dedicated to “governance and financial reporting issues at central banks”. Discussions about the credibility of central banks have intensified over the last couple of                                                 5 BCBS (2015), Guidance on credit risk and accounting for expected credit losses. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  years. I will leave it to the speakers tomorrow to highlight the latest developments in these areas. I will just describe some specific elements of our recent internal reorganisation at the ECB which are geared towards improving the quality of our governance function. Firstly, the ECB has created a new position in 2015, the Chief Services Officer (CSO), responsible for matters pertaining to administrative services, IT services, human resources and finance. Secondly, the Executive Board of the ECB decided to create an independent Finance department, reporting to the CSO and responsible for budgeting and controlling, financial and cost accounting, financial reporting and procurement. Finally, also in 2015, the ECB decided to establish a dedicated Compliance and Governance Office (CGO) as a key risk management control function to strengthen the ECB’s governance framework. The purpose of this Office is to support the Executive Board in protecting the integrity and reputation of the ECB, to promote ethical standards of behaviour and to strengthen the ECB’s accountability and transparency. To this end, the new CGO performs activities relating to the ECB’s revised ethics framework and other governance activities. Ladies and Gentlemen, the four sessions of today and tomorrow provide a representative sample of current key topics and challenges for central banks worldwide. I therefore wish you a productive and inspiring conference.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before the Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 21 June 2016. *      *      * Mr Chairman, Honourable Members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, Ladies and gentlemen, I am grateful to be back speaking to your committee for the second hearing of this year. Let me first say that the ECB takes note of today’s judgement of the Federal German Constitutional Court. This judgement confirms the ruling of the Court of Justice of the European Union which concluded that the OMT programme is compatible with EU law and falls within our mandate. In my remarks today, I will review the state of the euro area recovery and the recent monetary policy measures adopted by the ECB. Then, at the request of this committee, I will discuss the investment outlook, outlining in particular why more action is needed to boost investment demand in the euro area. Economic outlook and the ECB’s monetary policy As regards economic developments, the recovery of the euro area economy gained momentum at the start of the year. It is expected to proceed at a moderate but steady pace, supported by solid domestic demand and the effective pass-through of our monetary policy measures to the real economy. Consumers are benefiting from still relatively low oil prices and improved employment prospects. Likewise, investment is edging up, supported by higher corporate profits and favourable financing conditions. Looking forwards, according to the June 2016 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, annual real GDP is expected to increase by 1.6% this year and by 1.7% in the next two years. At the same time, inflation dynamics in the euro area remain rather subdued. The rate of headline inflation was slightly negative in May and is expected to hover at low levels over the coming months. While lower oil prices continue to act as a drag on the annual headline inflation, domestic price pressures, notably from wage growth, also remain muted, reflecting persistent economic slack. According to the Eurosystem staff projections, inflation should pick up towards the end of 2016. Thereafter, inflation is expected to increase further to 1.3% in 2017 and to 1.6% in 2018, as a strengthening economic recovery mobilises unused resources. Since the start of our credit easing measures in June 2014, bank lending rates for firms and households have fallen by about 90 and 80 basis points respectively, reaching historical lows in April 2016. The growth rate of bank credit to euro area corporations turned positive in 2015. At the same time, other sources of external finance – the net issuance of debt securities and shares by non-financial corporations – have benefited from more favourable capital market conditions, improving corporate profits and increasing retained earnings. The easing is especially felt by small and medium-sized companies (SMEs), which are heavily reliant on bank credit. In our recent Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises in the euro area, SMEs continued to report a further improvement in their access to credit and an increased willingness of banks to provide credit at lower interest rates. New bank credit to companies is increasingly being used to finance investment projects. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Further monetary policy stimulus is in the pipeline. We started our corporate bond purchases earlier this month as part of our asset purchase programme. The programme has started smoothly, with ample purchase volumes. Since the start of 2016, and even more evidently since the corporate bond purchase programme was announced in March, borrowing conditions for companies with direct access to the bond market have improved materially. For example, over the first half of 2016 the cost of market-based debt for euro area non-financial corporations has declined by around 75 basis points. We expect more firms, including mid-sized companies, to be able to access this source of external finance over the near future as the market for companies’ debt expands and deepens. Tomorrow we will start conducting the first operation of our new series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II). TLTRO II will allow banks to secure long-term funding at very attractive conditions that can be as low as the deposit facility rate. This should further ease the borrowing costs of the private sector and provide an additional impulse to credit creation. Overall, our measures have been instrumental in putting the recovery on a more solid footing and thereby securing the conditions for inflation to rise towards levels closer to 2% over a not-too-distant horizon. They have underpinned the revival in the consumption of durable goods which we have observed since 2014, and are finally showing through in a more robust pick-up in non-construction investment. Without our policy stimulus, both growth and inflation would be significantly lower. Our March package, in particular, has mitigated the downside risks to the euro area economic outlook. Additional impetus will come from the measures that are still at an early stage of implementation. At the same time, uncertainty remains high and downside risks are still significant due to the continued fragile state of the global economy and geopolitical developments. We will closely monitor the evolution of the outlook for price stability. We stand ready to act by using all the instruments available within our mandate, if necessary, to achieve our objective. In particular, the ECB is ready for all contingencies following the UK’s EU referendum. Investment in the euro area After the sharp downturn observed during the financial crisis in 2008 and the renewed decline during the European sovereign debt crisis, real investment in the euro area has now begun to recover. In particular, business investment has undergone a welcome recovery since 2013 and public and housing investment have recently broadly stabilised. Despite these positive trends, the current level of investment is still unsatisfactory. The level of total real investment in the euro area remains more than 10% below pre-crisis levels. Therefore, further action is needed, including at EU level. The Investment Plan for Europe is a welcome example. While we would support extending it beyond 2018, the success of the current plan also rests on its capacity to improve the investment environment, at both European and national level. Only reforms in this area can guarantee its long-term effects. At EU level – and here the European Parliament has an important role to play as co-legislator – we should further deepen the Single Market, notably in the areas of energy, transport and the digital economy. We should also make full use of the potential of existing Single Market legislation by ensuring its complete and consistent enforcement. Strengthening the European dimension of regulatory enforcement would help to lessen complexity, enhance the level playing field and reduce the fragmentation of product markets. In addition, we should act decisively to make the channelling of savings into productive investment more efficient. The banking union, including the ECB in its micro- and 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  macroprudential role, has an important role to play in ensuring that banking markets efficiently allocate resources to the most productive investment opportunities across the euro area. Progress on the capital markets union is also essential to develop a favourable environment for productive investment in the EU. It will help diversify the sources of funding needed to spur investment – notably for SMEs and long-term projects – by complementing bank financing with deeper, more developed capital markets. The legislative acts regarding simple, transparent and standardised securitisation you are discussing are tangible examples of how EU legislation can broaden financing opportunities for EU companies, foster cross-border investment and ultimately have a positive impact on the EU investment outlook. At national level, reforms to improve business framework conditions and reduce regulatory and administrative bottlenecks also need to be further pursued. It is the whole institutional framework that helps to transform financial resources into productive investments, which, in turn, increase productivity and, ultimately, create jobs. Inefficient public procurement, taxation systems, judicial systems and insolvency frameworks, identified in some countries, need to be fully addressed. Country-specific recommendations can be a powerful tool to identify and address barriers to investment in individual countries. Moreover, those countries where public finances allow, should undertake public investment in areas conducive to growth. Regarding other countries, let me mention that long-term investment benefits from stability-oriented macroeconomic policies. Finally, investors need certainty regarding the economic and institutional environment in which they will operate. This is also one of the reasons why, almost one year ago, the Five Presidents’ Report set out a plan for strengthening Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). Conclusions Allow me to conclude. Looking ahead, we expect the economic recovery to proceed at a moderate but steady pace. Nevertheless, for this recovery to be consolidated, our efforts should now concentrate on strong policy action to improve the business environment, favour investment and raise productivity. Delivering on these objectives will not only create the conditions for inflation to accelerate its return to levels below, but close to, 2%. It will also make a major contribution to improving the standard of living of the people of Europe. Citizens and markets need to be sure about our capacity to take on the common challenges we face. Our focus should be on making our common home, Europe, stronger. Thank you for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Carolyn Wilkins: Fintech and the financial ecosystem – evolution or revolution? Remarks by Ms Carolyn Wilkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at Payments Canada, Calgary, Alberta, 17 June 2016. *      *      * I would like to thank Scott Hendry, Grahame Johnson, Ron Morrow and Stephen Murchison for their help in preparing this speech. Introduction It is no exaggeration to say that we are in the midst of a defining moment for innovation in financial services. Some expect that new technology will cause a complete disruption of traditional financial institutions, giving businesses and households access to more convenient and customized services. Entrepreneurs are also finding applications well beyond finance, and these new technologies could transform other fields, such as humanitarian aid.1  Fintech, which is the term people use to refer to innovation in financial services, has created a lot of excitement, but also quite a lot of hype, depending on your perspective. Google searches for “fintech” have increased by more than 30 times in the past six years. Fintech has also attracted real money: over the same period, around 100 fintech start-ups in Canada have raised more than $1 billion in funding.2 At a global level, almost $20 billion was poured into fintech last year alone.3  There is a vast array of services being deployed in Canada and elsewhere. Many of you may be using Apple Pay or Google Wallet. You may also be getting investment advice from “robo advisors.” There is peer-to-peer lending, such as the Lending Club, and even more services are in the works. I have had the opportunity to participate in a number of fascinating discussions about fintech in recent months – with my colleagues at the Financial Stability Board and other international organizations, as well as with fintech entrepreneurs and traditional financial institutions around the world. I can tell you that, despite the hype, no one knows yet what the social and economic payoff of these investments will be. And because it is early days, no one knows for sure what fintech developments will ultimately mean for business models or for the financial system more generally. But we are all trying to figure it out. I know this interest extends to all of us in the payments business, which is undergoing its own transformation. This conference is a great setting to offer a central banker’s perspective on fintech. So I want to thank Payments Canada for the invitation to speak here today. The Bank of Canada is doing a lot of work in this area. Today I will explore three points with you that frame our thinking on the issues. First, fintech has the potential to transform the financial system across a broad range of services. And that is a good thing, because there is a lot of inefficiency that can be shed. Second, although some of the technology may be revolutionary, its overall effect on the financial system is likely to be evolutionary. Financial institutions that adapt will survive, and                                                 1 See, for example, D. Tapscott and A. Tapscott, Blockchain Revolution: How the Technology Behind Bitcoin Is Changing Money, Business, and the World (New York: Portfolio, 2016); Mark Walport, Distributed Ledger Technology: Beyond Block Chain (London: Government Office for Science, 2016). 2 OMERS Ventures, “Canadian Next-Gen Financial Technologies & Services,” September 2015. 3 This is about five times the $4 billion that was invested two years earlier. See R. Ghose et al., “Digital Disruption – How FinTech Is Forcing Banking to a Tipping Point,” Citigroup Inc., March 2016. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  new service providers will become part of the financial ecosystem. In some areas, this evolution is happening fast, while in others, the most transformative technologies still have developmental hurdles to clear. Finally, now is the time for financial institutions, new entrants and policy-makers to work together. That is the best way to create the right environment for modernizing the financial sector and sensibly managing the risks that arise. This applies to many areas. For the Bank, the focus is on preserving financial stability and maintaining the safe and sound operation of core payment systems in Canada. Change is in the air My first point is that change is definitely in the air. In many cases, financial innovations are simply interesting twists on existing technologies and business models. They promise to lower costs, improve services and broaden access. Peer-to-peer lending is one example. As we have already seen with the taxi and hotel industries, peer-to-peer services challenge traditional intermediaries. This new competition could fundamentally change the relationship that traditional financial institutions have with their customers. From a regulatory perspective, the main issues relate to consumer protection, market integrity and rules that guard against money laundering and terrorism financing. Authorities are working to close significant gaps in these areas and are monitoring implications for financial stability. Then we have financial services enabled by fundamentally new technology. A prime example is distributed ledger technology (DLT). This technology has the potential to replace entire transaction systems, including core payment systems, and offer new products, such as smart contracts. Smart contracts are agreements written in computer code that do not need human intervention to be executed. This strand of fintech could take us into uncharted territory. As I will explain in a minute, regulators could face issues related to governance, legal environments and financial stability. One might argue that the financial sector is always changing and that fintech is a case of déjà vu. We have seen important innovations in the past – such as credit cards, automated banking machines and online banking – that did not revolutionize the financial landscape, even if they provided huge advances in convenience for consumers. That is because financial institutions remained the dominant players and adapted to these changes, often by buying emerging competitors, adopting the technology and reducing access to legacy services to compel customers to adapt.4  I see a combination of factors that point to the potential for greater change this time. First, customers are more demanding than in the past. They are looking for more convenient and cheaper access to financial services that are well integrated with the rest of their online activities. Customers expect these services to be personalized, and faster, in part because of the widespread use of smartphones and the speed with which new apps can be pushed out.5 Given how accustomed people have become to instant access to goods and services, it is no surprise that they expect instant access to their money. That is why we see a push to                                                 4 J. Allen, R. Clark and J.-F. Houde, “Market Structure and the Diffusion of E-Commerce: Evidence from the Retail Banking Industry,” Staff Working Paper No. 2008–32, Bank of Canada, 2008. 5 According to the Millennial Disruption Index produced by Scratch, a third of Americans between the ages of 15 and 34 believe they will not need a bank at all within the next five years. Available at http://www.millennialdisruptionindex.com. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  implement real-time retail payment systems in nearly all major jurisdictions.6 This will be an important point to consider for the modernization of the Canadian payments system. Second, we are seeing large, well-funded companies outside the financial space, such as Apple and Google, starting to offer financial services. One of the main advantages of traditional financial institutions is the trust they have built with their customers. Tech giants also have wide customer bases and brand loyalty that could help drive adoption. These companies are using their customers’ information and their existing platforms to offer attractive and cost-competitive services and to pick away at the most profitable business lines of financial institutions. The range of services they offer could grow over time. Finally, some existing financial institutions and infrastructures have become relatively inefficient, while new technology has reduced barriers to entry in this space. Supporting systems can date back several decades and are often not interoperable, even within an institution. So the door for competition is open. Talking about an evolution This brings me to my second point, which is about the kind of change we can expect. Traditional players will have to adapt to survive, and there will be new players. And the new technologies that could be truly transformative have some way to go before they are ready for prime time. So I expect we are in for more of an evolution than a revolution. Since we are all talking about distributed ledgers – or blockchain – let me use that technology to illustrate my point. Ledgers may sound incredibly dull, but innovations in this space have been game changers in the past. Indeed, the invention of double-entry bookkeeping has been credited as one factor enabling capitalism.7  It makes me wonder what people will say about distributed ledgers 100 years from now. Let us first remind ourselves what this technology brings to the table. The exact features of DLT vary, depending on the needs it fulfills. At its core, it is a computer protocol that allows many participants to record information on a single ledger that is shared among users, so each one sees the same data. A consensus mechanism and modern cryptography ensure that stakeholders agree that entries to the ledger are authentic. The ledger’s key benefit is that you do not need a trusted third party to guard against double-spending or expensive processes to reconcile information between ledgers. The best-known application of DLT is Bitcoin, which is a decentralized digital currency. The ledgers used for these currencies are “permissionless,” which means that anyone with a computer can download the software, see the ledger and start authorizing transactions. The decentralized aspect of the technology is why some predict that widespread application of DLT could revolutionize entire industries. They contemplate alternative futures, such as one in which there is complete disintermediation of banks and even central banks, with state currencies being replaced by decentralized digital currencies. I see this as highly unlikely. People have not widely embraced digital currencies like Bitcoin because these currencies cannot outshine the competition when it comes to serving as a store of value and a medium of exchange. National authorities will want to run their own monetary policy, and so the most that could happen is that national currencies and digital                                                 6 M. Tompkins and A. Olivares, “Clearing and Settlement Systems from Around the World: A Qualitative Analysis,” Staff Discussion Paper No. 2016–14, Bank of Canada, 2016. 7 Max Weber, one of the founders of modern sociology, described double-entry bookkeeping as an essential element of a modern economy in his 1904 book, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (London: Routledge, 2001). The economist Joseph Schumpeter makes a similar claim in his 1942 book, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (New York: Harper Perennial, 1975). 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  currencies coexist. The Bank of Canada is studying digital currencies closely because of our role in issuing the nation’s currency and the implications these currencies could have for monetary policy and financial stability. Like many other central banks, we are also researching the conceptual merits of issuing electronic money ourselves.8  In fact, the potential for DLT is actually stronger for applications outside of digital currencies. We have seen test cases related to payments and post-trade processes, including the clearing and settlement of financial instruments such as repos, bonds, derivatives and equities.9  One interesting application is in the syndicated loan market, where loans can take up to 20 days to go through the clearing and settlement process. DLT could reduce this to about seven days by providing a secure database that all participants share across a distributed private network.10 Looking at a single source of information would help reduce disagreements and make it easier to comply with legal requirements, speeding up the process at every stage. We may also see applications in areas such as trade finance and supply chains, where information cuts across jurisdictions and is difficult to centralize. One estimate suggests DLT could enable banks to save as much as $20 billion a year in global back-office costs if applied to cross-border payments, securities trading and regulatory compliance.11 So it is easy to see why private enterprise is investing a lot of money in this type of technology. If these ventures deliver on their promises, improvements could extend beyond efficiency and cheaper processing. Transactions could be settled almost immediately, which would reduce counterparty risk and free up capital for other uses. Transparency would be enhanced because a distributed ledger lets participants see the entire history of transactions. That said, several important issues with DLT must be resolved before its benefits can be realized. First on the list are technical issues related to scalability, the consensus mechanism, data privacy and cyber security. Second, proponents will have to agree on governance, which can be a challenge when stakeholders have divergent interests. Bitcoin’s recent struggles are a clear illustration of this.12 Finally, standards and protocols, as well as a solid legal foundation, must be established to allow for interoperability. Protocols may be an area where governments can contribute. In the early days of the Internet, governments helped develop the first networking protocols. Like the Internet, many of the applications of DLT will require a global view. Applications of DLT will also need to become widely adopted. This means getting users to move away from the current networks and switch to DLT networks. Usually, the more people who join a network, the better the network becomes, which in turn entices even more people to adopt it. A social network like Facebook is a good example of this network effect – people                                                 8 Bank research and other useful information on e-money are featured on a dedicated webpage. 9 For example, Digital Asset Holdings is one company that has projects under way to explore the use of distributed ledgers with the Australian Securities Exchange (ASX) for the Australian equity market and with Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation for the clearing of repo transactions in the United States. 10 See J. Schneider et al., “Blockchain: Putting Theory into Practice,” Goldman Sachs, 24 May 2016. 11 See Santander InnoVentures, Oliver Wyman and Anthemis Group, “The Fintech 2.0 Paper: Rebooting Financial Services,” 2015. 12 As Bitcoin usage increased, developers proposed modifying the protocol that supports the technology to make it easier to process larger volumes of transactions, but Bitcoin’s decentralized governance system has made it difficult to agree on proposed changes. See R. Waters, “Bitcoin’s Future Threatened by Software Schism,” Financial Times, 11 February 2016. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  flock to the service that their friends use – and it is no small challenge to compete with a system that is already established.13  The final hurdle DLT has to overcome is to gain regulatory acceptance and comply with domestic and cross-border laws and regulations. Authorities should support innovation, but the bar will be high, especially for core financial services, and appropriately so. Financial institutions, including Canadian banks, are working hard to test and adopt new technologies and adjust to new trends. So while banks may look different in the future, they will still play a major role in the financial system. It is true that some changes could seem revolutionary to some incumbents. To customers, however, it will likely seem evolutionary, and some changes will not be visible to them at all. In some dimensions, DLT is reminiscent of Voice over IP: here was a revolutionary advancement in technology that caused an evolutionary change in how we, as end-users, use the phone system. Now’s the time This brings me to my final point. Now is the time for financial institutions, new entrants and policy-makers to work together. The opportunity cost of sitting back and waiting for the dust to settle is too great. Financial institutions and infrastructure operators are making important strategic decisions about which parts of their businesses they want to defend and grow and which ones they want to scale back. This urgency is not only coming from fintech contenders. Banks are also dealing with a more demanding regulatory environment and exceptionally low interest rates around the world that are squeezing profit margins. Banks already spend close to $200 billion a year on IT globally, so replacing legacy systems will mean difficult and critical investment decisions. For the Bank of Canada, our priority is to see upgrades made to the core payment systems that the financial system relies on and that the Bank oversees: the Large Value Transfer System (LVTS) and the Automated Clearing Settlement System (ACSS). These systems have served us well, but both require investments that are needed to fully meet our oversight requirements. Investment will also help the systems better meet the modern needs of participants and their customers. Take the ACSS, for example, which still handles most retail transactions today. It was implemented over 30 years ago, when everyone wanted a Commodore 64. The ACSS may have been at the forefront in 1984, but we are far from the efficient frontier now.14 Cheques take up to four days to clear, and some information needs to be re-entered manually. Now is the time to make our core systems more efficient and competitive. For consumers and business users, we need to move closer to real-time access to funds. In both the ACSS and LVTS, we need to collect richer data on transactions and, ideally, make them interoperable to avoid having to manually re-enter information. This effort is not change for change’s sake. If we can leverage some of the existing infrastructure and still achieve our goals, that is all the better. For our part, policy-makers and regulators need to address innovation in financial services in a few proactive ways.                                                 13 In a recent book, Hanna Halaburda and Miklos Sarvary illustrate network effects by showing how they come into play in the competition between cryptocurrencies and state-issued fiat currencies. See H. Halaburda and M. Sarvary, Beyond Bitcoin: The Economics of Digital Currencies (New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2016). 14 J. Chapman, J. Chiu, S. Jafri, H. Pérez Saiz, “Public Policy Objectives and the Next Generation of CPA Systems: An Analytical Framework,” Staff Discussion Paper No. 2015–6, Bank of Canada, 2015. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The first is to develop a solid analytical framework to understand and assess the benefits and challenges of something so new. This is something the Financial Stability Board is working on. Authorities will make their assessments through many lenses, including consumer protection, financial inclusion, market integrity, competition policy and financial stability. That is why other international groups such as the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, and the International Organization of Securities Commissions are also involved. The Bank of Canada, together with our domestic colleagues, is actively contributing to these efforts. Since fintech is a global phenomenon, it is critical that this regulatory effort be global. We must also learn from emerging-market economies that are further along in some areas. While fintech innovations promise to solve some current problems, they could also create new ones. Let me give you an example: I worry that network effects, which underpin the success of many payment applications, could lead to an excessive concentration of payment service providers. If this happens, households and businesses may not benefit from cost savings. This is clearly an issue for competition authorities. It also is an issue for financial stability because “too big to fail” could emerge in a new form outside the current regulatory perimeter. Once again, payments are a great example. I worry that players not covered currently by regulation could become important to the system even if they never take on bank-like risks, such as maturity transformation or leverage, or become big enough to be considered systemically important. The move to increased direct access means that even smaller players could very well create critical dependencies within the financial system, particularly if they connect directly to core payments infrastructure. This could give rise to moral hazard. At a minimum, authorities need to put a large enough weight on operational dependencies when looking at systemic importance, particularly in light of cyber risk. When a payment system grows to be prominent or systemically important, the Bank of Canada’s job is to oversee it. Even before we reach that point, regulatory measures should be considered to address specific issues, such as operational resilience and consumer protection.15  I also wonder how DLT-based infrastructures could affect the financial ecosystem. Ever-increasing automation through, say, smart contracts, could increase efficiency and certainty but could also increase financial volatility. Would that volatility be short-term, such as flash crashes? Or would it entail procyclical dynamics or new channels of contagion? There are also questions about whether the regulatory perimeter is adequate, given new entrants and risks of regulatory arbitrage. In my view, the field of inquiry should include the inherent risk and systemic importance of an activity, regardless of what entity is performing it. Even as we strive to implement a regulatory response that is proportionate to the risk, we need to keep in mind that maintaining a level playing field is important. Some of these issues are not too different from those that authorities face in their work on shadow banking, another area where new entrants are challenging traditional players.16 And, big or small, operational risk deserves much greater attention. The second way to address innovation in financial services is active engagement between authorities and the private sector. Some countries, such as the United Kingdom, Australia and Singapore, have created official regulatory “sandboxes.”17 These sandboxes allow start-ups to experiment with services without jumping through all the usual regulatory hoops.                                                 15 The federal government conducted a consultation on these issues in 2015. See “Balancing Oversight and Innovation in the Ways We Pay: A Consultation Paper,” Department of Finance Canada, 13 April 2015. 16 For a discussion of the issues in the shadow banking sector, see T. Lane, “Shedding Light on Shadow Banking” (speech to the CFA Society Toronto, Toronto, 26 June 2013). 17 See “Consultation Paper on FinTech Regulatory Sandbox Guidelines,” Monetary Authority of Singapore, 6 June 2016. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  Here in Canada, we are consulting with fintech entrepreneurs. The Bank of Canada is also partnering with Payments Canada, Canadian banks and R3 – which leads a consortium of financial institutions – to test drive distributed ledgers. Our only goal at this stage is to understand the mechanics, limits and possibilities of this technology. The plan is to build a rudimentary wholesale payment system to run experiments in a lab environment. Our experiment includes a simulated settlement asset used as a medium of exchange within the system. It is very much like the settlement balances in LVTS, except it is using DLT. Because it cannot be used anywhere else, it is a different animal altogether from a digital currency for widespread use. This is an experiment in the true sense of the word. I cannot think of a better way to understand this technology than to work with it. Other frameworks need to be investigated, and there are many hurdles that need to be cleared before such a system would ever be ready for prime time. The third way to address innovation proactively is to do fundamental research on the effects of new technology.18 The Bank of Canada’s research over the past few years has focused on new payment methods, the adoption and competitiveness of digital currencies, and the essential benefits of private e-money.19 We are continuing this work and broadening it to include other developments, such as peer-to-peer lending and uses of DLT. We also want to understand how new financial technologies will address the underlying forces that created the need for financial intermediation in the first place. In theory, new technology could enable a different framework for addressing the same frictions, potentially one that does not require financial intermediaries at all. The names and faces may change, but I do not see technology changing the need for maturity transformation, loan monitoring, intermediation of borrowers and lenders, and trust. This is a good question for academics. Conclusion Let me wrap up. While it is important to filter out the hype surrounding fintech, I am convinced that it could have a net positive impact on the financial system, provided the risks are adequately managed. Fintech will likely entail more of an evolution than a revolution. This is because incumbent financial institutions will adapt, new players will join the financial ecosystem and those with strong business models will survive. And the most fundamentally transformative technology so far – DLT – still has important hurdles to clear. Innovations may solve some current problems, but they could also create new ones. The regulatory framework needs to adapt so that the door is not opened to unmanaged financial and operational risks, unchecked critical dependencies within our financial system and moral hazard. Promoting financial stability is a core function of the Bank of Canada, and we take a system-wide perspective when we monitor risks. There is a lot of hard work ahead, and we need to get on with it. By working together, we can unlock the full promise of fintech to ensure a smooth evolution to tomorrow’s financial system – safe, sound and serving the people who rely on it.                                                 18 For a discussion of some possible effects, see D. Andolfatto, “Monetary Policy Implications of Blockchain Technology,” 1 May 2016. 19 See, for example, W.E. Weber, “A Bitcoin Standard: Lessons from the Gold Standard,” Staff Working Paper No. 2016–14, Bank of Canada, 2016; N. Gandal and H. Halaburda “Competition in the Cryptocurrency Market,” Staff Working Paper No. 2014–33, Bank of Canada, 2014; J. Chiu and T.-N. Wong, “On the Essentiality of E-Money,” Staff Working Paper No. 2015–43, Bank of Canada, 2015. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Philip R Lane: Technological innovation and financial services Address by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at Financial Services Ireland Ibec Annual Lunch, Dublin, 16 June 2016. *      *      * The long-term economic and social implications of technological innovation are widely debated. The international central banking community devotes considerable effort to assessing future productivity trends, with opinion divided between techno-optimists and those that consider that the current wave of technological innovation will generate only limited macroeconomic gains compared to previous waves of innovation in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Today, I wish to focus more narrowly on the opportunities and risks posed by technological innovation for the financial services industry. As a financial regulator, the Central Bank of Ireland must try to anticipate shifts in the financial services landscape, in view of the implications for regulated firms and industries and, indeed, the implications for our capacity to deliver our mandate in relation to the preservation of financial stability and the protection of consumers. While recognising that we do not possess a crystal ball, the Bank has to consider the effects and risks of potential innovations. To this end, we seek to understand: (i) the drivers of technological innovation; (ii) the possible outcomes; (iii) the associated risks; and (iv) the preparedness of financial firms. I will consider each of these areas in a little more detail. 1. Drivers of Technological Innovation in the Financial Sector Several forces are at work in driving technological innovation in the financial sector. First, the challenges facing existing business models and the identification of opportunities associated with new technologies are push and pull factors that build momentum for technological innovation. Second, as consumers increasingly move online in relation to a wide range of personal and retail activities, the market for financial services naturally evolves in the same direction, with incumbent providers of financial services possibly facing competition from online firms that have built strong relationships with consumers in other areas. The ongoing digital revolution poses fundamental trade offs for incumbent firms, given the burden of legacy infrastructures and cost bases. However, from the perspective of consumers, the potential for increased competition from new entrants may help to reduce costs and increase choice in the provision of financial services. Individual firms and sectors are grappling with technological innovation in different ways and with different perspectives, with many welcoming the associated challenges and opportunities. It is inevitable that there will be winners and losers associated with technological innovation, both among incumbent firms and new entrants. 2. Potential Outcomes for the Financial Sector I am struck by the conflicting forces at work in reshaping the structure of the financial sector. In one direction, economies of scale and scope may result in a higher degree of consolidation across financial services providers. For the banking sector, this would reverse the retreat to domestic markets that followed the onset of the financial crisis in 2007 / 2008. In addition to the scalability of successful new technologies, another factor that supports consolidation are the significant fixed costs in meeting contemporary international regulatory requirements. Whether the next wave of consolidation requires cross-border M&A activity is 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  questionable, since the need to acquire national franchises to operate on a cross-border basis has been significantly reduced by freedom of services legislation, the move to a single supervisory mechanism for banks in the euro area and the increasing harmonisation of regulations for non-bank financial firms. In the other direction, there are other forces that may lead to increasing fragmentation of in the provision of financial services, with specialist providers increasing the level of competition in individual market segments and threatening the integrated model of universal banking. In particular, it is possible to envisage an increasing role for specialist firms that target particular niche services and cherry pick higher-margin business lines. A third pathway is the development of partnerships between larger incumbents and newer financial technology providers, with such partnerships focusing on complementing existing service offerings and developing entirely new categories of financial services. It is possible for all of these outcomes to occur simultaneously. Consolidation may be driven by the bigger players across Europe seeking to drive down costs in a continued low-interest environment, moving to a more fee-based business model and competing across borders through freedom of services. At the same time, new entrants may grow by offering niche service offerings, through different and newly-conceived delivery channels. Whatever the outcomes, resolution planning is thrown into sharp relief, in view of the potential financial stability risks associated with the failure of larger, established firms and the elevated likelihood of failure for smaller, newly-formed, mono-line enterprises. Orderly resolution regimes enable the financial system to absorb the failure of individual firms: especially in a period of innovation, a “zero failures” objective is not appropriate. 3. Risks This brings me to the myriad associated risks. I will start from a financial stability perspective, where we need to consider the risks to incumbents. An increase in competition in or across these sectors may result in reduced income (for example, through squeezed margins or reduced fee income) as a result of more profitable business lines being targeted by new competitors. At best, those that do not respond to these threats effectively, including those that back the wrong horses, may be reduced to the role of utilities, with lower income and higher costs due to legacy infrastructure and capability issues; at worst, some incumbents may fail altogether. These risks may well result in the demise of certain types of business model and categories of financial service providers. A byproduct may be loss of access to critical financial services for some cohorts of society. The former may be acceptable and even desirable, if the externalities of failure can be managed. The latter may be highly problematic in relation to consumer welfare and the implications for social cohesion. Technological innovations may also generate new risks for consumers in relation to innovations in the marketing and delivery of financial services that result in new categories of mis-information and mis-selling. Risk exposures in the handling and storage of customer data also pose a challenge for both new entrants and existing firms. Accordingly, technological change presents multiple operational risks, both in relation to the intrinsic characteristics of some new technologies and in terms of implementation risk. Higher probability but lower impact human risks are being replaced by lower probability but higher impact technology risks associated with operational failures and the threat of devastating cyber crimes. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  4. Preparedness It is difficult to manage and mitigate the diverse risks associated with this uncertain environment. As a regulator, our experiences regarding the awareness and preparedness of regulated firms for this changing environment are mixed. It is clear that some firms are considering these risks in a coherent, considered and appropriate way and are embracing the technological opportunities in a calibrated manner. However, many other firms, including some of the entities that have been damaged by the crisis and are still dealing with the legacy issues of the past, are less well prepared, perhaps less able to invest in new technologies to improve processes and reduce costs and, consequently, less able to cope. The fundamentals of running businesses well and in a prudent manner will remain critically important as the financial services sector continues to evolve. Strong governance, clear strategic planning, effective and embedded risk management, and the careful shepherding of resources are vitally important in times of innovation as in times of greater stability. Regardless of the future shape of the financial services sector, lessons from our most recent financial crisis will remain critical and must inform our policy framework and policy actions into the future. Role of the Central Bank of Ireland As a regulator, the Bank also has to ensure that it keeps abreast of the changing technological environment and is able to assess the level of preparedness of regulated firms, both in the authorisation process and during ongoing supervisory engagement. This is quite challenging, particularly given the uncertainty about the future structure of the financial sector. In many respects, we have the same challenges as the firms that we authorise, regulate and supervise: we also need to adapt and evolve to ensure that we continue to be effective in our capacity to understand the benefits and risks of financial innovation. Regulators should also embrace technological advances that can contribute to positive regulatory outcomes by developing better tools, undertaking better analysis of “big data” in the identification of financial risks and the allocation of regulatory resources, and incorporating improvements in key risk management tools, such as the use of identity verification techniques in providing assurance in the implementation of anti-money laundering processes. To this end, the Bank is committing significant resources to improve our data architectures and establish quantitative analytical teams for our banking, insurance and markets directorates. Let me highlight four primary challenges in the regulatory treatment of financial innovations. First, in relation to the authorisation of new firms, regulators must strike the appropriate balance between encouraging innovation-related entry and ensuring that new firms are sufficiently ready to fulfill all regulatory obligations in relation to financial stability and consumer protection. Second, in supervising existing firms, regulators must make measured judgement calls in relation to the shifting business models and the appropriate level of capital required to provide a buffer vis-à-vis the associated risks. Third, as noted earlier, credible and effective resolution regimes are necessary to manage the failure of established or new firms. Fourth, the increased scope for cross-border delivery of financial services reinforces the importance of international regulatory harmonisation and cooperation, especially where home and host regulatory authorities have different supervisory responsibilities. Furthermore, technological innovation may also alter the role of central banks in managing the money supply and acting as a lender of last resort. At one level, growth in various types of electronic payment technologies looks set to reduce the traditional role of notes and coins in the monetary system. At another level, there is much discussion of the relative merits of more widespread adoption of private-sector digital currencies versus a new role for central banks in the direct issuance and management of publicly-backed digital currencies. Alas, it is beyond the scope of today’s speech to pursue this fascinating topic in any detail. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  In conclusion, the challenge for policy makers is to understand and attempt to appropriately regulate the evolving financial services landscape, while at the same time balancing often-competing objectives of competition and choice, financial stability, and the effectiveness of macroeconomic policies. We remain vigilant and alive to these challenges, just as we expect a similar attitude from our regulated firms. To state this is easy, to deliver more difficult. I wish you all well in your endeavours in navigating this phase of technological innovation in financial services. Acknowledgements: I thank Anna Lalor, Anne-Marie McKiernan and Ed Sibley for their inputs into this speech 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mark Carney: Enabling the FinTech transformation – revolution, restoration, or reformation? Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial Stability Board, at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London, Mansion House, London, 16 June 2016. *      *      * Given the tragic murder of Jo Cox MP on 16 June, at the Mansion House dinner in lieu of this speech, the Governor paid tribute to Ms Cox and the highest standards of public service she represented throughout her life.  1. Introduction My Lord Mayor, Chancellor, My Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen. Let me begin by thanking Andrew Bailey for his outstanding record of public service during his 31 years at the Bank of England.  Andrew is an extraordinary public servant who has devoted his entire professional life to serving the people of the United Kingdom. During his career, he has worked across all of the Bank’s policy areas, combining leadership and innovation to deliver consistently the Bank’s policy objectives. His work in helping to manage the crisis and then to develop the post-crisis regulatory framework has been exemplary. He has made the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) a highly respected and effective regulator and built a team of exceptionally dedicated colleagues. I would like to thank Andrew for his counsel and support since I joined the Bank and wish him every success in steering the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) at this vital time in its history. I admire his commitment to ensuring the UK’s financial system serves its real economy and I look forward to continuing to work closely with him in future.  Although the Bank has placed itself in purdah, its duties never cease. The people of the United Kingdom, via parliament, have conferred tremendous responsibilities on the Bank. These remits must be pursued continuously, independently and transparently. The independence of the Bank of England is at the heart of the integrity of the financial system. And the Bank’s independent conduct of monetary policy is vital to ensuring price stability and to support strong, sustainable and balanced growth across the United Kingdom.  Transparency is the hallmark of modern central banking and democratic accountability.  Today, consistent with its statutory responsibilities, the nine-member independent Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) announced its latest monetary policy decision.  The published minutes of that meeting contain, as they should, carefully calibrated and precisely worded descriptions of the MPC’s deliberations, the adjustments to our outlook, including our assessment of the major risks to the economy. The minutes also note some of the wide range of contingency plans the Bank has put in place to support market functioning and financial stability around the referendum.  If you have not already done so, I recommend you read them.  Let me move from the short term to the medium term. For there is more than a whiff of revolution in the air. 2. The promise of FinTech  Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive; but to be young was very heaven! 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  To its advocates, the wave of innovation sweeping through the world of financial technology promises nothing short of revolution. ‘FinTech’ heralds the dawn of narrow banking and portfolio optimisation. It will change the nature of money,1 shake the foundations of central banking and deliver nothing less than a democratic revolution for all who use financial services. Revolutions are not always abrupt, and sometimes their origins remain obscure. In noting the possibilities at the start of the Twentieth century, Keynes remarked that “the inhabitant of London could order by telephone, sipping his morning tea in bed … the various products of the whole earth … adventure his wealth in the natural resources and new enterprises of any quarter of the world…; [or] decide to couple the security of his fortunes with the good faith of the townspeople of any substantial municipality in any continent that fancy or information might recommend…”  Such global portfolio management was made possible by technological developments stretching back decades, ranging from the ‘pantelegraph’ of the 1860s – capable of transmitting signatures to verify bank deposits – to the cable buried deep beneath the Atlantic that could transmit eight words a minute. Such remote trade confirmation and low latency that made the Flash Boys of the day possible. The financial globalisation these innovations enabled was built on a much earlier, simpler, and more profoundly transformational development: the ledger. For there is no finance without the ability to record transactions, balances, and obligations.  Money and credit, the universal instruments of commerce, could not exist without this most fundamental of financial technologies, which allows debits and credits to be netted off; debt to circulate as currency; money to replace memory; and with it, trade to expand exponentially.  How much have we progressed since Keynes’ bed-ridden globalisation? Replace “telephone” with a “tablet” and “tea” with a “soy latteccino” and you have not the start of the Twentieth Century but the Twenty First, a century in which opportunities are no longer limited to men or denizens of the City. Nonetheless, finance continues to be arranged around a series of hubs like brokers, clearing houses and exchanges; whereas, in other domains, people form connections directly, instantaneously and openly, and this is revolutionising how they consume, work, and communicate.  The extent to which finance continues democratising and transforming depends on superficially arcane, but fundamentally vital, enabling technologies. The emergence of mobile telephony, the ubiquity of the internet, availability of high-speed computing, advances in cryptography, and innovations in machine learning could combine to enable rapid changes in finance – just as they have in other areas of the economy.  The ledger, once stone, wood, or paper – and always centralised – is now digital and may become distributed. FinTech has the potential to deliver more resilient financial infrastructure, more effective trade and settlement, and new ways to encode, share and analyse data.  For the financial sector, these could offer shorter, speedier transaction chains; greater capital efficiency; and stronger operational resilience. For consumers, they could mean more choice; better-targeted services; and keener pricing. For everyone, FinTech may deliver a more inclusive financial system, domestically and globally; with people better connected, more informed and increasingly empowered.2                                                  1  Especially the balance between inside money (created by commercial banks) and outside money (created by central banks). 2  FinTech could play a role in helping to address a worrying decline in the provision of correspondent banking services which support cross-border payment and settlement. Half of emerging market and developing economy jurisdictions, three quarters of large banks and a majority of local and regional respondent banks recently reported a decline in such services. Know-your-customer utilities and potentially distributed ledger technologies 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  These benefits spring from FinTech’s potential to deliver a great unbundling of banking into its core functions of settling payments, performing maturity transformation, sharing risk and allocating capital. This would mean revolution, fundamentally re-shaping the financial system.  At the same time, some financial technologies could make incumbent banks more efficient and profitable, reinforcing existing economies of scale and scope in banking. This would mean a restoration, reinforcing incumbents’ power. The balance of these forces may yield a third alternative – a reformation – a more diverse, resilient and effective system for consumers. One where large banks exist alongside new entrants who compete across the value chain. Tonight, I want to discuss how FinTech could affect the Bank of England’s policy objectives and our role in enabling FinTech to meet its promise for the people we serve. I will begin with the former. 3. The Potential impact of FinTech on financial and monetary stability  FinTech has the potential to affect monetary policy transmission, the safety and soundness of the firms we supervise, the resilience of the financial system, and the nature of shocks that it might face. It could also have profound implications for the Bank’s secondary objective, as supervisors, to facilitate effective competition between the firms we regulate.  The impact on firms’ safety and soundness depends on several factors. By making wholesale and retail settlement faster and capital allocation more efficient, FinTech could boost banks’ returns and therefore viability.  Already, FinTech is spurring new entrants including payments providers, peer-to-peer lenders, robo advisors, innovative trading platforms, and foreign exchange agents. This could, with time, unbundle traditional banking models and deny banks their traditional economies of scale and scope. The systemic consequences of FinTech are even more complex. More diverse business models and alternative providers are positives for financial stability. By allowing better credit screening and less adverse selection, FinTech could improve risk assessment, credit allocation, and capital efficiency. But if it encourages herding on common information, trading positions could become more correlated. And if switching costs in funding markets fall, liquidity risk could rise and systemic risks grow.  Indeed, sometimes when I hear of democratising finance, spreading risk in capital-light originate-to-distribute models, I think I haven’t been this excited since the advent of sub-prime. FinTech could also affect the conduct of monetary policy. Unbundled banking would change the roles of bank capital and funding costs in the credit channel of monetary policy. If FinTech enhances participation in financial markets, the wealth channel of monetary policy could strengthen. More broadly, Big Data techniques could tell us about the state of the economy more accurately and promptly. Forecast performance could improve, akin to the forecast improvements that better measurement of atmospheric conditions has, over time, delivered for meteorologists.                                                 may help to lower the compliance costs which major banks say have been a factor in their decisions to withdraw from correspondent banking. And in time, FinTech may broaden the pool of non-banks able to provide individuals and companies with viable alternatives, but for now banks continue to act as gatekeepers to payment and settlement in central bank money. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  My own forecast is that FinTech’s consequences for the Bank’s objectives will not become fully apparent for some time. Many of the technologies needed to deliver such transformations are nascent – their scalability and compatibility untested beyond Proofs of Concept. Moreover, the bar for displacing incumbent technologies is very high. Nor will the Bank of England take risks with the resilience of the core of the system. Disruption won’t come either easy or cheap. 4. Enabling the FinTech Transformation We are actively exploring how new financial technologies could support our policy objectives. There are five ways the Bank is enabling the FinTech transformation. The first is widening access to central bank money to non-bank Payments Service Providers, known as PSPs. 3 As the internet revolutionised commerce, making trade faster and markets more competitive, payments technology lagged in many countries, although it is worth remembering that the UK has been a global leader on real-time retail payments. Faster Payments (FPS) was one of the earliest real-time retail systems introduced, in 2008. Now, new entrants and established players are seeking to provide payment services that are instantaneous, secure, reliable and accessible anytime from anywhere.4 Retail consumers and firms are increasingly demanding payments completed in seconds, not hours or days.  They expect payments to be seamless, reliable and cheap whether to recipients overseas or just up the street.  And they expect to make payments without visits to a bank branch or even logging onto a desktop computer.  Similarly, companies, financial intermediaries and governments want to process ever larger and more complex bulk payments covering multiple systems, countries and currencies. Central banks lie at the hearts of payment systems, giving households and firms the assurance that transactions have settled in the most secure form of payment: central bank money. To fulfil that role, our payments infrastructure needs to remain fit for purpose: reliable, resilient and robust. But we must also be responsive to changing payments demands. So earlier this year the Bank announced we would be drawing up a blueprint to replace our current real-time gross settlement (RTGS) system, now twenty years old.  48 institutions currently have settlement accounts in RTGS. All other users of the systems that settle across RTGS access settlement via one of four agent banks.5 These users include over 1000 non-bank PSPs serving customers’ increasingly demanding standards, and many rely on major UK payment schemes, particularly Faster Payments (FPS).  As they grow, some PSPs want to reduce their reliance on the systems, service levels, risk appetite and goodwill of the very banks with whom they are competing. Re-selling services ultimately provided by banks limits these firms’ growth, potential to innovate, and competitive impact.                                                 3  These PSPs include firms granted the status of either an e-money or payment institution in the UK.  4  Examples include From Stripe to Square, from Paypal to Ripple, from Applepay to Zapp. 5  Indirect access removes the need to build costly payments infrastructure – a potentially large fixed cost for young companies. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  That is why I am announcing this evening that the Bank intends to extend direct access to RTGS beyond the current set of firms, allowing a range of non-bank PSPs to compete on a level playing field with banks. 6 By increasing the proportion of settlement in central bank money, diversifying the number of settlement firms, and driving greater innovation in risk-reducing payments technologies, expanding access should bring financial stability benefits. It should also enable more efficient, effective and inclusive payments, including in ways that we cannot fully anticipate. It is not a one-way street, however.  As we extend access, we will safeguard resilience in three ways: by holding settlement account holders to the appropriate standards; by removing legislative barriers to non-bank access; and by designing the right account arrangements for new entrants. I am pleased that both the FCA and HMRC, who together supervise these institutions, are committed to developing a strengthened supervisory regime for those who apply for an RTGS settlement account, to give assurance that non-bank PSPs can safely take their place at the heart of the payment system. And I welcome the Chancellor’s commitment tonight to make the necessary legislative changes to ensure that these new entrants can access RTGS safely and efficiently.7  By extending RTGS access, our objective is to increase competition and innovation in the market for payment services. To ensure that PSPs are not disadvantaged relative to banks offering equivalent payment services, the Bank intends to give appropriate remuneration for balances that PSPs will be required to hold overnight to support their payments activities.8 The second way the Bank is enabling the FinTech transformation is by being open to providing access to central bank money for new forms of wholesale securities settlement.  Securities settlement is the lifeblood of modern wholesale financial markets – the associated payments account for fully half of RTGS’s daily settlement flows. However, as with retail payments, securities settlement is now ripe for innovation. A typical settlement chain can involve many different intermediaries, meaning securities settlement is comparatively slow. Transactions that take nanoseconds to execute settle in days. This also means large costs and operational risk. And, like in payment systems, economies of scale introduce concentration and create single points of failure. All of that ties up potentially tens of                                                 6 Another key enabler of PSP access to major retail payment systems such as FPS is the development of aggregators that can provide direct technical connections to the infrastructure, reducing the costs of building this capability for newer entrants. The intention is that these aggregators could be used by PSPs without an RTGS account, but under this arrangement PSPs would still need an agent bank for settlement of their obligations across RTGS.  7  The legislative changes include adding Payment Institutions to the list of regulated entities to whom the Settlement Finality Regulations apply, modifying the Payment Services and Electronic Money Regulations to enable safeguarded funds held by E-Money Institutions and Payment Institutions to be posted with the Bank and amending the Banking Act to expand HM Treasury’s powers to grant the   Bank of England with the ability to supervise any relevant payments systems if they ultimately grow large enough to pose a systemic threat. The first is essential to enable these firms to benefit from the critical protections the Settlement Finality Regulations offer to users of major UK payment systems. The second is needed to enable these firms to deposit monies in RTGS on behalf of their customers. The final change provides assurance that any longer-term stability implications of these changes can be addressed under the Bank’s prudential remit. 8  We do not intend, however, to extend facilities to PSPs for which they have no need. Non-bank PSPs will not therefore be eligible for membership of the Sterling Monetary Framework – and in particular the Bank’s credit facilities. That is because PSPs are not part of the monetary policy transmission mechanism or exposed to inherent overnight liquidity risk. The Bank may also take steps to limit PSPs’ capacity to hold unlimited overnight balances on their settlement accounts. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  billions of pounds worth of capital. With the economics of wholesale banking under pressure, cutting inefficiencies is a high priority for industry. That is why it is welcome that FinTech innovators are exploring the potential of distributed ledger technology to simplify the settlement chain, reduce its cost, and raise its speed while increasing resilience. The instruments involved range from equities to bank loans. However, the challenges facing such projects are legion, including reliability, resilience, security and scale. And fundamentally, how to prove technologies that are still nascent?  One challenge an otherwise robust system of sufficient scale would not face is access to central bank money from the Bank of England. The Bank has for many years sought to ensure that, wherever possible, wholesale securities settlement occurs in central bank money.  We are already clear that we stand ready to act as settlement agent both for regulated systemically important schemes supervised by the Bank, and, on a case-by-case basis, for other new systems.9 The Bank will use this to enable innovation and competition, without compromising stability.  The third way the Bank is enabling the FinTech transformation is by exploring the use of Distributed Ledger (DL) technology in our core activities, including the operation of RTGS.  If distributed ledger technology could provide a more efficient way for private sector firms to deliver payments and settle securities, why not apply it to the core of the payments system itself? The great promise of distributed ledgers for central banks is their potential to enhance resilience. Distributing the ledger means multiple copies of the system. It can continue to operate if parts get knocked out. That removes the single point of failure risk inherent in a centralised system. But if we are to entrust the heart of our financial system to such technology, it must be robust and reliable. The payments system we oversee processes £½ trillion of bank transactions, equivalent to around 1/3 of annual GDP, each day. Disruptions are potentially costly. That is why, in payments and settlement, the Bank has an extremely low tolerance for any threat to the integrity of the economy’s ‘plumbing’. We won’t beta test RTGS.  To help distinguish DL’s potential from its hype, the Bank has set up our own as a Proof of Concept. We have learned a great deal – about the opportunities and the challenges that need to be met before DL could be used in central banking.  Some of those challenges are familiar to any payments system.10 Others are more specific to DL. For example, we would need assurance that DL systems can be scaled, retain data integrity, and operate at the speeds and volumes required by central bank infrastructure – day in, day out.  And we need to be certain that the privacy of the data in those distributed copies cannot be compromised by cyber attack, not just today but in the future. One way this might be achieved is to limit the distribution of the ledger to existing trusted parties, such as other public sector entities. To move forward we are working with other central banks. Beyond this we are open to working with others to explore further possibilities, including alternative applications of the technology.                                                 9  The criteria are publicly available in the Bank’s Settlement Account Policy, available at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/paymentsystems/boesettlementaccounts.pdf. 10  In particular, participants need to be identifiable; permissions need to be assigned; messaging must be secure; and transactions must be verified, recorded, and stored. Ownership of assets must be capable of being determined with certainty, particularly in the event of a participant default. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  In the extreme, a DL for everyone could open the possibility of creating a central bank digital currency. On some levels this is appealing. For example it would mean people have direct access to the ultimate risk-free asset. In its extreme form, it could fundamentally and perhaps abruptly re-shape banking.  However, were it to co-exist with the current banking model, it could exacerbate liquidity risk by lowering the frictions involved in running to central bank money.11 These questions and others are why these topics are being examined as part of the Bank’s research agenda, with the prospect of a central bank digital currency for the UK, in my view, still some way off. We will work to make payments easier, and though cash may no longer be king it once was, its reign will endure for some time.  The fourth way the Bank is enabling the FinTech transformation is by partnering with FinTech companies on projects of direct relevance to the Bank’s mission.  I am announcing tonight that the Bank is launching a FinTech Accelerator to work in partnership with FinTech firms on challenges that we, as a central bank, uniquely face. The Accelerator will work with new technology firms to help us harness FinTech innovations for central banking. In return, it will offer firms the chance to demonstrate their solutions for real issues facing us as policymakers, together with the valuable ‘first client’ reference that comes with it. With time, the Accelerator will build a network of firms working in this space for the benefit of us and them alike.  How will this help us? Consider that the Bank monitors risks that threaten the operational resilience of the UK financial system.  At the Financial Policy Committee’s instigation, we have been working with other authorities to encourage firms to improve their cyber defences. Over the past two years, twenty-three firms have undergone CBEST penetration tests, with all core banks expected to have completed tests by the end of this year. To complement these efforts, the Bank has begun examining how public data could be used to assess firms’ cyber resilience, including looking for malware on a firm’s systems, software vulnerabilities, or weak encryption that could be exploited by hackers.12 As a proof of concept and good cyber hygiene, we are using data publically available on the web to assess our own resilience. Early results indicate these techniques could complement existing tests in our regular assessments of firms’ operational resilience.  We are also exploring how we - and others - could use the data the Bank collects more effectively. Big Data has the potential to help the Bank’s policy committees identify trends in systemic risk and the economy. Much of the data we collect is rightly subject to strict limits on confidentiality and sharing. For example, our regulatory mortgage contract data comes under strict control to guarantee personal data protection. We can’t just share the private data to which we have access with external researchers, foreign authorities or even across the Bank. But this means that, simply put, the people of the United Kingdom are not getting the most out of the data the Bank collects.                                                 11  For further discussion see Broadbent (2016), “Central banks and digital currencies”, available at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2016/886.aspx. 12  This allows an efficient check of a firm’s cyber defences akin to the way a policeman could walk by a house and observe, from the outside, its security features – whether the gate is locked; whether it has an alarm; whether windows have been left open; what routes intruders might use to gain access to the property; and so on. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  That’s why we are investigating ways of anonymising and de-sensitising data – fully respecting privacy laws without losing analytical content – to allow wider sharing.  Progress has been encouraging creating the prospect of better informed policy making.13  These are just two examples of a bigger programme of collaboration between the Bank and technology innovators. We are open to further collaboration and tomorrow will provide details of the next steps.  Finally, the Bank is calibrating its regulatory approach to FinTech developments.  FinTech should neither be the Wild West nor strangled at birth. The Bank is devoting considerable resources to ensure whatever develops is sustainable, not ephemeral. If FinTech enables a great unbundling of financial services, risks will change in tandem. Our interest is in ensuring the safety and soundness of banks, the protection of insurance policy holders and the resilience of financial ecosystem as a whole to these changing risks. It is about activities not labels. That is why the Bank has been engaging with FinTech firms to understand better the financial stability risks that could emerge as banking is re-shaped. We will monitor those that arise along the transition path and those that could endure. Where firms or activities become systemic and risks to the real economy grow, they will come within the purview of the Bank’s responsibilities for the stability of the system as a whole. The Financial Policy Committee will continue to monitor the scope of the regulatory perimeter. Adjustments will follow if necessary. When FinTech companies fall within our remits, we will monitor them in the same proportionate way that we approach other firms – backed by analytics and judgement, taking action where appropriate.  We are building a system that allows for orderly failures. Not just to end the blatant unfairness of Too Big to Fail, but also to foster industry dynamism and better outcomes for consumers. After all, ease of exit promotes ease of entry. We won’t discourage avatars by preserving dinosaurs. 5. Conclusion  Will FinTech mean a restoration, reformation, or revolution for finance? Through our regulatory approach, widening access to RTGS, and facilitating technological development, the Bank is helping to enable a sustainable FinTech reformation. This will promote the UK’s monetary and financial stability and mean better financial services for firms and households. With time, FinTech could mean a more open, more transparent, and more democratic global financial system. As host to the world’s greatest financial centre, this room, this City, this country stand to gain tremendously. The Bank will play its role in enabling a blissful dawn to unfold; to set the budding rose above the rose full blown.                                                 13  More broadly, Sir Charlie Bean’s independent review of economic statistics highlighted the impact on economic data arising from inadequate sharing of data across the public sector, something that I am pleased that the Cabinet Office is taking steps to address. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Robert Ophèle: Diversity and harmonisation of deposit insurance Closing speech by Mr Robert Ophèle, Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at the International Association of Deposit Insurers (IADI) International ERC Conference, Paris, 26 May 2016. *      *      * I wish to thank the IADI and the FGDR for inviting me to deliver this closing speech. Bruno Bezard opened the conference for the French Treasury, and a central banker will close it. This is a perfect arrangement.  Deposit insurance or deposit guaranty is a fascinating tool. History and geography have demonstrated the variety of schemes and how they are a powerful force for the better, or perhaps for the worse.  I can’t indeed refrain from quoting the American Bankers Association, in 1933, i.e. more than 100 years after the introduction in the US of the first deposit insurance scheme, by the State of New York in 1829: “these historical experiences show that the guaranty plan is inherently fallacious and based on erroneous premises and assumptions. It has proved to be one of those plausible, but deceptive, human plans that in actual application only serve to render worse the very evils they seek to cure.”  Today 113 Deposit Insurance Funds are in place, but I should stress that the jury is still out as to their effectiveness. Indeed, recent history shows how tricky deposit insurance can be. Just remember a few years ago, when schemes avoiding moral hazard by not providing a 100 percent coverage of even the smallest deposits were favoured. Along this perfectly understandable line of reasoning, avoiding moral hazard, the UK Financial Services Compensation Scheme, in accordance with the European directive then in force, covered in full the first £2,000 deposit but only 90pc of the next £33,000. The Northern Rock crisis showed in a dramatic way that such a scheme was totally ineffective in preventing a bank run.  Almost at the other end of the spectrum of possibilities, the Irish decision, in September 2008, to increase its deposit insurance to an unlimited amount, triggered a transfer of savings from other countries, especially from the UK, and from branches of non-Irish banks operating in Ireland to Irish banks. It contributed to Ireland's financial debacle and illustrated the need for an international cooperative stance with regard to deposit insurance. Since then we have introduced in Europe a resolution scheme that changes dramatically the hierarchy of creditors and modifies profoundly the risks for small depositors and the purpose of a deposit insurance regime.  There is no crisis-proof deposit insurance scheme and this conference has been a very welcome opportunity to discuss the various models, share experiences, compare principles, governance and operating methods. Thank you all for your useful testimonies today. We all share ambitious objectives: to address crisis situations, manage the multicultural framework in times of crisis, handle cross-border resolution cases, and structure Deposit Insurance Schemes to deal with such events and ensure payouts. To achieve these objectives, international cooperation, even though it may sometimes be difficult to implement, can be highly beneficial.  International cooperation is indeed of great importance to supervisory and resolution authorities and deposit insurance systems (DISs).Globalisation has prompted us to decide and act jointly to address the financial crisis and to prevent new ones. We now know that a financial crisis cannot be resolved by countries and/or authorities acting independently.  It is not only a matter for DISs but also for all other bodies involved in financial stability: central banks, supervisors, capital markets authorities, accounting standards setters, etc. The FSB 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  has taken the lead in initiating reforms and in helping to implementing common principles at the local level.  As regards deposit insurance, the International Association of Deposit Insurers was created in 2002 as a direct result of the early understanding of the importance of international discussion and practice-sharing between DISs. Progress made in this field has been tremendous.  The momentum created by international authorities and standards-setters has actually been crucial International common standards are key because they embody common understanding and analysis. They are safeguards of the level playing field and of orderly problem solving. The Core Principles for Effective Deposit Insurance Systems drawn up by the IADI in cooperation with the BCBS, regularly updated and supplemented for instance by the guidance on ex-ante funding, are a perfect example in this respect.  In Europe, we have gone further with our second Directive on DGS (Directive 2014/49/EU) that harmonises the reimbursement of covered deposits within 7 working days and with the on-going negotiations for the establishment of a Single DGS for European Member States participating in the Banking Union. Is a single DGS a prerequisite for a genuine Banking Union or is it the final stage to be implemented when everything else has been harmonised? In all events, the European stance will be prudent, favouring the establishment a European Scheme based on a re-insurance approach.  It is not only standards that matter but practices too  Common standards alone are not sufficient because day-to-day work on financial stability requires practical solutions that cannot be implemented in isolation by a single jurisdiction.  This does not mean that everything must be unified but bridges must be built between stakeholders, in accordance with their legal remits and constraints.  At the European level, we pushed forward this approach through European agencies such as the European Banking Authority (EBA), the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) and the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) to help implement the standards consistently and ultimately by the creation of the Banking Union. The latter is wholly dedicated to the practical exercise of supervision, resolution and, at a later stage, deposit insurance.  More specifically, we welcome the completion of the cooperation agreement guidelines prepared by the EBA and mentioned in the last panel today. I stress their importance because they promote a multilateral cooperation framework agreement and set minimum requirements for achieving the rapid and consistent conclusion of the cooperation agreements between deposit guarantee schemes (DGS). These cooperation agreements will address operational cross-border challenges,1 such as ensuring that depositors in EU branches of institutions headquartered in other Member States are treated similarly to depositors in the home Member State.  The H2C (home-host cooperation) project, which has just been extensively presented is also a remarkable new step towards finding and experimenting with solutions to shared problems, and this must be encouraged. It is an example of the constructive cooperation between DIS operators or authorities despite their diverse regulatory or operational approaches.                                                  1  These guidelines concern (i) the modalities for repaying depositors by local DGS at branches of banks established in other European Member states, (ii) the modalities for the transfer of contributions from one DGS to another in the event of a credit institution ceasing to be a member of a DGS and joining another DGS, and (iii) modalities for mutual lending between DGSs 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  From a regulatory perspective, there is the example of the FSB Key Attributes that have been applied through the Crisis Management Groups, with relevant authorities holding discussions to find ways to tackle the recovery and resolution of GSIBs.  Practice and model diversity is a challenge, but not an obstacle for implementing efficient resolution strategies  We have heard today that DGSs may still be very diverse in terms of their status, functions, design, size, etc.  This is also the case for supervisory and resolution regimes even though the international standards-setters have made considerable progress in terms of harmonisation.  Let me take the example of banking resolution: one of the (many) remaining challenges is to make sure that the adopted resolution strategies will be recognised and applied cross-border. Under the aegis of the FSB, several initiatives have been taken (e.g. ISDA protocol for financial contracts) but this is not the end of the story and many further discussions will be necessary to remove all the obstacles to implementing, inter alia, a single point of entry resolution of a GSIB.  In the EU we have now a common legal resolution regime and even a common resolution authority for the Banking Union but resolution measures continue to be implemented at the national level because insolvency regimes within Europe are not unified. Being optimistic, I would say that these difficulties are not an impediment to resolution, because the most important thing is to be mindful of such a difficulty and to deal with it.  Each of us constitute a vital link for building the proper international regulatory framework  The presence of so many different institutions at this conference demonstrates the need and interest to talk and work together because we share a lot of similar concerns and goals concerning depositor protection and financial stability.  We are united by a common goal: to strongly mitigate contagion and make liquidation operationally possible. Depositors must perceive the DIS as a well-funded and reliable partner able to satisfy their claims in a timely manner.  But continuous efforts are required. I know for instance in France the permanent working relationship between the ACPR, the FGDR and the Treasury to make the French DIS ever more effective with regard to these goals.  I am wholeheartedly convinced that working together, especially at the international level, is a key factor of success. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Yannis Stournaras: Financial stability and growth – the role of central banks and the pre-requisites for sustainable growth in Europe Keynote speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 33rd International Financial Law Conference “Financial stability and growth: the role of central banks and the pre-requisites for sustainable growth in Europe”, co-presented by the IBA Banking Law Committee and IBA Securities Law Committee and supported by the IBA European Regional Forum, Athens, 20 May 2016. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, It is a great pleasure to be with you today and to have the opportunity to share with you some thoughts on financial stability in Europe. Systemic financial stability is a critical condition for achieving our common goals of prosperity and sustainable growth. At the outbreak of the international financial crisis in 2008, central banks and regulatory mechanisms lacked a well-tried toolbox for containing systemic instability and for preventing its build-up. With the measures taken and mechanisms established in subsequent years, that picture has changed substantially, as market participants, regulators, supervisors, macroprudential authorities and others quickly dealt with the challenges. Not only have we seen the transformation of banking supervision through the creation of the European Banking Union with its three pillars, the Single Supervisory Mechanism, the Single Resolution Mechanism and the still-to-be-implemented common deposit guarantee scheme, but we have also seen increased recognition of the importance of systemic stability and the role that macro-prudential policies can play in fostering it. Traditional banking supervision is more focused on individual institutions and the prevention or management of isolated instances of bank failures. Macro-prudential regulation, by contrast, focuses on the system as a whole and largely seeks to prevent systemic instability and to limit the consequence of systemic distress for the macro economy. But if financial stability is crucial for growth, the crisis has also taught us that growth is crucial for financial stability. Sluggish growth in the euro area, in spite of unprecedented monetary policy loosening, has weakened European banks, not least through the rise in NPLs, thus hampering their ability to finance the real economy. In order to explore these ideas, I initially examine this new role for central banks and the tools that have been – indeed, are still being – developed in an attempt to strengthen the resilience of the financial system. Developments in the EU regulatory framework in this area are discussed. I then outline some of the challenges ahead and, finally, provide some thoughts on euro area growth. A. Central banks and macro-prudential policy The challenges facing EU financial sectors in recent years have significantly increased the responsibilities of central banks in the area of crisis prevention. Mandates have been amended to explicitly refer to financial stability as a core central bank task. Thus central banks are charged with limiting system-wide distress and, ultimately, avoiding its negative consequences for the real economy. In the past, it was not thought necessary to separate monetary policy from the task of providing financial stability. It was thought that price stability in the market for goods and services would be sufficient to ensure financial stability in asset markets. Experience has dispelled such beliefs and has shown that the business cycle and the financial cycle are not necessarily synchronized; long periods of disconnect between the two cycles can 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  materialize. In particular, the financial cycle tends to have larger amplitude and lower frequency than the normal business cycle. Macro-prudential policy bridges the gap between the traditional micro-prudential supervision of individual banks and monetary policy. Its objectives are, first, to enhance the resilience of financial institutions and the entire financial system, and, second, to smooth the financial cycle. In this regard, macro-prudential policy allows monetary policy to focus on maintaining price stability, while micro-prudential supervision focuses on individual institutions. In this way, macro-prudential policy enhances the institutional separation that is one of the principles of the architecture of the euro area. Whilst separation is important, the usefulness of coordinating policies should not be forgotten – whether that be coordination of specific policies across different countries (as happened in the wake of the failure of Lehman Brothers with the simultaneous cuts in policy rates) or coordination of policies within one jurisdiction. Respect for the independence of the various authorities involved in securing financial stability should not imply separation and a lack of coordination. B. The macro-prudential toolbox and developments in the EU financial regulatory framework If macro-prudential policy is to effectively curb the financial cycle, it is essential to have tools that deal with the credit-real estate (or whatever other asset) relationship. There are two ways to deal with this relationship. The first is by imposing restrictions on credit institutions – for example, through capital-based measures. The second is by limiting the degree to which households and non-financial corporations take on leverage. With regard to credit institutions, the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR) and Directive (CRD IV) play a prominent role in setting the prudential standards in the EU. Implementation is ongoing and expected to be completed by 2019. From January 2016, the countercyclical capital buffer (CCB), the systemic risk buffer (SRB) and the other systemically important institutions (OSII) buffer, three important macro-prudential tools, have been operational. However, given the need to diversify the available tools beyond regulations based on capital, tools based on liquidity, leverage and funding sources are also being introduced. With regard to the borrower’s side, instruments such as the loan-to-value (LTV), loan-to-income (LTI) and debt-service-to-income (DSTI) limits are considered to be among the most effective macro-prudential instruments in curtailing excessive credit growth and the build-up of unsustainable debt positions. In order to effectively moderate the financial cycle, a time-varying dimension is crucial in the design of the various ratios. For example, the loan-to-value ratio should be lowered during the expansionary phase of a financial cycle and raised during the contractionary phase, while respecting the mandate of financial stability and avoiding the build-up of systemic risk. Otherwise, there is a risk of pro-cyclicality since leverage constraints decline as asset prices rise. It is imperative, however, that the macro-prudential toolbox be further enhanced with innovative tools beyond those outlined above. Cyclical systemic risk can arise not only as a result of excessive credit expansion (an issue that can be addressed with the countercyclical capital buffer along with limits on borrowing) but also because of inadequate channeling of credit that keeps the real economy under-financed for extended periods. A lesson drawn from the crisis is that we have focused on rather narrow areas of financial activity. Nowadays, it is important that we focus on the risks that might have been missed such as the interlinkages between sectors, and thus explore how the financial system can influence, and be influenced, by the wider economy. In the euro area, there is evidence of limited financing of the real economy, with the consequence that euro-area investment has not recovered to pre-2008 levels despite ECB policies directly aimed at increasing the lending of the banking sector. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  C. Challenges ahead and the way forward Challenges, of course, remain. Let me point to some that are more relevant for macro-prudential supervision and systemic stability. 1. A first challenge relates to the issue of the increased burden of complying with the new regulatory framework and assessing its cumulative impact. I am not referring to additional capital adequacy requirements but rather to the plethora of new measures being applied by more than one institution. In the pursuit of making banks more robust, liquid, responsible and transparent, huge progress in regulating and supervision their operations has been achieved. However, there has been no estimate of the cumulative impact of these regulations. I welcome and look forward to the report on the impact of capital requirements on the economy; however, the impact of other regulations should also be examined. We need to keep in mind the principle of proportionality, a general principle of EU law. As new regulations accumulate, they can come with costs as well as with benefits. Policymakers need to be watchful that, in attempting to limit externalities, they do not inadvertently create new externalities. The financial sector ultimately exists to serve the real economy. It is very likely that there are trade-offs between ensuring financial stability and imposing such a burden on the financial sector that it ceases to be able to do its job, namely to intermediate between surplus and deficit units in any economy in order to encourage long-term investment and growth. Thus we have to develop methods to judge the appropriateness of indicators and tools. Since many of the regulations have been applied over the last few years, that is, in a period of acute financial stress, I expect that in the coming years there will be a need to reassess those regulations and perhaps conduct some fine-tuning. Similar arguments apply to the national options and discretion in the new regulatory framework. 2. Closely related to the previous challenge is the degree to which regulatory developments should be front-loaded. The regulations themselves often have long phase-in periods such that new versions of the regulations are developed before the previous versions have been fully implemented. Supervisors have tended to compensate for the long phase-in periods by front-loading all prudential requirements, a situation that sometimes can be considered excessively harsh. Of course the long phase-in periods are often a reaction to the expected impact of the regulation on bank behaviour and, in particular, on the lending to the real economy. Some middle road has to be found. 3. A third challenge is the need to reduce reliance on models. Recently conducted stress-tests, a core macro-prudential tool, followed a “single-model-fits-all” methodology, which left very little room for idiosyncratic and specific national characteristics. Moreover, according to some analysts, there is a risk that stress tests are becoming less effective as a tool. Instead, they may increasingly be seen as being conducted simply to calm financial markets. Ideally, stress tests should be implemented in benign times in accordance with an old wisdom attributed to John F. Kennedy, that “the time to repair the roof is when the sun is shining”. In crisis times, there is the risk that crucial inputs such as macroeconomic variables are under or over-estimated and that adverse scenarios become unrealistic – either too benign or too severe. In consequence, outcomes become ambiguous and difficult to interpret. Additionally, the potential pro-cyclical effects of stress tests should be explored. Stress tests should not only place emphasis on solvency, but they should explore the impact of the assumed shock on bank liquidity, the implications of applying the bail-in tool, the funds needed to meet any demand on deposit guarantee funds, etc. We should focus on harmonizing processes, while models should be enriched with constrained judgement as is standard practice in macroeconomic forecasting. 4. Fourth, there is a need to widen the scope of regulation. Systemic fragility may arise from sources other than the traditional banking sector. A crucial challenge ahead is related to recent disintermediation and the development of “shadow” banking as an alternative means of financial intermediation. The need for macro-prudential regulation of certain financial activities becomes clear if we consider that banks and non-banks are closely tied through 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  market-based intermediation activities. These include a broad array of services related to securitization transactions, securities financing transactions, repos, collateral management and derivatives. The consequences of poorly-monitored risks in this area are unknown and the risk of a new crisis could be lurking, while spill-over effects are difficult to assess. Moreover, the more policymakers are effective in using macro-prudential tools to constrain excessive credit growth in the banking sector, the more likely it becomes that there will be excessive adjustments in the non-bank sector through leakages. Fortunately, “shadow banking” is high on the agenda of the relevant fora and there is a clear need to extend the regulatory toolkit. 5. A fifth challenge, the role of the central bank as a lender of last resort to the banking system, needs to be addressed in the light of the mandate to preserve financial stability. The lender of last resort function is a crucial macro-prudential tool for managing financial distress. The principle developed by Thornton and Bagehot is well-known. Central banks should lend freely to solvent but illiquid banks against good collateral at a high rate of interest. How is this tried and tested principle to be made operational in today’s environment with much larger bank balance sheets and fewer liquid assets? In the past, government bonds were automatically considered good collateral. Today, central banks accept a wider pool of collateral. By what criteria should collateral be judged? We know that liquidity problems can become solvency problems if liquidity is denied or not provided generously enough. Thus the seemingly simple principle developed by Thornton and Bagehot can be open to various interpretations. There is a need, I think, to revisit the question. Mervyn King’s pawnbroker concept (2016) provides some new ideas on the issue. The ultimate aim in meeting these challenges is to make finance in Europe more resilient and to enhance and safeguard financial stability. The role of supervisors of the financial system is to enhance harmonization while respecting proportionality. They should safeguard a level-playing field among all participants and protect depositors while striking the right balance between “strictness” and “fairness”. Their mandate is to set clear boundaries within which financial intermediation can prosper while financial stability is maintained. D. Beyond policies towards the financial sector As I stated at the outset of my presentation, financial stability is not only crucial for growth; growth is also crucial for financial stability. So let me close with a few remarks on growth in the euro area and the completeness of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). Despite the progress made in the past few years, EMU remains incomplete. Divergence across the euro area is significant and the crisis has further highlighted existing shortcomings and important differences that need to be bridged. To this end, Europe should build upon other proposals outlined in the Five Presidents’ Report (2015). As argued in that report, EMU will not be complete until the appropriate mechanisms to share fiscal sovereignty are in place. Monetary unions have to develop mechanisms for risk sharing. Mark Carney (2015) recently highlighted the stylized fact that, whatever happens to asset prices, debt endures. Reducing debt levels is difficult and he notes that it is unlikely that high debt in one sector or region can be reduced without at least temporarily increasing it in another. Fiscal integration can help in this respect. Allow me to remind you of Keynes’s view about the Bretton Woods System – it needed, he believed, to provide mechanisms to promote symmetric adjustment within the fixed exchange rate area so that there would not be a bias towards deficient demand across the system. A more-fiscally-integrated monetary union would help address the problems of asymmetric adjustment and the deflationary bias of our monetary union. Sustainable economic growth can contribute to financial stability. Failure to maintain sustainable growth has been the biggest threat to the long-term stability of the EU since the onset of the 2007 crisis. An appropriate balance between managing risk and enabling investment needs to be struck. In this connection, it is crucial that the regulatory framework does not impede, but provides a suitable environment, for sustainable growth. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Ladies and gentlemen, ultimately, a sustainable recovery will need to be underpinned by higher investment. Yet, in the euro area we presently face a significant investment gap. The financial system and its stability have a crucial role to play in closing this gap. Central bankers and supervisory authorities bear an enormous responsibility in shaping a system that can deliver prosperity to the citizens of Europe. We have made important progress in securing the financial stability needed to deliver such prosperity, but we have not yet completed the job. As the ancient Greek mathematician, Archimedes, once said, “Give me a place to stand and I will move the earth, but first I need a place to stand, a foundation.” The completion of our financial-stability edifice will provide the necessary foundation for the citizens of Europe. Sources: 1. Bank for International Settlements (2015) “Making supervisory stress tests more macroprudential: Considering liquidity and solvency interactions and systemic risk”, BCBS Working Papers No 29, https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/wp29.htm, November. 2. Banque de France and Bank for International Settlements (2016) “Ultra-low interest rates & challenges for central banks”, Farewell Symposium for Christian Noyer, Paris, https://www.banque-france.fr/en/economics-statistics/research/seminars-and-symposiums/symposium-a-loccasion-du-depart-de-christian-noyer-banque-de-france-et-banque-des-reglements-internationaux.html, January. 3. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2015), Finalising post-crisis reforms: an update, A report to G20 Leaders, http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d344.pdf, November. 4. Carney, M. (2015) “Fortune favours the bold”, Speech given to honour the memory of The Honourable J. M. Flaherty, P.C., Iveagh House, Dublin, http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2015/speech794.pdf, January. 5. Cœuré, B. (2016) “Time for a new Lamfalussy moment”, Speech at the Professor Lamfalussy Commemorative Conference, Budapest, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160201.en.html, February. 6. Cœuré, B. (2016) “From Challenges to Opportunities: Rebooting the European Financial Sector”, Süddeutsche Zeitung, Finance Day, Frankfurt, http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160302.en.html, March. 7. Constâncio, V. (2015) Interview with Börsen-Zeitung, “We need more integration in Europe”, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/inter/date/2015/html/sp151230.en.html, December. 8. Draghi, M. (2015) Monetary policy and structural reforms in the euro area, Prometeia40, Bologna, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp151214.en.html, December. 9. Draghi, M. (2016) Introductory statement during the Hearing at the European Parliament’s Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, Brussels, http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160215.en.html, February. 10. Five Presidents’ Report sets out plan for strengthening Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union as of 1 July 2015 (2015), Press release, Brussels, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15–5240_en.htm, June. 11. Hill, J. (2015) “For a financial sector that promotes investment”, London, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–5380_en.htm, July. 12. Hill, J. (2015) Keynote speech at European Banking Federation, “A Brave New World for Banks”, 2015 Annual High Level Conference, Brussels, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–5624_en.htm, September. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  13. Hill, J. (2015) Speech at the European Central Bank Forum on Banking Supervision, “Bank Supervision: Europe in global context”, Frankfurt, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–5985_en.htm, November. 14. Hill, J. (2015) Opening statement on Structured Dialogue – European Parliament: Economic & Monetary Affairs Committee, Brussels, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–6206_en.htm, November. 15. Hill, J. (2015) Speech at the CRR Review Conference, DG FISMA, “The Impact of the CRR and CRD IV on Bank Financing of the Economy”, Brussels, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–6310_en.htm, December. 16. Hill, J. (2016) Keynote speech at the European Banking Authority’s 5th Anniversary Conference, London, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-16–250_en.htm, February. 17. King, M. (2016) “The End of Alchemy: Money, Banking and the Future of the Global Economy” Little, Brown. 18. Praet, P. (2015) Interview with La Libre Belgique, “Europe must show it can bring prosperity”, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/inter/date/2015/html/sp151221.en.html, December. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mario Draghi: Laudatio for Theo Waigel Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, in honour of Dr Theodor Waigel, at SignsAwards, Munich, 17 June 2016. *      *      * James Freeman Clarke, a 19th century theologian, once observed that “a politician is a man who thinks of the next election, while a statesman thinks of the next generation”. This captures well why we are here to honour Theo Waigel today. Theo Waigel’s political career cannot just be defined by the elections he won, however many there were during his 30 years in the Bundestag. Nor can it be defined by his time as head of the CSU and as finance minister of Germany. It is defined by his legacy: a legacy that is still shaping Europe today. He became finance minister in 1989 at a turning-point in post-war European history – when the Iron Curtain that divided Europe was being lifted; when the walls and barbed wire that divided Germany were being removed. It was a time of great hopes and expectations. But it was also a time of some anxiety. It was clear that the successful reunification of Germany would be a tremendous undertaking. And many wondered what those changes would mean for the European Community – whether it would upset the balance of power that had prevailed between nations since the war. In that uncertain setting, Theo Waigel’s leadership was pivotal – both as a German and as a European. He was one of the strongest advocates of German reunification, and was instrumental in getting Germany’s federal and state governments to finance the reconstruction and modernisation of East Germany. And under his influence, the German government took a fundamental decision for Europe: that the reunification which made Germany stronger should not make Europe weaker. Free of the threat of the Soviet Union, Germany chose not to go down a path of its own making. Instead, it renewed its commitment to Europe. And it demonstrated the strength of that commitment by sharing its currency with its neighbours. As Theo Waigel said, Germany brought the Deutsche Mark to Europe, and in doing so brought the euro into being. This historic sequence of events spoke to three character traits which define Theo Waigel: his vision, his resolve and his statesmanship. He was a person who took the long view and followed his convictions rather than the zeitgeist. He was not discouraged by the obstacles that stood in his way, however high they were. And he had that crucial quality of all great statesmen – the ability to take others with him. He brought these same three qualities to bear in the design of Economic and Monetary Union some years later. His voice carried particular weight in the decision to add the Stability and Growth Pact to the architecture of monetary union. Against considerable resistance in some corners, his advocacy ensured the euro was born within a framework for fiscal discipline. This was visionary, because the Pact was more than just a set of rules. What Theo Waigel understood is that a union of separate nations, with different histories, traditions and cultures, but bound together by common interests and common needs, could only be built on mutual trust. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Trust was the key ingredient for countries take further steps towards integration without fear of moral hazard. But trust had to be earned. First, by countries showing that they accepted the shared responsibilities that monetary union creates. And second, by converging towards similar levels of income, which would assuage fears of a future “transfer union”. Theo Waigel’s insight was to see that the Stability Pact could achieve both. Responsibility would be demonstrated by compliance with the rules that had been agreed by all. And compliance would lead to greater stability, higher growth and ultimately faster convergence. When the Pact was agreed in the late 1990s, it was in a climate of optimism and prudence where this expectation seemed feasible. Fiscal discipline had spread through the euro area as countries prepared for membership. And the addition of the single currency to the single market was expected to lead to a rapid narrowing of differences between richer and poorer members. But the reality was of course different, and convergence was slower than we thought – at least sustainable convergence that did not unwind with the bust. This was in part due to a lack of conviction among euro area countries that compliance with the rules would generate jobs and growth. It was in part due to a lack of determination in applying those rules. And it was in part due to external factors, namely the global financial crisis. Fundamentally, the culture that should have underpinned trust – of responsibility leading to solidarity – needed to be stronger. And without that, as Theo Waigel foresaw, our monetary union was more fragile than it should have been. So today we face a choice – between leaving things as they are and moving forward. And this is not a choice without costs. We have seen that the price of inaction is high. We have seen how it leaves the economy vulnerable to instability. We have seen how the perceived impotence of public authorities in meeting the needs of their people feeds into frustration and rejection. And we have seen how that risks undermining trust in and support for our institutions – and even the European Union itself. So to my mind there is only one way ahead, and that is to complete the vision that Theo Waigel left us. But progress today must be different from the past. We have to find a new way to build trust among the Member States and the peoples of Europe – a way that builds on existing institutions to better ensure that the common needs of the people are met. The needs that we share in common, and that can be more safely delivered in common, must be identified and explained more clearly. They include economic interests, such as the benefits provided by a large and fully integrated financial area. They include defence, and more generally security against internal and external threats, the capacity to address global migration challenges and the protection of intellectual property – all of which the European Union helps deliver, in ways that individual governments may not necessarily be able to do. And they include environmental protection and the fight against climate change. It is the demonstration of why, and how, those interests can be better protected in common that will gradually complement compliance and convergence as the basis for trust and the cement of the Union. And I think that in many cases the evidence is already there for all to see. But to move forward, and I believe it is in our interests to do so, will require us to draw on the qualities that made Theo Waigel a leader. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  His focus on the long horizon rather than the demands of the day. His courage in his convictions and his resilience in seeing them through. And above all his mastery at convincing and building consensus. That would be the best way to honour Theo Waigel’s legacy, and to deliver the stability and prosperity that our Union was built for. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Fritz Zurbrügg: Presentation of the Swiss National Bank’s Financial Stability Report Introductory remarks by Mr Fritz Zurbrügg, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the media news conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 16 June 2016. *      *      * In my remarks, I will start by looking at the key points addressed in the Financial Stability Report, which was published today. I will then finish with a review of the launch of the new banknote series, which commenced in April. Big banks: Capital situation further improved – SNB welcomes regulatory reforms Let me begin with the situation of the Swiss big banks. Over the past year, they each improved their capital situation further, as regards both risk-weighted capital ratios and leverage ratios. Both big banks are already almost fully compliant with the requirements of the current Swiss ‘too big to fail’ regulations (TBTF1), which will apply in full from the beginning of 2019. The Swiss National Bank acknowledges the progress made in this area. These regulations were revised over the course of the last year. The revised regulations (TBTF2) envisage a significant increase in requirements on the loss-absorbing capacity of the big banks and will come into effect in a little over two weeks from now. With a phase-in period until end-2019, the requirements will be gradually increased to the definitive level. Both big banks are already fully compliant with the revised requirements that come into effect on 1 July. However, to meet the requirements applicable from the beginning of 2020 – i.e. after the phase-in period – action will need to be taken. This is particularly the case as regards meeting the leverage ratio requirements, but also as regards gone-concern instruments. The latter are used to recapitalise a bank in the event of imminent insolvency without recourse to government support. This is achieved by writing off designated debt instruments or converting them into equity. In addition to the reforms at national level, reforms are also underway on the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s international capital framework. It is likely that risk-weighted assets will increase as a result of these international reforms. This expected increase has, as far as possible, been factored into the calibration of the revised Swiss ‘too big to fail’ regulations. All of these reforms – especially the higher leverage ratio requirements – will result in a further strengthening of the Swiss big banks’ resilience. In light of the fact that, in an international comparison, these two institutions are particularly large relative to the economy, this strengthening is necessary for two reasons. First, the big banks’ loss potential relative to their capitalisation is substantial. Given their significance to the Swiss economy, it is important that the big banks remain adequately capitalised, even in the event of such losses occurring. Second, while leverage ratios at both Swiss big banks have improved by international standards, they are still below the average for large globally active banks. The SNB welcomes and supports these reforms. We will continue to be actively involved in the finalisation of the international reforms. The combined package of national and international reforms represents a decisive step in the process of resolving the ‘too big to fail’ issue in Switzerland. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Domestically focused banks: adequate resilience, despite substantial increase in mortgage exposure This brings me to the domestically focused banks. For these banks, whose activity centres on Swiss lending and deposit-taking business, I would like to highlight three developments. First, these banks’ risk exposure to the Swiss mortgage and residential real estate markets rose markedly in 2015, with their mortgage lending volume growing at a similarly robust pace as in the previous year. In addition, they further increased their affordability risk and interest rate risk exposure from maturity transformation, against a background of slightly higher imbalances on the mortgage and residential real estate markets. Second, in 2015, these banks’ interest rate margins stabilised at a low level, after having fallen steadily and significantly since the start of the low interest rate period at end-2008. This stabilisation is remarkable, given that pressure on interest rate margins continued last year. Swiss money and capital market rates fell once again in 2015. At the same time, the interest paid by banks on customer deposits remained largely unchanged. Thus, the difference between these two interest rates – the liability margin – narrowed further. The reduction of the liability margin was offset by an increase in the asset margin, and by taking on greater interest rate risk. Third, domestically focused banks were able to maintain their level of resilience compared to the previous year, despite the increased risk exposure. Overall, their capitalisation is well above regulatory minimum requirements, and is also adequate according to SNB stress tests. The currently available capital surpluses at most banks would be sufficient to cover the losses projected in these stress tests. Given the level of prevailing risks, this is positive. However, the risks to financial stability could increase further. As we saw in 2015, even a lower momentum on the Swiss mortgage and residential real estate markets can cause imbalances on these markets to increase. This can happen, for instance, when combined with comparatively weaker developments in fundamentals such as GDP growth. Moreover, in a sustained period of low interest rates, real estate prices will remain subject to upward pressure. Another rise in prices or decline in yields could occur particularly in the residential investment property segment. This would increase the risk of a substantial correction in the event of an interest rate rise, which would put pressure both on leveraged investors and on the banks who finance their investments. At the same time, in an environment of persistently low interest rates, the pressure on interest rate margins would continue. Such pressure creates powerful incentives for banks to take on more risks. The focus here is on maturity transformation and affordability risk in mortgage lending. In the short term, this may allow banks to increase their profitability, but the flip side is that this also makes them more vulnerable to interest rate shocks and corrections on the mortgage and residential real estate markets. Domestically focused banks would be particularly exposed to a major interest rate shock. As we explain in our Financial Stability Report, in the event of a normalisation of interest rates, banks would initially benefit from the restoration of the liability margin. However, a major interest rate shock would cause net interest income to fall significantly at many banks, potentially resulting in losses. The greater a bank’s maturity transformation is, the higher these losses will be. Even if the current low interest rate period were to continue and interest rates were only to rise very gradually, the possibility of a major interest rate shock should not be ruled out. Experience has shown that interest rate corrections can sometimes be sudden and sharp. It should also be borne in mind that interest rates on the money and capital markets are currently more than 300 basis points lower than at the beginning of 2008. In other words, 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  even if interest rates were to return to levels previously considered normal, this would still constitute a major correction. In view of the fact that risks to financial stability could increase further over the short to medium term, the capital surpluses of domestically focused banks are of particular significance. When defining their appetite for risk and their capital plans, the banks should continue to ensure that they are also able to absorb the losses associated with highly unfavourable but possible scenarios in the future. Even under scenarios of this kind, they should be able to perform their core functions for the Swiss economy – in particular, the supply of credit. The SNB will continue to monitor the situation on the Swiss mortgage and real estate markets closely, paying particular attention to developments in the residential investment property segment as well as to banks’ risk-taking in mortgage lending. As hitherto, the SNB will regularly reassess the need to adjust the countercyclical capital buffer. New banknote series: successful launch I would like to finish my presentation today with a few words on the new 50-franc note, which was released on 12 April 2016 as the first denomination in the ninth banknote series. From the SNB’s perspective, the launch of the new banknote series was an all-round success. First, the changeover at bank counters and ATMs went as planned. According to our information, the general public also encountered no major problems when withdrawing or paying in money at cash machines. Second, reactions to the new banknote were predominantly positive among the public and experts alike. Using a nationwide information campaign, we were able to inform the public about the new 50-franc note’s design and security features in a very short time. This campaign helped members of the public across the country to familiarise themselves quickly with the new banknote. When new banknote series are issued, the demand for information is always greatest at the launch of the first denomination. Third, the return rate of the old 50-franc notes is within the expected range. We anticipate that, six months after the launch date, around two-thirds of the old notes in circulation will have been exchange 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Veerathai Santiprabhob: Monetary and financial sector policy – moving forward Speech by Dr Veerathai Santiprabhob, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Foreign Correspondents’ Club of Thailand (FCCT), Bangkok, 1 June 2016. *      *      * Members of the FCCT Executive Committee, Distinguished guests, Ladies and gentlemen, Good evening to you all, It is my pleasure to be here with you tonight. Although this is my first time speaking at the FCCT, I can feel the vibes of active journalism, which underpins the club’s foundation and its long history in the community of journalists in Thailand. As one of the oldest press clubs in Southeast Asia, I would like to thank you for your continued commitment and contribution to the Thai economy and the Thai society. Public perception and expectation indeed play a large part in establishing credibility and effectiveness of economic policy. As public opinion influencers, journalists greatly contribute to achieving desired policy outcome. As we progress half way through the year, today I would like to share with you the Monetary Policy Committee’s latest economic assessment and monetary policy stance to support the current economic recovery and safeguard stability of the Thai financial system. After that, I will turn to the Bank of Thailand’s financial sector development policy, with a view to facilitating Thailand’s economic transition towards strong, sustainable and inclusive growth. Let me start by talking about recent developments in the global financial markets. We started off this year with heightened volatility in the global financial markets, mainly due to concerns over the China’s economic slowdown, declining oil and commodity prices and monetary policy divergence among major central banks. Lately, the global volatility has subsided as the Chinese government has shown a strong commitment to limiting the possibility of hard landing with additional fiscal and credit stimulus while restructuring the economy. Commodity prices have also begun to edge higher. Financial market participants expect monetary policy in major countries to remain highly accommodative, despite an increased possibility of another rate hike by the US Federal Reserve in the next few months. While relative calm has returned to the global financial markets, I must stress that the global financial environment remains fragile. Development on China’s economic restructuring and concerns over its corporate debt, the possibility of Brexit, and major central banks’ policy divergence are among the most significant factors that can trigger new bouts of volatility. Investors’ sensitivity to unexpected news and events could also amplify the volatility. Amid the fragile global financial climate, the Thai financial markets have been relatively resilient compared to those of other emerging markets, thanks to Thailand’s strong external position. Current account position last year registered a surplus of 9 percent of GDP, and is projected to remain at that level in 2016. Our international reserves have been at a healthy level, standing at around three times of the short-term external debt and 1.3 times of the total external debt. Foreign holdings of the Thai government and Bank of Thailand bond outstanding are less than 9 percent, compared with more than 30 percent in some other emerging markets in the region. External debt of the corporate sector has been relatively low, and mostly belongs to large companies, which manage their exchange rate risk sufficiently well. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  While Thailand’s financial strength serves as a buffer against external shocks, it is important that the private sector is not complacent and should continue to be prudent in their financial risk management. Global financial volatility can definitely trigger two-way movements of currencies and asset prices. As a small open economy, Thailand cannot escape, but to find effective ways to live with the global volatility. On the Bank of Thailand’s part, under the flexible exchange rate regime, currency movement serves as the first line of defense against unexpected external events. We continue to be prudent in using an appropriate mix of policy tools to help prevent excessive volatility of the currency and asset prices. In addition, to build market resilience in the longer run, we embrace on financial market developments, as deep and liquid markets would better absorb large swings in capital flows. We also plan to further relax capital flow regulations to allow more balanced flows in and out of the country, which would enhance stability against short-term speculative flows. Ladies and gentlemen, Moving from the financial side to the real side, let me share with you the Monetary Policy Committee’s latest assessment to summarize where the Thai economy stands at the moment. This year, the Thai economy is projected to gradually recover, driven mainly by government spending and the tourism sector. Government spending, mainly through small investment projects, has lent support to the recent economic recovery. Contribution from large-scale infrastructure projects is expected to become more evident in the latter half of this year. Meanwhile, tourism has been an important growth driver, with a broad-based improvement in a number of tourists from China and other regions. In 2016, we estimate that more than 32 million foreign tourists, improving from 30 million last year, will choose Thailand as one of their destinations. In addition, the Thai economy has benefited from expansion of investment in certain sectors, notably those related to telecommunication and alternative energy. Exports of goods to CLMV countries, which now account for around 10 percent of our total exports, has supported economic growth and has potential to grow further, despite a decline in export volumes of oil in recent months due to temporary factors. Overall, the Monetary Policy Committee forecasts that the economy will grow at 3.1 percent in 2016, picking up from a growth rate of 2.8 percent in 2015 and 0.9 percent in 2014. However, I must admit that overall momentum of the Thai economic recovery remains slow at this stage. Exports of goods, excluding gold, continue to contract, largely attributable to weak external demand, notably from China and Asian trading partners, as well as structural constraints of the Thai industries and changes in global trade structure. Weak exports have mainly weighed on private investment which only saw a modest expansion. Private consumption, particularly which of rural agricultural households, has been dragged by high indebtedness, low income growth and severe drought. Amid gradual economic recovery, employment conditions remain intact. Flexibility in the labor market has allowed workers to move from the agricultural sector to other sectors. There have been no extensive layoffs, despite a reduced number of working hours. In recognition of lower-than-potential growth and low inflationary pressure, the Monetary Policy Committee has maintained an accommodative policy stance to support the economic recovery. At its latest meeting a few weeks ago, the Committee decided to maintain the policy interest rate at 1.50 percent. In the Committee’s view, current monetary conditions have eased further as bond yields remained low, and commercial bank lending rates declined. Therefore, the policy interest rate should be kept on hold to preserve limited policy space, which can be deployed if unforeseen events emerge in the future. Moreover, maintaining the policy interest rate would not add risks to financial stability. Under a prolonged period of low interest rate environment, some tentative signs of search-for-yield 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  behavior, such as higher demand for risker financial instruments, have emerged and thus warrant close monitoring going forward. Ladies and gentlemen, As the Thai economy gradually recovers and inflationary pressure remains subdued, monetary policy will ensure that monetary conditions are adequately supportive to growth. At the same time, we must not forget to chart a course towards the country’s long-term economic development. As the Thai economy is in need to upgrade growth potentials and increase competitiveness, the Bank of Thailand will contribute to this process of economic transformation by taking a proactive role in the financial sector development policy. Ongoing in this sphere, there are at least three development plans under implementation, namely, the Financial Sector Master Plan, the Payment Systems Roadmap, and the Capital Account Liberalization Master Plan. Although the three plans have different objectives, they complement each other and together form a strong foundation for the country’s financial sector development. I will highlight a few key elements we hope to get out of these plans. The first one is the Financial Sector Master Plan (FSMP) Phase III. Approved by the Cabinet in March this year to set out strategic directions for the next five years (2016 – 2020), FSMP III is aimed to promote a competitive Thai financial sector, to support more diverse needs at fair and undistorted prices, as well as promote regional trades and investments, with proper supervision to ensure macroeconomic and financial stability. In short, this plan’s motto is to promote a “competitive, inclusive, connected, and sustainable” financial system. After five years, the Bank of Thailand expects to see growing financial innovation with more diverse players, both banks and non-banks, especially those offering digital financial services. These services will allow a new segment of customers to gain access to financial services through new channels. SMEs entrepreneurs, for example, could pitch their ideas to a wider group of investors, through crowd funding and peer-to-peer lending platforms. New ideas would have a higher chance of being translated into businesses, thus promoting innovative spirit among the Thai entrepreneurs. Financial innovation will also promote competition and drive higher efficiency in the banking sector. At the same time, we expect most Thai individuals to have access to basic financial services at a fair price and have an appropriate level of financial literacy. Financially deserved enterprises should receive adequate funding, using proper financial instruments. We expect to improve households’ financial literacy, leading to more prudent financial management and lowered households’ indebtedness. For financial institutions, we encourage them to improve the level of consumer protection and quality of financial professionals, and to incorporate more sustainability practices into their core business operation. On the road to enhancing regional connectivity, under the ASEAN Banking Integration Framework, we encourage banks to further extend their regional presence to support expanding economic activities, or use Thailand as a springboard to expand their business in regional countries, leveraging on Thailand’s established legal framework, financing facility, infrastructure, logistics and IT capability. In addition, the use of local currency in regional trade and investment has been promoted to lower business transaction costs and mitigate volatility of the major currencies. We hope that policy to strengthen financial connectivity with our neighbors will facilitate closer economic integration for the shared benefits of the region. The second plan is the Payment Systems Roadmap. The plan is aimed to promote safe and efficient electronic payment services with new technologies and innovation, with a view to reducing transaction costs, improving governance standards, and being supportive of expanding economic activities. In particular, 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  integrated payment channels, such as mobile phones, internet, debit/ credit cards, and e-money along with a competitive fee structure, will support e-Commerce/ m-Commerce and benefit both businesses and consumers alike. The Bank of Thailand will also continue to work with regional regulators to advance payment systems connectivity to support international trades, labor movements, and tourisms. Under this roadmap, the Bank of Thailand has worked closely with the government to advocate the idea of digital economy by taking a lead in the National e-Payment Plan to promote Any ID infrastructure and debit card usage. Development of a new payment infrastructure as the “open architecture” to allow network interoperability among various types of players will lower payment fees and discourage the use of cash, thus resulting in much lower operating costs and higher efficiency for the corporate and banking sectors. As fundamental parts of infrastructure development, we adopt international best practices on the security and prudential standards to ensure confidence as the country moves from a cash-based economy towards a digital economy. The third area of financial sector development policy is the Capital Account Liberalization Master Plan, Phase II. The plan aims to deepen Thailand’s financial markets by allowing greater flexibility and diversification in products and services offered to residents and non-residents, and to support the growth and development of the Thai economy. So far, a number of regulations on foreign-exchange management have been relaxed for greater flexibility and lower transaction costs. This year, the Bank of Thailand plans to further relax foreign-exchange regulations by allowing qualified investors to invest in securities abroad directly within a certain limit without the need to go through local intermediaries. We also plan to allow securities companies to buy and sell foreign currencies with their clients within the scope of their brokerage business. Lastly, foreign corporations located in neighboring countries are to be permitted to borrow direct loans in Thai baht from domestic financial institutions to invest in Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS). We have also started to see the results of the increased flexibility, which helps Multi-National Companies to establish Treasury Centers (TC) and International Headquarters (IHQ) in Thailand. As of now, there are 13 companies holding Treasury Center licenses, of which 4 have been granted in the past 3 months, with one more awaiting approval from the Ministry of Finance. Many more have also made inquiries which I am very glad to see. Ladies and gentlemen, Let me now turn to the concluding part of my talk tonight. Amid the volatile global financial climate, Thailand’s strong external positions will serve as buffers against financial shocks. The private sector’s prudent financial management and policymakers’ credible policy will allow us to successfully ride with the global tides. In the real sector, the Thai economy is expected to maintain its gradual recovery path, driven mainly by government spending and tourism. Exports of goods, on the other hand, is subject to a slowdown in trading partners’ economies and structural constraints of the Thai industries. Inflationary pressure remains subdued, but the headline inflation will gradually rise in line with a recent pick up in oil prices. Against this backdrop, monetary policy stance will remain adequately accommodative to support economic activities, while safeguarding financial stability. Over a longer horizon, the Bank of Thailand is committed to creating financial infrastructure and nurturing the financial eco-system to help lift up growth potentials of the Thai economy. We aim to promote financial innovation, financial inclusion and 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  financial literacy, as strong foundations for sustainable economic development. With regard to the payment systems, the new infrastructures are being built to support the transition towards the digital economy. Rules and regulations on exchange-rate management are to be relaxed further for greater flexibility of investors and multinational companies. We believe these policies would put Thailand on a strong foothold to serve as a regional connector to support closer economic integration. Last but not least, let me once again thank the FCCT for organizing this forum. The road ahead for the Thai economy indeed brings new opportunities as well as challenges, urging us to adjust ahead of the changing conditions. Being among policymakers, businesses, and journalists who gather here tonight, I hope we will continue to work together on the route to enhancing competitiveness and sustainable development of Thailand. Kob Khun Krub. 
Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Some thoughts on the new economySpeech by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank NegaraMalaysia), at the Malaysian Institute of Economic Research’s (MIER) 30th Anniversary Dinner,Kuala Lumpur, 26 September 2016.*   *   *Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,I am honoured to speak here at the Malaysian Institute of Economic Research’s (MIER) 30thAnniversary Dinner. I would like to commend MIER on the institute’s continuous efforts inexpanding economic knowledge, and the commitment to research over the past 30 years.Today, we meet at a time where the global economy is becoming increasingly dynamic andchallenging, underpinned by complex global interlinkages and shifting trends. The challengesposed to policymakers are immense. The rapidly evolving world also necessitates swift, yetpragmatic policies in order for us to remain ahead of the competition. Against this backdrop, adeep understanding of the core issues is absolutely critical in supporting evidence-based policyresponses; not only to manage risks but also to better leverage on opportunities. Tonight, I will besharing some thoughts about this “new world economy” that we are in, and along the way, sharesome policy insights and research ideas for the many economists and policy thinkers in thisroom.Global macroeconomic environment is becoming increasingly challengingThe periods of strong global growth have become something of a distant memory to us. Globalgrowth for the past 5 years has averaged 3.5%, well below the pre-crisis average of 5.1%. Tradeactivity, which was once itself a catalyst of growth is now lacklustre. This was evidenced by theslower growth in global trade activity relative to global growth, as reflected in the decline in tradeintensity from 1.6 times between 2002 and 2007 to just around 1 time between 2011 and 2015.Trade activity in the 1990s was driven mainly by trade of intermediate goods following theproliferation of global value chains, driven in part by the ICT revolution. However, the expansion ofglobal value chains has slowed with increasing on-shoring of manufacturing activity. Global tradehas also been dampened by weaker investment growth in several major advanced economiesand China’s efforts in rebalancing its economy. Given these cyclical weaknesses and structuralshifts, the prospects for global growth and trade are expected to remain challenging goingforward. In fact, the World Trade Organisation has projected for world trade to grow by onlyaround 3% in 2016 and 2017.Global risks have also increased significantly. In a globalised and digitalised world, higherinterconnectedness and integration have resulted in greater transmission and amplification ofrisks. Country-specific risks have become more eminent as they could generate broadercontagion effects. Ongoing global developments such as policy adjustments in several majoreconomies, volatile commodity price movements and geopolitical tensions have compoundedthe uncertainties surrounding the global economy. Although baseline growth forecasts arealready relatively low, the materialisation of these downside risks could nudge growth even lower.Unconventional policies during the challenging times fast reaching limitsAt the onset of the Global Financial Crisis, immediate policy responses were largely targetedtowards stabilising the financial markets. As volatility began to subside, and as financialinstitutions and markets were stabilised, the policy focus subsequently shifted to rejuvenatinggrowth and raising employment. An immediate policy challenge facing crisis-affected countrieswas that conventional policy responses of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies have fastreached significant constraints. Let me elaborate. 1 / 8BIS Central Banker's Speeches
In the aftermath of the crisis, public debt in crisis-affected countries reached very high levels, inlarge parts due to the high cost of bailing out financial institutions. In the advanced economies,public debt grew by almost half within the span of 5 years from 2007 to 2012. For Europe, it evenculminated in the European Sovereign Debt Crisis. The enlarged public debt levels and fiscaldeficit put a hard limit on current governments’ ability to spur real activity, even as growth falters.Many governments of crisis-affected countries undertook austerity measures to avert financialmarket backlash. This, of course, have had a further dampening impact on growth. In short,fiscal policy has lost its ammunition and has been rendered impotent in many countries.In many of the economies, monetary policy became the only feasible stimulus tool, so called ‘theonly game in town’. However, substantial easing by major central banks has led to global policyrates reaching historically low levels. In fact, the zero lower bound that was once a theoreticalconstraint has now been the norm for the last 8 years. Unconventional policy measures, such asquantitative easing were adopted. Next came the introduction of the negative interest rate policy,particularly in the advanced economies. First adopted by the Danish National Bank in 2012, fiveother central banks have now lowered their key policy rates to negative territory. The outcomes ofthese unprecedented policy measures remain uncertain, with possibility of unintendedconsequences and the emergence of yet more risks.Fiscal and monetary policy, two of the most important macroeconomic policy tools, are reachinga point where they have very limited room to influence the desired growth and employmentoutcomes. This raises a few questions – have we reached a point where macro economybecomes a dismal science? Have we reached a macro-policy trap? What have we missed in thedesign of these policy tools? These are very important questions. They warrant a deep re-thinking of the underlying basis of the discipline, and a re-examination of the many principles thatwe have been relying on all these while. To apply the same solution over and over again iscertainly not a viable option.The international monetary system fosters imbalances and volatility of capital flows andexchange ratesSince the departure from the Bretton Woods system, the international monetary system hasevolved to reflect on-going changes in global economic developments and economic thoughts.The architecture of our current monetary system is characterised by flexible exchange rateregimes, free capital flow and independent monetary policy. This global landscape has expandedthe cross-border exchange of goods, services and capital. Importantly, the transition to moremarket-based foreign exchange rate system has accorded policymakers greater control overdomestic policies, accelerated the development of financial sector, and, ultimately, boostedeconomic growth.Nonetheless, this international monetary system also has obvious shortcomings. In the post-Bretton Woods period, the frequency of banking and currency crisis has increased dramaticallywith large output and employment losses. At the centre of this international monetary system,policy adjustments in major economies have led to significant volatility in the financial markets.The initial hint of tapering by the Federal Reserve in May 2013 resulted in large reversal of capitalflows and exchange rate over-shooting in emerging economies. Today, the complexity ofmanaging an economy is compounded by the impact of global shifts in capital on domesticfinancial markets and real economic activities.Given our high degree of openness, Malaysia was not spared by these developments. Forexample, global concerns over monetary policy normalisation by the Federal Reserve continue toimpact the ringgit. Ringgit volatility since September 2014 has exceeded levels in previousepisodes of sharp adjustments such as the European Sovereign Debt Crisis and Taper Tantrum.The weak ringgit performance was further amplified by the misperception about Malaysia’sreliance on commodities and our position as a net oil exporter. Despite Malaysia’s lower 2 / 8BIS Central Banker's Speeches
dependency on commodities, the magnitude of ringgit depreciation is disproportionately higherand is even comparable to the currencies of countries that rely more heavily on commodities,such as Australia and Norway. For the record, in 2015, commodities constituted only 19% ofMalaysia’s total exports. For example, the oil and gas industry accounts for only 11% of totalexports, about 1% of total employment, and 22% of Government revenue. I must emphasize thatadjustments in the ringgit should be viewed from a long-term perspective. In the short-term,exchange rate movements could react to new headlines and market sentiments, instead ofreflecting the underlying strength of the economy. What is important, therefore, is to ensure theavailability of ample reserves, maintain strong economic fundamentals and manage ourexposure to external debt.There has been increasing discussion among global policymakers, including at the recentsymposium at Jackson Hole, on the changing nature of our international monetary system.Some measures proposed include encouraging the use of Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) bythe International Monetary Fund to increase the flexibility of the current monetary system. The G-20 framework also stressed on countries’ shared responsibility in supporting “strong, sustainableand balanced growth” globally. Ultimately, there is an increasingly compelling case for a newthinking about the international monetary system and ways to reduce excessive volatility in globalmarkets. Managing excessive volatility is particularly pertinent for small and open economies asvolatile currency fluctuations not only affect trade, external debt servicing and cost of investment,but also affect domestic business and consumer sentiments. In response, countries in theregion have embarked on greater quest to use local currencies for the settlement of trade andinvestment activities.Against this backdrop, I shall attempt to outline some of the core issues in need of policyresponses. I will be sharing some thoughts on the so-called “new global economy”, and along theway provide some policy insights that may spur research ideas for the many economists andpolicy thinkers in this room.A World Defined by ParadoxesSince the global financial crisis almost a decade ago, the world has continued to be reshaped bycomplex and challenging forces with far-reaching implications, both economically and politically.Some of these forces were not foreseen and are causing many unintended consequences.So it’s not surprising that some circumstances are seemingly contradictory yet in some senseexpresses a possible truth. In other words, paradoxes. These paradoxes pose a challenge to usall; from policy-makers, to businesses, to academics , provoking us to question ourunderstanding of how the world works, and forcing us to rethink the approaches that we need toformulate in response to these forces that are shaping the global economy. I have threeparadoxes in mind.The first paradox is this; while globalisation drives the world to grow closertogether, we are simultaneously drifting further apart. By many measures, nations andpeople are closer than ever in terms of trade, investment, information exchange and physicalmobility. Despite the weakness in growth and trade activities, global flows of goods, services andfinance is still more than one-third of global GDP, 150% the level in 1990. Yet, social disparities,most noticeably inequality in the distribution of income, have worsened considerably. Incomeinequality has risen in many OECD countries since the 1980s; we in Asia have not fared welleither, with an average Gini coefficient that is higher than the rest of the world. The distancebetween the reality that we live in and our idea of an ideal construct of society is thus at onceboth closer and further than it was in our parents’ generation.The issues underlying this paradox are complex and different for every nation. In many ways, it is12 3 / 8BIS Central Banker's Speeches
driven by the very forces of globalisation that have brought our economies closer together, but atthe same time undermined the welfare of the middle-class in advanced economies and driventhe ‘haves and have-nots’ further apart in the emerging economies. The problems confronting ustoday are different from the past. The implications for policymakers and social thinkers aretherefore, immense. These new challenges require more nuanced understanding andapproaches, and because of this, our frameworks need to adjust accordingly. For a start, it isimportant to recognise that new challenges can arise as a by-product of a genuinely positivedevelopment. Indeed it has been argued that rising income inequality is a direct and unavoidableconsequence of the advent of technological revolution and the expanding process ofglobalisation. Thus, in this new economy, one of the pressing challenges may come down toreconciling the benefactors of technology and globalisation with those who are excluded, with theintention of keeping inequality at bay.This brings me to the second paradox. Despite all the technological advancements that wehave experienced in recent years, labour productivity has not risen in tandem. The worldis now at the cusp of path-breaking and fundamental technological changes – in the area ofartificial intelligence, bio-technology, advanced analytics or ‘Big Data’, and fintech, just to name afew.But at the same time, labour productivity has been anaemic in major economies since the globalfinancial crisis, which in the US, is currently experiencing the longest run of declining workerproductivity since the 1970s. Tangible slowdown in productivity is also prevalent in manyemerging economies since the global financial crisis.This is a disconcerting trend, as productivity growth is the bedrock of sustained improvements instandards of living and income. To borrow Paul Krugman’s quote, “productivity isn’t everything,but in the long-run it’s almost everything”. It’s a real challenge, to truly understand why this ishappening. Advocates of the secular stagnation hypothesis argue that this is a result of under-investment in capital; others point to declining business dynamism, excessive household debtthat leads to the misallocation of resources, and some attribute it to measurement errors giventhe expansion of the digital economy. And then, there are those who question the productivity-enhancing-value of recent technological innovations. What is the value of an Apple Watch ascompared to the invention of the internet? It is indeed a challenge to comprehend this rapidlychanging complex system that we operate in, let alone diagnose it. We need to humblyrecognise the boundaries of our understanding for now, but at the same time relentlessly expandthe frontier of thinking and conduct robust deliberation on the implication for public policyformulations.The last paradox, one that is familiar to many policymakers, a disquieting calmness. In thefinancial markets, the VIX – a standard indicator to measure volatility in the global financialmarkets – is at its lowest in the last two years. In fact, it is close to the all-time low of below 10,last seen just before the global financial crisis. Yet, a quick scan of financial news would revealsignificant uncertainty in the global economy, amid an ongoing series of policy adjustments inmajor economies, volatile commodity price movements and geopolitical tensions. To a largeextent, this paradox is an outcome of the combined policy efforts by central banks andgovernments worldwide to maintain stability since the global financial crisis.But beneath this sense of calmness is a tense undercurrent. There is an underlying anxiety thatprevails beyond the realm of economics, for example in relation to issues of internationalsecurity, environmental change, and the global spread of disease. Despite the tremendousprogress that has been achieved in many of these areas through international treaties andinstitutional efforts globally, anxieties remain. Extreme views are becoming more prevalent inboth side of the aisle, and manifests in the form of backlash against conventional wisdom, andthe establishments. We ought to be circumspect in expressing our views. As individuals andinstitutions that have influence to mould public thought and perception, we have the added3 4 / 8BIS Central Banker's Speeches
responsibility to be balanced. We should not be too eager to discard all wisdom that have beencarefully amassed over many years but at the same willing to adapt to new thinking, newcircumstances and new possibilities.As policy-makers and economists, these contemporary issues confronting the field ofeconomics are indeed reinvigorating. New rules are being made. Old rules revisited. Thecontradictory forces that I mentioned earlier, are causing great policy tensions. The policies thathave been implemented and experimented in recent years by policy-makers across the worldmight themselves appear in contradictions. And the fact that the performance so far has beenmixed does not invoke confidence in some of the policy prescriptions. These ranged fromcontinued experimentation of unconventional monetary policies and the need to ‘balance’ that,with preserving financial stability, to the continued reemphasis in fiscal and structural policies inboth advanced and emerging economies.But in facing a world of paradoxes, perhaps we too need to take full advantage of the strongfoundations and conventions that were built in the past, yet remain sufficiently nimble andunafraid to rethink and reconstruct in facing the uncertain future. Errors will be inevitable, but themore important point is our ability to correct them and to remain committed to achieving the rightoutcomes. This is true for policies of central banks as well.Bank Negara Malaysia’s Approach to Monetary PolicyWithin this context, please do allow me to share with you the approach to monetary policy thatBank Negara Malaysia takes. Bank Negara Malaysia’s decision-making processes andgovernance framework today reflect the combination of the efforts and progress since theestablishment of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) a decade and a half ago.Not many of you might be aware, but the MPC had its first meeting in 2002. In fact, the upcomingMPC meeting in November would mark our 100th MPC meeting since 2002. Before that,monetary policy formulation was conducted under the absence of an established framework anda standard structure. Over the years however, the MPC has evolved and enhanced itseffectiveness as the sole body responsible for the formulation of Malaysia’s monetary policy andpolicies for the conduct of monetary policy operations.Of note, the new interest rate framework which was implemented in 2004 introduced theOvernight Policy Rate (OPR) as a new policy rate and contributed towards improvements in theconduct of monetary operations.This not only played an integral role in enhancing the effectiveness of our monetary policytransmission, it also encouraged a more market-oriented financial system. At the same time,foreign exchange administration rules were liberalised, which created the preconditions for us toshift to a flexible exchange rate regime in 2005.These developments laid the necessary foundations for the formulation of monetary policy to beeventually formalised following the enactment of the Central Bank of Malaysia Act 2009. The Actwas a significant milestone – it institutionalised the autonomy of the Bank in the formulation ofmonetary policy and provides greater flexibility in monetary policy implementation.Prior to the Act, the MPC, which was an advisory committee supporting the Governor, hadmeetings that typically took place only within a day. In its current form, the MPC meetings arenow conducted over two days. The additional time is noteworthy, as it enabled the evolvement ofthe MPC towards a more robust, inclusive and comprehensive decision-making platform. Thisextension allocates sufficient time on the first day for in-depth presentations by staff anddiscussion amongst the MPC members on the implications of new economic developments. Onthe second day, the MPC members deliberate and decide on the appropriate policy after havingcarefully appraised and internalised the assessment and discussion from the first day. All these 5 / 8BIS Central Banker's Speeches
proceedings are also meticulously minuted, with the intention that the Bank will one day releasethe minutes for transparency purposes, and for the benefit of the research community.Even after the formal institutionalisation of our conduct of monetary policy, continuous effortswere made in the years after to further strengthen our policy decision-making framework in faceof the ever-challenging policy environment. For instance, the establishment of the Joint PolicyCommittee in 2010, which combines members from both the MPC and the Financial StabilityCommittee, was done in recognition of the need to have effective coordination of monetary andfinancial stability policies given their increasing interdependence. The year 2015 also markedanother significant milestone for the Bank. We appointed for the first time two external membersto our MPC, a progress that reflected the ongoing maturity and inclusiveness of the MPC as adecision-making committee.The inclusion of the external members has brought about additional diversity of views, and theirrelevant experiences have further enhanced the collective expertise of the MPC.It is important for us to outline the philosophy that underpins our policymaking. The first ispragmatism – the need to do the right thing without necessarily being dogmatic and rigid inapproaches. Our monetary policy framework is not on inflation targeting, but one with primacyplaced on the price stability mandate while giving due regards to developments in the economy.This was amply illustrated in the way that we managed the challenges in 2007 and 2008. Backthen, monetary policy was faced with the dual challenge of inflationary pressures from escalatingglobal commodity and food prices, as well as headwinds in global growth from the unstableglobal financial markets. In this case, despite the upside risks to inflation, monetary policy wasmaintained given the need to balance against the weakening global growth prospects and itsimplications on the domestic economy.BNM recognised that the upside risks to inflation originated mainly from supply-driven factors, inwhich the members opined that monetary policy was not the appropriate tool to alleviate theimpact. In this situation, raising rates to achieve a stable inflation at all cost would be against ourphilosophy and against public interest.During that time, our monetary policy inaction was criticised for being behind the rate-hike curverelative to the actions taken by other regional central banks. But in retrospect, we wereattempting to do the right thing based on the prevailing data and our assessment. We would liketo think that our departure from the convention stood the test of time, and that we were eventuallyproven right when Malaysia was able to withstand the crisis.Staying committed to our decisions, however, does not imply inflexibility in our approach. Whenglobal conditions deteriorated rapidly, monetary stimulus was swiftly and significantly front-loadedbetween November 2008 and February 2009, to cushion the domestic economy from adversespillovers. Conversely, as the recovery became more firmly entrenched, Malaysia was the first inthe region to normalise interest rates in March 2009 from the record-low level, well ahead of theregional counterparts.We shall continue to strive to make monetary policy decisions based on prevailing data and theassessment to the best of our ability, even if it might be against conventional wisdom or nomatter how unpopular the decisions might be.In managing the exchange rate, a similar philosophy of pragmatism is applied. We shouldrecognise that in today’s world of greater interconnectivity, we are all susceptible to the vagariesof the global financial markets. But to distance ourselves from the global financial markets is notan option.In this regard, despite the extreme volatility experienced in recent years, our thinking has 6 / 8BIS Central Banker's Speeches
remained the same – market forces ought to determine the direction and level of the exchangerate. The central bank’s role should be to contain the degree of volatility, which we know hassignificant implications for an open economy like ours.As such, there will be times when the Bank’s presence is apparent in the market, to manage thedegree of volatility, but there will be times when the ringgit movements will be more volatile thannormal so that it will take its course in line with demand and supply in the market that reflectsunderlying trade transactions. More recently, the ringgit had adjusted to reflect changes in theglobal economy including the developments in the US economy and global crude oil prices.Certainly there are risks associated with different levels of exchange rates and that differentlevels of exchange rate will benefit differently the various sectors and stakeholders in theeconomy.Looking forward, while the financial markets can be capricious, as market players focus onshort-term developments, our role as policy makers is to look beyond these noises. As wecontinue to address our vulnerabilities and improve domestic fundamentals, the ringgit willeventually reflect the strength of our economy.Our path forward would continue to be characterised by fast-moving and ever-evolvingmacroeconomic risks and constantly evolving global trends. In facing the complex andmultifaceted risks associated with it, the Malaysian economy is subjected to concerns of pricestability and many other considerations that could affect overall macroeconomic stability.This brings me to another one of our approaches in relation to ensuring overall macroeconomicstability. We do not rely on any single policy tool. In particular, dependence on monetary policy asthe sole instrument would be too narrow an approach. Monetary policy at best provides anenabling macroeconomic environment to support growth, and it should not be relied upon as theprimary instrument to drive growth. In this regard, the Bank’s policy toolkit relies on a broad set ofinstruments to achieve overall macroeconomic stability. This includes considerations of macro-prudential and pro-growth policies, as well as our advice on fiscal policy to the government. Suchan approach is key in ensuring that no single tool is overburdened.Reawakening growth, reigniting productivity and restoring inclusivenessBefore I conclude, let me suggest how we can successfully navigate this global landscape withcontradictory forces held in tension. I have no precise answer. But I will highlight three importantoutcomes that need to be achieved jointly in order to secure continued and sustainable progressin the global economy.First, is the need to reawaken growth. Having had sub-par growth for nearly a decade now,policy-makers need to relook what we have learnt and rethink our approaches; from fiscal tomonetary policies and structural issues that need to be addressed, to enable us to remove anyimpediments to growth. We need to enact policies that enable the private-sector to revive theirdynamism and explore new strategies to enable them to engage and uncover productiveinvestment opportunities.The second is to reignite productivity. To this end, just as how technology and globalisation hasresulted in many of the paradoxes outlined earlier, it is also an avenue that could provideanswers to our challenges. Policy-makers and the private sector need to automate and adopttechnology to increase productivity and dispense the easy way out of depending on low costlabour model for competitiveness.Third, and perhaps the most important of all – to restore inclusiveness. The socio- and geo-political paralysis that is splicing the centre towards the far-left and far-right in so many parts ofthe world can be traced back to the unequal sharing of global economic progress in pastdecades. This underscores the importance of broader-based economic growth and the urgency 7 / 8BIS Central Banker's Speeches
to close the inequality gap. Leaders from the public and private sectors must help boost labour-market participation; across genders, creed and nationalities and cushion any negative socialcosts that may arise as a by-product of growth.Only by reawakening growth, reigniting productivity and restoring inclusiveness, can we reclaim apositive and sustainable future.On that note, I would like to congratulate MIER on its commitment to research this past 30 years.It is my hope that MIER will continue to produce quality policy-informative-research, strengtheningthe synergies that exist between policy-making and research efforts. Finally, my wish is for MIERto become the leading “global bearer” for economic research in Malaysia; a think-tank thatmatters, to the sound policy formulation of the nation.Thank you. Income Inequality: The Gap between Rich and Poor, B. Keely (OECD Insights, 2015). Sharing the Growth Dividend: Analysis of Inequality in Asia, S. Jain Chandra et al. (IMF Working Paper, 2016). The Morning Ledger: Productivity Slump Threatens Long-Term U.S. Growth, W. Azeez (Wall Street Journal,2016).123 8 / 8BIS Central Banker's Speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Minouche Shafik: Small is beautiful but big is necessary Speech by Ms Minouche Shafik, Deputy Governor for Markets and Banking of the Bank of England, at the Bloomberg Markets Most Influential conference, London, 28 September 2016. *      *      * Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of England’s website. The title of this speech is an expression used by Sir Fazle Abed, the founder of BRAC, the largest non-governmental organisation in the world. He was referring to the development community’s fascination with small projects rather than focussing on large scale systemic change. In response he built an organisation that reaches over 100 million people, provides loans to five million poor women, and runs 40,000 schools. I am especially grateful to Grellan McGrath, whose combination of creative challenge, analytical depth and organisational skills greatly enhanced this speech. I would also like to thank Ben Morley, Lee Robinson and Alastair Firrell for their assistance. I am grateful to other Bank of England staff and fellow members of the policy committees on which I sit for helpful comments on an earlier draft. Nevertheless, the view expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Monetary Policy Committee, the Financial Policy Committee or the Board of the Prudential Regulation Authority. Introduction Central banks are bigger than ever before. Gone is the pre-crisis ideal of minimalist central banks with small balance sheets, narrowly defined objectives and tools, and a bias toward non-intervention. Today, major central banks have greater responsibilities and a wider range of tools at our disposal. Our balance sheets are larger and for the most part continuing to increase (Chart 1). I’d like to use these remarks to offer a number of reflections on these developments, using the Bank of England’s recent experience by way of example, and focussing on four themes. My first theme is that the broadening of our responsibilities and range of tools at our disposal has facilitated a more joined up approach to how we set monetary policy and pursue financial stability – as I will illustrate using the example of our contingency planning around the referendum. Second, the increase in size of our balance sheet has been a necessity of the times we live in. Deep structural forces have combined to depress the level of interest rates at which the economy would be in equilibrium, obliging us to rely evermore on monetary policies that were once considered unconventional. This requires us to operate with multiple instruments in multiple markets meaning that our impact on the financial system – the central bank’s footprint – is larger. Third, we are aware that some of our policies have spillovers and side effects, but we take steps to address them where feasible to do so within our mandate. We know that a bigger footprint means we need to be mindful of our step. Finally, despite our bigger size, there are some things central banks cannot do. To generate sustainably strong growth over the medium term, monetary and financial stability policy must be part of a balanced package that also includes the government’s economic policies and, given strong global interconnections, international policy co-ordination. Joined up contingency planning I’ll start with our contingency planning prior to the referendum on the UK’s membership of the EU. We started from a position of strength thanks to changes made since the financial crisis, including: reform of the regulatory capital and liquidity frameworks; a more robust supervisory model; and increased access to our own liquidity facilities. Nevertheless, as we made clear in the run up to the vote, the three statutory committees on which I sit – the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), the Financial Policy Committee (FPC), and the Prudential Regulation 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Authority (PRA) Board – undertook extensive work to consider the implications of a vote to leave the EU. This contingency planning was the embodiment of joined up policymaking. The MPC and the FPC met to exchange views on risks around the referendum for financial and economic conditions; the FPC and the PRA Board both considered the potential for the referendum to create financial instability; supervisory and market operations staff worked in tandem to ensure that banks’ liquidity needs could be met through a prudent combination of their own buffers and Bank of England facilities; and we made sure to reach out to our international partners in order to be able to present a co-ordinated response whatever the result of the vote. I am sure that everyone in this room could tell similar stories of detailed and co-ordinated contingency planning in firms across the UK and indeed internationally. In part because of this careful planning by all of us, the day after the referendum was remarkably orderly. Like many of you, I arrived in a dealing room in the very early hours of the 24th of June to witness astoundingly large volumes go through the foreign exchange market in a remarkably orderly fashion as sterling found its new level – many banks and trading platforms reported turnover that was up to ten times the typical daily amount. And, like many of you, I went through a series of pre-scheduled conference calls and meetings with market participants and counterparts in the international system which had an eerily calm atmosphere as the immediate risks we had most feared – thankfully – did not materialise. That is not to say there was nothing to do. Having raised the countercyclical capital buffer in March, the FPC was in the welcome position of being able to reduce it once again and thus send a strong signal that banks would be expected to support lending to the real economy. And having already made clear that it would allow insurers to use the flexibility built into the transition to Solvency II, the PRA was able to re-iterate publicly that firms could apply for approval to re-calculate the Transitional Measures on Technical Provisions as at the end of June – thus reducing the impact of the sharp decline in risk free interest rates on their solvency positions. Given my responsibility for the Bank of England’s market operations, one success story I will draw particular attention to is the resilience of banks’ liquidity positions. By way of context, in the period since the financial crisis banks have increased their liquid asset buffers fourfold, and increased fourfold the lendable value of collateral pre-positioned for use in the Bank of England’s normal liquidity facilities. In recent years we have made much of these facilities and how they have been overhauled since the crisis to provide access to a broader range of counterparties, and to provide liquidity against a broader range of collateral. But in truth this was one of the first times these new facilities had truly been put to the test, and I am pleased to say they performed admirably. The flexibility we were able to show by increasing the frequency of our regular operations gave added reassurance to banks that they would indeed be able to rely on us. Our ability to send the message to the wider public on the day of the referendum that we stood ready to lend more than £250bn to the banking system helped head off any concern about the health of our banks. And the fact that the facilities were used in moderate size proved they are an effective form of insurance – over the month of June banks borrowed about £9bn of central bank reserves from us through our regular operations in exchange for pre-positioned collateral as they prudently maintained very high levels of liquidity around the referendum result. Navigating through uncertainty Once it became clear that the immediate financial stability risks had either not materialised or been effectively mitigated, our attention turned to the macroeconomy. In setting monetary policy after the referendum result, we faced two challenges. The first was that there was little data on which to base an assessment of how the outlook had changed; the second was that 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  we started from the unusual position of Bank Rate already being at a record low. I’ll take each of these challenges in turn. It is vital that monetary policy is set in a forward looking manner, given the lags in the transmission mechanism, and this means taking decisions even when the data cycle is at an early stage. That was very much the case in August. Although we had little hard economic data covering the period since the referendum, we did have some forward looking surveys and leading indicators of GDP growth at our disposal. Now these leading indicators are of varying quality – some have a high predictive content for GDP growth, others very little, so it can be difficult to know what signal to take. One simple way of organising this information is illustrated in this “radar” of economic indicators which I found helpful to navigate through the data (Chart 2). Its cells are coloured green when the indicators are above their long run average; amber when they are below, which is cause for concern; and red when they are well below, which is even more worrying. The cells in the centre represent the data which have historically had the highest correlation with GDP growth, while those in the outer circles have a lower correlation with GDP growth and are less reliable. The first radar dates from early 2014, a year in which GDP growth was 3.5%, so it is not surprising that its cells are predominantly green. The intervening years remained mostly green, though some amber spots began to appear as the initial recovery slowed to a more normal rate of expansion. In the wake of the referendum result, at the time of our decision in August, the most reliable indicators – those at the centre – were for the most part flashing amber or red (Chart 3). Since then, of course, the data have turned out more positively than expected, and the radar has become a little less red, a little more amber, though it mostly remains below average levels (Chart 4). Now, this is just a way of organising the data. Formally extracting a signal from it requires much by way of econometrics – there is a rich literature devoted to data uncertainty and nowcasting, to which the Bank has contributed significantly1. Forward looking indicators are prone to overreaction and in some cases are outright misleading. Moreover, their predictive power is limited to the very near term outlook. Given that monetary policy has its greatest effect one to two years ahead, this means we must combine our assessment of the near term indicators with a view of the underlying shocks which will drive the economy over the coming years. There is no doubt in my mind that the UK is experiencing a sizeable economic shock in the wake of the referendum. Any reduction in openness or need to reallocate resources will necessarily imply a slower rate of potential growth for the economy. Moreover, the reality of the protracted process of withdrawing from the EU means we still know very little about the nature of our future trading arrangements, and this uncertainty is weighing on prospects for business investment. Our agents around the country report that some new projects are being scaled back or deferred until the outlook becomes clearer. There are signs that foreign companies have become more cautious about investing in the United Kingdom, and we know that some of those who rely on the European Union as a destination for their exports are beginning to make contingency plans in case they have to move some of their business elsewhere. All of this reflects the unavoidable economic reality of a period of transition. The depreciation of the sterling exchange rate is certainly helping the economy find a new equilibrium. While                                                 1 The Bank currently uses several nowcasting models to predict the current rate of GDP growth. Details of some of these models can be found here: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterly bulletin/2014/qb14q106.pdf. Initial estimates of GDP growth get revised over time, so the Bank makes distinct predictions for “preliminary” and “mature” estimates of GDP growth. More details can be found here: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/qb070301.pdf. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  the flexible nature of the UK economy means it will ultimately adjust to its new circumstances, the process of adjustment can sometimes be painful. That’s where monetary policy can help, and it seems likely to me that further monetary stimulus will be required at some point in order to help ensure that a slowdown in economic activity doesn’t turn into something more pernicious. However, the likely timing of that stimulus will depend on the continued evolution of the data over the coming weeks and months. Thus far, the welcome improvement in the forward looking indicators suggests that the slowdown may not be as sharp or as sudden as we might have feared. For example, Bank staff have revised up their forecast for the mature estimate of GDP growth in Q3 to 0.3% from 0.1% at the time of the August Inflation Report. But we will learn a lot from the arrival of more official data for the post-referendum period, and that will allow us to navigate by looking out the window as well as down at our radar. A package tailored to our starting point What is unusual about this particular loosening relative to previous cycles is its starting point. Despite many real economic variables having returned to around normal levels following the financial crisis the absence of any signs of overheating or inflationary pressure meant that at the time of the referendum Bank Rate was already at an all-time low of 0.5% and we held a stock of £375bn gilts on our balance sheet. The global decline in market-based measures of long run real interest rates – which have fallen by more than 5 percentage points since the 1980s (Chart 5) – suggests that the neutral rate of interest is now far lower than any time in the past.2 The drivers behind this move are deep structural shifts in trend growth rates, demographics and risk appetite. Taken together, they have changed the global balance of savings and investment, thus depressing the level of interest rates which will bring the economy into equilibrium. These structural factors are beyond the influence of monetary policy. We can only respond by setting Bank Rate lower than in past economic cycles – to do otherwise would result in an unwarranted slowing of the economy. It means we must consider carefully where we think the effective lower bound in our policy rate is – taking into account financial stability considerations. It also means that we must be ready to use monetary policy instruments other than Bank Rate – what was once unconventional is increasingly becoming conventional. With that in mind, the MPC had actively considered in the run up to the referendum how we would go about loosening if it was necessary. Working closely with supervisors in the PRA we confirmed that we had room to lower Bank Rate to a small positive number without endangering the banking system. Based on our continuous dialogue with the Debt Management Office and market participants, we knew there was scope to buy more gilts. We also confirmed that there were a number of additional tools that we could use to generate economic stimulus. In fact our creativity was limited only by the number of combinations and calibrations the nine members of the MPC could come up with – making the voting process a bit like trying to solve a Rubik’s cube. The package the MPC ultimately chose had five elements: a cut in Bank Rate to 0.25%; the launch of a Term Funding Scheme (TFS) to reinforce the pass through of that cut; the purchase of up to £10bn of corporate bonds; the purchase of an additional £60bn of gilts; and forward guidance that should the data prove to be broadly consistent with the August Inflation Report forecast, a majority of members expected to support a further cut in Bank Rate during the course of the year. A sixth element was added by the FPC, who in parallel                                                 2 Carney (2013) Haldane (2015), Rachel and Smith (2015), Shafik (2015a). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  approved a change to the definition of the leverage ratio to exclude central bank reserves, thus making our monetary policy package more effective. This package involved several pieces of innovation for the Bank of England. It brought our official policy rate to a new record low in the Bank’s 322 year history. It will bring the stock of government bonds on our balance sheet up to £435bn, representing 23% of nominal GDP, a new high. For the first time, we will purchase private sector assets for monetary policy purposes3. And we will lend central bank reserves to the banking system, at a rate close to Bank Rate, for a longer term than ever before. Mindful of our step The reason the MPC took these actions is because they will benefit the economy and, by delivering monetary stability, contribute to prosperity. Our initial assessment of the impact so far has been positive. But we are very aware that all monetary policy has spillovers and side effects, and that we have a duty to minimise those where it is possible to do so without jeopardising the overall beneficial impact. With that in mind, I would like to discuss three criticisms frequently levelled at monetary policy of this kind, and to illustrate how the MPC tried to take them into account. 1. Ultra low interest rates are self-defeating because banks are unable to pass them through to customers. This criticism has its genesis in the fact that once household and business deposit rates have reached a very low level, it becomes difficult for banks to reduce them further. They face a choice between not passing the change in Bank Rate through to borrowers, or having their net interest margins squeezed.  In light of the mixed experience of pass-through of very low levels of policy rates by other central banks, this was something the MPC was acutely aware of in deciding how far it should reduce Bank Rate. Using the intelligence and analysis of bank supervisors in the PRA, we were able to establish that net interest margins on banks’ UK retail business were sufficient to comfortably withstand a cut in our policy rate to a small positive number. UK banks’ Net Interest Margin were around 230bps in 2015 on average (Chart 6).  However, we still faced the risk that banks would choose to preserve these existing margins, dampening the pass through of our change to rates faced by households and consumers. The TFS is explicitly designed to counter that risk to the transmission mechanism by tethering banks term funding costs more closely to our policy rate. It gives them the ability to borrow from us for up to four years at Bank Rate so long as they maintain their lending to the real economy. The initial signs are good – standard variable rates have already been or, we expect, shortly will be reduced on the vast majority of existing mortgages, and the rates available on new lifetime tracker mortgages are on average 25bps lower.4, 5 Though it is of course difficult to say how much of this is directly attributable to the TFS.                                                 3 The Bank has previously purchased private sector assets, via the Asset Purchase Facility, in order to help improve market liquidity in credit markets that are not functioning normally. For example, the Corporate Bond Secondary Market Scheme offered to make regular small purchases and sales of corporate bonds from 2009 until 2013, when it was moved to operating only if warranted by market demand. Since there was no indication of demand in the intervening period, the scheme was closed in August 2016. More information is available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Pages/apf/withdrawnschemes/default.aspx. 4 Based on announced changes and supervisory intelligence on changes to Standard Variable Rates by 19 lenders representing 90% of the stock of Monetary Financial Institutions’ lending, weighted by their share in the value of outstanding mortgages.   5 Based on the Bank’s quoted rates data on new Lifetime Tracker mortgages. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  2. Quantitative Easing has adverse consequences for pension funds and insurance companies. The MPC is very aware that the marginal impact of low long term risk free interest rates is – all else equal – to increase the present value of pension fund liabilities, and to increase the margin that insurers must set aside to cover the present value of otherwise unhedgeable risks. This is something we hear frequently through our Market Intelligence, from businesses we meet, in conversations with the Pensions Regulator, and of course through the PRA’s prudential supervision of insurers. It is also an international concern since long rates are low globally.  Ultimately, the way the MPC can most effectively contribute to generating the stable return on assets that these investors need to meet their long term liabilities is by supporting stable economic growth and by pursuing its inflation target. The boost to economic activity that will come with lower interest rates should increase the profits of companies across the country, and boost the value of financial assets more generally. Indeed for a pension scheme that starts off in balance, the increase in value of assets can be expected to offset the increase in liabilities.6 The problem arises for pension funds that already start from a deficit, who will find it more costly to acquire the assets to match their future liabilities.  In making our policy decisions we must bear in mind we are uncertain about the magnitude of both the impact of QE on the economy and its side effects. Indeed that was one of the key motivations in working to develop a broad range of tools. At the margin, our determination to use a range of easing options – rather than relying solely on the purchase of gilts – likely reduced the marginal impact on long term risk free rates. Our package spread the transmission of monetary policy more evenly across short-term interest rates, corporate credit and bank funding markets, as well as long rates. Conscious of the structural changes in market liquidity over recent years7, we are also purchasing at a slow pace compared to previous rounds of quantitative easing to minimise any impact on market liquidity (Chart 7). 3. The central bank should not take the place of private markets in allocating credit. The need to avoid unduly affecting the allocation of credit was paramount in our design of the corporate bond purchase scheme. As a result, we have deliberately chosen criteria for purchases that will give us a broad and representative range of issuers and sectors. Those companies who have an investment grade rating, subject to assessment by our risk management staff, and who make a material contribution to the UK economy can expect their bonds to be eligible.8 Purchases began yesterday, and at the end of each month we will publish our holdings in each of 9 sectors, and how that compares to the corresponding market share. Over time, we will adjust our purchases with the aim of achieving a sectoral balance across our portfolio that matches that of the market as a whole.                                                 6 See Bean (2012) for illustrative scenarios of the impact on pension funds with different initial positions. 7 Shafik (2015b), Cunliffe (2015). 8 Eligibility decisions will be made by our risk management staff, taking into account a number of different factors. Eligible companies may be incorporated in the UK or other jurisdictions. Companies with significant employment in the UK or with their headquarters in the UK will normally be regarded as making a material contribution to the UK economy. We will also consider whether the company generates significant revenues in the UK, serves a large number of customers in the UK or has a number of operating sites in the UK. For example, a company headquartered outside of the UK but employing hundreds of people in the UK and generating sales of £20m in the UK would be considered to make a material contribution to the UK economy.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  Things a central bank cannot do I hope I have by now convinced you of three things: (i) that the benefit of gathering a broad range of responsibilities under one roof allows us to practice more effective joined up planning and policymaking (ii) that the expanding size of the Bank of England’s balance sheet is a necessary response to the circumstances we find ourselves in (iii) that in making decisions we are conscious of the spillovers of our actions. Let me end on a note of humility. If I were to be granted one wish as a central banker it would be to increase the neutral rate of interest toward a more historically normal level. That would hasten our return to a simpler world in which Bank Rate would be our only monetary policy tool, and allow us to reduce our footprint in other financial markets accordingly and return to a “small is beautiful” world. However, despite the broadening of our responsibilities and the increase in tools at our disposal, the Bank of England does not set the neutral rate of interest – that is set by the economy. Over the long run, it is determined by deep structural forces, including demography, the flexibility of our labour and product markets, the quality of our institutions and infrastructure, and the balance of savings and investment in the world economy. Policies that affect those forces can increase the potential growth rate of the economy, and lead to a general improvement in the underlying appetite for investment, thereby driving up interest rates. So monetary policy is just one part of the story alongside government’s fiscal and structural policies and the degree of international policy co-ordination. A good balance between them can put us on a more prosperous and stable path. But for now, even if we might wish for the time when small was beautiful, big is necessary. References Bean (2012) “Pension Funds and Quantitative Easing,” Speech given to the National Association of Pension Funds’ Local Authority Conference. Carney (2013) “The Spirit of the Season,” Speech given to the Economic Club of New York. Cunliffe (2015) “Market Liquidity and Market-Based Financing,” speech given at the British Bankers Association International Banking Conference, London. Haldane (2015) “Stuck,” Speech given at the Open University, Milton Keynes. Rachel, L. and Smith, T. (2015) “Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate,” Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 571. Shafik, M (2015a) “Interpreting the Yield Curve: Warning or Opportunity?” Speech given at the Association of Corporate Treasurers Annual Conference, Manchester. Shafik, M (2015b) “Dealing with change – Liquidity in Evolving Market Structures,” Speech given at AQR Asset Management Institute, London Business School. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches      
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9       
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches      
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  S S Mundra: Financial inclusion in India – the journey so far and the way ahead Address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the BRICS Workshop on Financial Inclusion, Mumbai, 19 September 2016. *      *      * Shri Santhosh Kumar Gangwarji, Honorable Minister of State for Finance, Government of India; Shri Ashwani Kumar, Chairman, IBA & CMD, Dena Bank; Shri Rajiv Rishi, Deputy Chairman, IBA & CMD, Central Bank of India; Dr. Madnesh Kumar Mishra, JS(DFS) & Mission Director-Financial Inclusion, GOI; delegates to the Workshop; ladies and gentleman! At the outset, I would like to compliment Department of Financial services, GOI and IBA for organizing this workshop on Financial Inclusion under the BRICS Forum. It is indeed a pleasure for me to speak to you from this Forum today. 2. Financial Inclusion is a much cherished policy objective for us in India and our economic policy has always been driven by an underlying intent of a sustainable and inclusive growth. Although I would not dwell at length about the virtues of financial inclusion before this learned audience, I would still like to draw reference to a profound ILO Declaration of Philadelphia (1944) which states that “Poverty anywhere is a threat to prosperity everywhere.” The policy makers in India too i.e. Government of India and the RBI, had an early realisation about the implications of poverty for financial stability and have endeavored to ensure that poverty is tackled in all its manifestations and that the benefits of economic growth reaches the poor and excluded sections of the society. 3. I wish to use this Forum to brief you on our journey towards the goal of universal financial inclusion in India, the challenges encountered and the way forward. But before, I get into the subject proper; let me for the benefit of our international participants, state our definition of Financial Inclusion. “Financial Inclusion is the process of ensuring access to appropriate financial products and services needed by all sections of the society in general and vulnerable groups such as weaker sections and low income groups in particular at an affordable cost in a fair and transparent manner by mainstream institutional players”. Role of RBI in financial inclusion 4. As I said earlier, RBI has been pursuing the goal of financial inclusion for a long time. RBI’s financial inclusion efforts can be traced back to the 1960s when the focus was on channelizing of credit to the neglected sectors of the economy and weaker sections of the population. While the Government of India nationalized the banking operations of few commercial banks in two tranches in 1969 and 1980; RBI also took initiatives like laying down priority sector lending requirements for banks, Lead Bank Scheme, establishment of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs-1975–76), Service Area Approach (1989), Self-Help Group-Bank Linkage Programme (1989–90), setting up of Local Area Banks etc., all aimed at making available benefits of banking services to the masses. 5. Although these measures resulted in impressive gains in enhancing the outreach of banking services and extent of credit to the population, there were certain structural challenges which impeded the progress of financial inclusion. On the supply side, absence of technology was a major impediment as it restricted expansion of banking services to far-flung areas of the country comprising of 600 thousand plus villages. In the absence of technology, developing a cost-effective delivery model also remained a challenge. 6. Since 2006, RBI has adopted a planned and structured approach to address the issues of financial inclusion. RBI’s approach has been to focus both on the demand as well as on the 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  supply side. This has in a large way been possible due to the availability of technology and its gradual adoption within the banking processes. Let me elaborate on some of these measures and consequent achievements. 7. Institutionalization of the framework of Banking Correspondents (BCs) has been a major step towards enhancing access of banking services. RBI advocated a combination of “Brick and Mortar” structure with “Mouse and Click” technology for extending financial inclusion in geographically dispersed areas. 8. On the regulatory side, the banks were mandated to open at least 25 per cent of their new branches in unbanked rural centers. Taking into account the difficulties encountered by common people in meeting the “Know Your Customer (KYC)” requirements for opening bank accounts, several measures were taken. For example, RBI allowed banks to accept self-certification for opening of basic service bank accounts. RBI has encouraged banks to open Aadhaar1 Enabled Bank Accounts by linking Aadhaar numbers of individuals, wherever available, with the Basic Savings Bank Accounts opened for them, so that their credit histories can also be built up over time.  9. Co-terminus with the above efforts, RBI also encouraged banks to adopt a structured and planned approach to financial inclusion with commitment at the highest levels through preparation of Board-approved Financial Inclusion Plans (FIPs). The first two phases of FIPs implemented over 2010–13 and 2013–16 were interspersed with the implementation of PMJDY by the Government of India during 2014–15, whereby the supply side efforts received an extra push. Snapshot of progress 10. Let me quote some numbers. i)  The number of banking outlets in villages went up from 67,694 in March 2010 to 5,86,307 in March 2016 after RBI permitted appointment of BCs and laid out a roadmap for spreading banking services in rural India through a mix of bank branches and BC outlets. In addition, the number of urban locations covered through BCs has also surged from 447 in March 2010 to 1,02,552 in March 2016. ii)  The Basic Savings Bank Deposit Accounts (BSBDAs) have gone up from 73 million in March 2010 to 469 million as on March 31, 2016. Under the PMJDY alone, until June 1, 2016t, 220 mn accounts have been opened with an approximate balance of Rs. 384 bn. iii)  There were 47.31 million small farm sector credit accounts and 11.3 million small non-farm sector credit accounts with an outstanding of Rs. 5130.7 billion and Rs. 1493.3 billion outstanding respectively as on March 31, 2016. The number of small farm and non-farm sector credit accounts stood at 24.3 million and 1.4 mn respectively in March 2010. iv)  The total number of transactions in BC-ICT accounts which were around 26 million during 2010–11 have increased to 826.81 million as on March 31, 2016. 11. For most other countries these numbers may appear overwhelming, however, we still have a long way to go here in India and we are extremely mindful of that. There are plenty of challenges – low volume of transactions in the basic bank accounts, inactive BC outlets, inaccessibility, poor connectivity etc. Last year, RBI had set up an Expert Committee on Medium Term Path for Financial Inclusion under ED (Deepak Mohanty) which was tasked to                                                 1  Aadhaar is a unique identifier for all individuals in the country. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  draw up a medium term and long term roadmap for FI. The committee has made about 80 actionable recommendations which are being pursued by RBI. 12. Following a paradigm shift in the Financial Inclusion landscape, a need was felt for convergence of the FI efforts of various stakeholders. Accordingly, RBI has reconstituted the high-level inter-institutional Financial Inclusion Advisory Committee (FIAC) for undertaking a continuous review of the policies on FI; monitoring of the progress in Financial Inclusion and the financial literacy; evaluation of its impact through conduct of study/surveys and for preparation of a National Strategy for Financial Inclusion. Other recent measures New banking entities permitted in the financial inclusion space 13. RBI has granted in-principle approval to some entities to set up differentiated banks namely “Small Finance Banks” (SFBs) and “Payments Banks” to further the cause of financial inclusion in the country. Other than serving as vehicles for savings, SFBs and Payments banks are expected to enhance the supply of credit to small business units, small and marginal farmers, micro and small industries and other entities in the unorganized sector and enable provisions for cost-efficient remittance services in a secured technology driven environment respectively. Role of payment system in promoting financial inclusion 14. Considering the strong linkage between financial inclusion and the payment systems, RBI has taken several steps. Some of these include encouraging use of Mobile Banking, pre-paid instruments in the form of digital wallets and mobile wallets, operationalization of the Aadhaar Bridge Payment System (ABPS) and Aadhaar-Enabled Payment system (AEPS) etc. Increasing brick and mortar presence 15. While there is considerable improvement in access of banking services through a mix of physical and virtual mode, it is believed that there should be a fair balance between the number of BCs and brick and mortar branches for better alignment of the inclusion efforts. Accordingly, it is mandated to open physical bank branches in all villages above a population of 5000 in a phased manner. We feel this would also enable banks to not only provide quality financial services but also timely support to their BC network. Creation of BC registry and certification 16. The BC Model is a critical lynchpin of our Financial Inclusion initiative. We believe that to support the BC structure, a vital first step is developing a BC Registry. This would not only ensure greater oversight on the functioning of BCs but would also provide more confidence to the end customers. A scheme for graded certification/ training programme for BCs is also being introduced to enable the BCs with a good track record and advanced training to handle complex tasks that are beyond deposits and remittances. Financial inclusion Plans for banks (2016–19) 17. To sustain the momentum of achieving the financial inclusion objectives by setting FIP targets for banks, the third phase of Financial Inclusion Plans for the next three years  2016–19 has been initiated. Under the third phase, the focus is on more granular monitoring of the progress made by banks under FIPs at district level. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Demand side interventions 18. Having spoken about the progress and some recent measures taken by RBI on supply side, let me talk about an equally important, but less focussed, demand side aspects of Financial Inclusion. As I mentioned earlier, banks have opened about 440 million accounts under the push from RBI and the PMJDY and hence, it is right time to focus on the demand side which is to focus on enhancing capabilities so that the individual is in a position to not merely avail the offered services, but is also capable of demanding preferred products and services suitable to her need/choice. Our belief is that unless the demand side measures adequately supplement the supply side measures, the goal of financial inclusion would remain the proverbial “wild goose chase”. Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs) / rural self employment training institutes  19. Banks in India have been mandated to set up FLCs for extending financial literacy. Currently, about 1380 FLCs across India are functional which adopt a tailored approach to conduct of camps. Special focus is given on people newly inducted into the banking system. Besides this, tailored camps are conducted for five different target groups i.e. farmers, small entrepreneurs, SHGs, School students and senior citizens. Going forward, given the challenges of skewed distribution of existing FLCs in a few states, limited outreach and to have an exclusive focus on financial literacy at the ground level, we are encouraging banks to set up CFLs (Centres for Financial Literacy) at the block level on a pilot basis in a few states. 20. The Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs) have been set up by various banks all over the country at the district level. The key objective of RSETI is “Short term training and long term hand holding with assistance to credit linkage for trainees”. Direct benefit transfer and Aadhaar seeding of accounts 21. An important driver for enhancing the demand side of financial inclusion is Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT). It has the potential to be game changer. If entitlements under various state sponsored schemes starts directly flowing into the bank accounts of individuals under DBT mode, it can act as a catalyst to encourage saving habit leading to build up of investment and seed capital for availing productive credit. Let me now come to the way forward. Way forward 22. I feel in order to motivate and nudge consumers to begin seeking formal financial services, there is need to focus on what I have named 3 Ps- Products, Processes and People. Let me elaborate. a)  Suitable Products. The traditional approach of “take it or leave it” is not going to work for the people who are new to the financial system. Many of them do not have a continuous income stream. Their incomes are generally seasonal and hence erratic. Also, many have only a meagre amount to save and their needs are widely different from those of regular consumers. All these necessitate a customer centric product design taking into consideration the lifecycle needs of customers at every stage. Simultaneously, it is also important to prevent mis-selling of financial products to the newly inducted customers without due consideration around suitability. I have also noticed overzealousness in few quarters to provide credit to the new entrants to the fold of the financial sector. It is important to ensure that this overzealousness does not result in over-indebtedness. We must be mindful of the fact that these individuals have entered the formal financial system after a lot of pushing and prodding and it would be difficult to bring them back into the formal financial sector, if they leave feeling cheated/dejected. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  b)  Transparent Processes. Another area of concern is transparency in the processes. By transparency, I mean an objective communication about the products, procedures, documentation and other necessary formalities to be completed while making a financial transaction. Transparent processes result in greater trust and confidence in the financial system. c)  Committed People. Both the suitable products, and the transparent processes need to be complemented by committed people who are willing to listen keenly, empathize with the consumers and willing to walk that little extra to welcome the customers into the formal financial system. The 3x3x3matrix 23. I believe once the above 3 Ps are in place, a focus on 3x3x3 matrix would be important for enhancing financial capability of individuals and for achieving financial inclusion. The 3x3x3 matrix refers to three sections of the society which need a greater focus, pitching of products based on three kinds of surpluses that people generate and the three types of institutions that have a central role to play. The three section approach – improving credit absorption capacity 24. Firstly, in India, when we talk of inclusive growth, there are three sections that would warrant special focus. i) the small and marginal farmers, share croppers, ii) micro and small industries and iii) the low salary earners in the unorganized sectors. Collectively, this section makes a significant part of the population that needs enhancement in their financial capabilities. Also, these sections are extremely important contributors to the country’s GDP and labour force. 25. The credit absorption capacity of the farmers can be enhanced through consolidation of fragmented landholdings by ushering in land reforms or through pooling of land holdings in an SHG format. Efforts to enhance the credit absorption capacity must also be supplemented through financial literacy and vocational training initiatives, comprehensive insurance cover against failure of crop & innovative practices in farming. Farmers also need to be sensitized about the concept of financing against warehouse receipts to avoid distress sale of produce at low prices. 26. Enhancing financial capability of mainly the micro and small entrepreneurs from amongst the larger MSME fold would help these entrepreneurs to move away from the informal to the formal sources of finance. Micro and small entities are typically enterprises with little or no credit histories and with inadequate expertise in preparing financial statements etc. They would, hence, need to be served with relevant products and at low cost by employing innovative credit scoring models. 27. There is also a pressing need to scale up the skills of the low salary earners in the unorganized sector through training inputs. Integrating the skill development initiatives with secondary and intermediate level education would address the challenge of low education levels and also provide school dropouts with employability skills. Dearth of formal vocational education, high school dropout rates, inadequate skill training capacity, negative perception towards skilling, lack of industry ready skills even in professional courses, continue to stand out as some of the major causes of poor skill levels in the workforce. It is heartening to note Government’s commitment in encouraging entrepreneurship in the country through the new national skill development mission. The three surpluses approach – suitability in products and services Let us now look at what I call as 3 surpluses. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  28. The first group is the one that generates adequate surpluses. These people should be sensitized about different avenues to invest so as to reach their financial goals with ease. These may include investing in the capital market through shares, mutual funds, gold bonds etc. The second category of people generate meagre surpluses. They are the people who will be most suited for products like recurring deposits, SIPs etc. The third category comprises of people who have recently come into the financial system, who live on subsistence income and do not generate any meaningful surpluses. Our role as far as this group is to encourage them to use the basic bouquet of financial products like BSBDA for daily transactions as well as introduce them to electronic remittance channels. Similarly, customised basic term insurance and pension products currently being made available to this target Group under the Government of India initiatives can also go a long way in providing them some financial security in the longer term. The three Institutions approach – endless opportunities 29. The first category of institutions is whom I would call “Existing & Included”. It refers to the banks which have traditionally been leaders in bringing people in the formal financial system. These “included” institutions must look to deliver on the promise of ensuring the 3 Ps. Under the second category are institutions whom I refer to as “Existing, but not included” in the FI Grand Plan in a structured way. They are financial Intermediaries like NBFCs and MFIs that have a good last mile reach and should be leveraged upon. The third type is of the new institutions that will start operations soon. Three SFBs have already started their operations. Seven other entities hold in-principle approvals. We believe that they will be able to bring in technology backed innovative last mile practices to serve their customers. The bottom-line is that a coherent approach must be worked out so that the relative strengths of the three types of institutions can be leveraged upon. Conclusion 30. The vision for Financial Inclusion as envisaged by the Committee on Medium Term Path to Financial Inclusion is that by 2021, empowered by formal finance, over 90 per cent of the hitherto underserved sections of society would become active stakeholders in economic progress. This is very much possible but it would require focussed efforts both on the supply side as well as on the demand side. There is a strong business case in catering to the underserved sections of the society, given the vast developments in the frontiers of digital technology. 31. In conclusion, I would say that the cherished goal of universal Financial Inclusion can be achieved only through synergistic efforts between the mainstream financial entities and fringe players like rural co-operatives, NBFCs, MFIs, credit societies, NGOs ,etc. All of them have to play a complementary role in championing the cause of financial inclusion. Time is ripe to weave a financial inclusion tapestry where all these institutions can fit in a manner which brings about their contribution in the most efficient manner. This is where the efforts of the Government and RBI are currently focussed. I hope we can draw some useful lessons from the experiences of other countries within the BRICS Forum and build upon them as we continue our journey towards attainment of universal financial inclusion. Thank you! 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Daniel K Tarullo: Next steps in the evolution of stress testing Speech by Mr Daniel K Tarullo, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Yale University School of Management Leaders Forum, New Haven, Connecticut, 26 September 2016. *      *      * Supervisory stress testing has become a cornerstone of post-crisis prudential regulation. Stress testing, unlike traditional capital requirements, provides a forward-looking assessment of losses that would be suffered under adverse economic scenarios. The simultaneous testing of the largest firms lends a perspective on a large part of the banking system and facilitates identification of common exposures and risks. During the financial crisis, the success of an ad hoc stress test in assessing the capital needs of, and restoring confidence in, the nation’s largest financial institutions encouraged Congress to make stress testing a required and regular feature of large firm prudential regulation.1 The Federal Reserve has, in the succeeding years, substantially refined its supervisory stress test. Moreover, the stress test has been integrated into our Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), which both ties the results of the test into the banks’ capital distribution practices and evaluates their risk management and capital planning capacities. Today I want to share with you the results of an extensive review of the statutory stress test and CCAR programs, which we began following the end of the 2015 cycle. Before turning to the reasons for that review and some ideas for changing these programs that have arisen from it, I will take a few moments to summarize the characteristics and purposes of the programs as they have evolved to this point. Stress testing and CCAR today As we have implemented the requirement mandated by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) for stress testing – which the Federal Reserve denominates as the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test (DFAST) – that exercise includes four main steps.2 (1) The firms subject to DFAST provide the Federal Reserve with detailed, significantly standardized data on their loans, securities holdings, trading positions, counterparty exposures, revenue, expenses, and balance sheets. (2) The Federal Reserve specifies hypothetical macroeconomic and financial market scenarios – including an “adverse” and a “severely adverse” scenario. (3) The Federal Reserve inputs the data from the firms into its own supervisory models to project each firm’s losses, revenues, and capital over a nine-quarter planning horizon under the specified scenarios. (4) The results of the exercise, including the capital positions of the firms following the hypothesized stress scenarios, are disclosed to the public. As DFAST has evolved, it has become an increasingly valuable tool for evaluating whether the largest financial firms are holding sufficient capital to continue providing credit in the event of significant macroeconomic and financial stress. However, in itself DFAST does not set any capital ratios or limit any capital actions by the firms. Those functions are implemented through the CCAR program, which was created through the regulatory process                                                 1 Dodd-Frank Act §165(i), 12 U.S.C. §5365(i). 2 For a more complete description of the Federal Reserve’s DFAST and CCAR programs, see www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/stress-tests-capital-planning.htm. As a formal matter, DFAST was implemented beginning in 2013. However, in 2011 and 2012, the Federal Reserve conducted supervisory stress tests as part of its CCAR program, as explained later in the text. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  by the Federal Reserve.3 In CCAR, the Federal Reserve assesses the overall capital adequacy of the firms – including evaluations of whether each firm’s capital provides an adequate buffer for the losses that would be incurred during the stress scenarios, whether its risk management and capital planning processes are appropriately well-developed and governed, and how its plans to distribute capital through dividends or share repurchases could affect its ability to remain a viable financial intermediary in the hypothesized scenarios. Given how central these considerations are to effective risk management and the soundness of these firms, we are progressively integrating the qualitative elements of CCAR into our year-round supervisory program for the largest banking organizations. Under CCAR, the Federal Reserve may object to a firm’s capital plan on either quantitative or qualitative grounds. A quantitative objection is made when the stress test reveals that a firm would not be able to maintain its post-stress capital ratios above the regulatory minimum levels over the planning horizon, taking into account its planned capital distributions. We have taken planned distributions into account because, as the run-up to the financial crisis revealed, firms may be reluctant to cut their distributions – particularly dividends – even in a period of growing stress. Thus, CCAR included what has been called a “pre-funding” requirement. The Federal Reserve may object on qualitative grounds if it finds that the firm’s capital planning processes are not sufficiently reliable. The qualitative assessment includes the assumptions and analyses underlying each firm’s capital plan, its controls and governance processes, and whether previously identified weaknesses in management and operations have been corrected. If the Federal Reserve objects on quantitative or qualitative grounds, the firm may not make any capital distributions without our permission. In practice, in the case of a qualitative objection, we have generally permitted distributions at the previous year’s level but no increases. This practice, however, has been in the context of distributions rising from generally low levels coming out of the crisis; there has been no guarantee that a similar practice would prevail as distributions continue rising. The quantitative component of CCAR, based as it is on the DFAST stress tests, has contributed to the continued strengthening of the capital levels of the largest financial institutions that began after the original stress test in the winter of 2009.4 While, understandably, many focus on the quantitative side and its implications for capital distributions, the importance of the qualitative component has been perhaps underappreciated. We saw during the 2009 stress test that many large financial institutions were unable to marshal the data necessary to gauge their own exposures accurately or to project the adverse effects they would suffer in a tail event, as opposed to a more ordinary cyclical downturn. CCAR has required the firms to steadily improve their risk management and capital planning processes. Indeed, some of the firms – particularly the less complex banks within the CCAR cohort – are now meeting, or are close to meeting, our supervisory expectations across a range of risk management and capital planning processes. The CCAR review Clearly, then, we regard the stress testing and CCAR programs to have made substantial contributions to protecting the safety and soundness of the nation’s largest financial firms and to promoting the stability of the financial system as a whole. But, equally clearly, if a                                                 3 12 CFR 225.8. 4 The common equity capital ratio – which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets – of the 33 bank holding companies in the 2016 CCAR has more than doubled from 5.5 percent in the first quarter of 2009 to 12.2 percent in the first quarter of 2016. This reflects an increase of more than $700 billion in common equity capital to a total of $1.2 trillion during the same period. www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/ press/bcreg/20160629a.htm. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  stress testing regime is to continue to play this role, it must be dynamic. The hypothesized scenarios must change to take account of new economic and financial risks. The supervisory model may, in some circumstances, need to be changed to take account of evolving economic conditions and bank portfolio characteristics. Additionally, we have been refining the stress testing and CCAR processes in what is, of course, still a relatively new regulatory and supervisory tool. Changes of all these kinds have been, and will continue to be, made from year to year. After five years of post-crisis stress testing, however, we believed it was important for us to conduct a more thorough assessment of the program. Taking advantage of the shift in timing of the annual stress tests following the 2015 cycle, we undertook an overall review.5 We knew there were several areas to which attention was needed. These included the imperfect alignment of CCAR with the regulatory capital requirements as they had evolved since we began stress testing, the desire for additional macroprudential elements in the stress test, and the qualitative component of CCAR as it applied to less complex firms. But we also wanted to hear what others thought. Accordingly, we met with bank officials, debt and equity-side market analysts, public interest groups, and academics – both to solicit their views on the topics I noted a moment ago and to hear their overall evaluation of, and recommendations for, our stress testing and CCAR exercises. As you can imagine, we received a wide range of suggestions, at least some of which were inconsistent with one another. In the main, though, these discussions reflected strong support for stress testing, reinforced our going-in view of the key issues for consideration, and presented us with some other areas for possible change. Before describing the package of potential changes that is emerging from our review, let me explain a bit more about each of the key topics. First is the fact that CCAR has been adjusted to align with some, but not all, of the important changes made in our regulatory capital rules over the past six years.6 One might decide that the regulatory capital rules and CCAR should be different, complementary capital measures, roughly the way that a leverage ratio requirement and risk-weighted capital requirements are complementary. In some particulars, though, CCAR sits a bit uneasily alongside the ongoing capital requirements. The most notable example is that CCAR assumes that a firm will continue to make its planned capital distributions during a stress period even though the regulatory capital rules now include a capital conservation buffer to limit such distributions. Another is that, to this point, CCAR has not reflected the firm-specific capital surcharge we have adopted for global systemically important banks (GSIBs). Our second key topic was the macroprudential dimension of the stress testing and CCAR regimes. One of the most important lessons of the financial crisis was that prudential regulation, including capital regulation, had been dominantly microprudential in nature, even for the largest firms. That is, the regulation was designed and applied with a view mostly to the idiosyncratic risks faced by a bank in isolation, without regard to the interaction of the bank and the financial system as a whole. Thus, for example, capital regulation did not take account of fire sale effects – the reduction in portfolio values for one bank by other banks selling certain types of assets in order to enhance their own solvency or to counter a reduction in funding availability. Similarly, microprudential capital regulation allows a bank to meet its capital ratios by reducing lending – that is, by reducing the denominator of its ratio –                                                 5 The 2016 CCAR cycle started one quarter later than past years’ CCAR cycles. 6 For example, our regulatory capital rules now include a minimum requirement based on common equity, reflecting the fact that common equity provides the best buffer against losses. As a result, the similar common equity requirement that had been included in the early years of CCAR, to meet an additional post-stress target ratio of tier 1 common equity, was removed after CCAR 2015. Other changes that have been integrated into the stress test include modification of the risk-weighted asset calculation methodologies and revised definitions of capital. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  as well as by increasing capital. If many banks were to follow this strategy, even creditworthy borrowers would be adversely affected, thereby exacerbating an economic downturn. Our stress testing and CCAR regimes do have some macroprudential elements, which have been modestly enhanced over the past few years. By conducting the stress tests for all large banks at the same time under common scenarios, we can evaluate the collective losses that may be borne by a major part of the industry in the stress scenario. We vary scenario design to take account of a variety of risks to the financial system and in a way that reduces procyclical effects.7 We vary the market shock over time to reduce the incentive for firms to correlate their asset holdings or adopt correlated hedging strategies that are treated relatively favorably under one particular market shock scenario. And we do not allow firms to plan on a reduction in their balance sheets as a way to meet capital ratio requirements under stress. Still, as currently conceived and implemented, our stress testing regime emphasizes the direct risks to bank capital from a severe recession and associated market dislocation via the usual channels of reduced operating revenues combined with credit, market, counterparty, and operational losses. However, as noted by some academics and policy analysts, a fully developed macroprudential dimension to stress testing would incorporate indirect risks to bank capital through channels such as market-wide funding and liquidity disruptions, fire sales, and so on.8 These amplification effects are obviously particularly important for firms that have relatively larger trading books or that rely relatively more on short-term funding, or both. Indeed, many of the academics with whom we discussed stress testing during our review emphasized the importance of building out the macroprudential elements of our stress testing program. The third topic we had identified for review was the nature of the qualitative assessment as it applied to the relatively smaller, less complex firms within the CCAR exercise. While we had always explicitly differentiated our risk management and capital planning expectations for these firms, our supervisors had observed that many such firms seemed uncertain of whether they would nonetheless be held to the more stringent standards intended for the largest, most complex firms. In the course of our review, comments from these smaller, less complex firms confirmed this observation. Officials from these banks expressed the view that the CCAR qualitative assessment was unduly burdensome because it created pressure to develop complex processes, extensive documentation, and sophisticated stress test models that mirrored those in use at the largest, most complex firms, in order to avoid the possibility of a public objection to their capital plan. Since our intention had never been to create an incentive for firms with a relatively small systemic footprint to invest in stress testing processes appropriate only for larger or more complex firms, we knew we needed to address this problem. Results of the review After more than a year of discussions and analysis, we have developed ideas for changes to the stress testing and CCAR regimes that would address these three key issues, along with some related matters that arose during the course of our review. Some of these changes would need to be pursued through rulemakings, including the usual notice-and-comment process. Others can be implemented through nonregulatory changes, though some will need further elaboration in moving from idea to concrete practice. Thus, there is a necessarily provisional character to the package set forth here. Except for the relief from the qualitative                                                 7 Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), “Macroprudential Regulation,” speech delivered at the Yale Law School Conference on Challenges in Global Financial Services, New Haven, CT, September 20. 8 See, for example, David Greenlaw, Anil Kashyap, Kermit Schoenholtz, and Hyun Song Shin (2012), “Stressed Out: Macroprudential Principles for Stress Testing.” Chicago Booth Research Paper No. 12–08, Fama-Miller Working Paper (Chicago: University of Chicago Booth School of Business, February 13). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  requirements for smaller, less complex CCAR firms – which I will describe a bit later – we do not contemplate proposing regulations to implement these ideas until early next year. Thus, any such changes would not apply to the coming 2017 DFAST/CCAR cycle. Better alignment of CCAR with the new regulatory capital rules As I noted earlier, there have been significant additions to regulatory capital requirements since the first CCAR exercise began in late 2010. While some – such as revised risk-weighted asset calculation methodologies and definitions of capital – have been integrated into the stress testing program, other important additions have not. Most significant are the various capital buffer requirements that sit atop the regulatory minimum levels. These include a uniform 2.5-percent capital conservation buffer (CCB), the GSIB surcharge, and a countercyclical buffer that can expand the CCB for a broad range of firms in times of increasing financial vulnerabilities.9 Firms that do not hold capital sufficient to meet or exceed this combined buffer level are subject to restrictions on their capital distributions and bonus payments to executives, which become progressively stricter as their capital level falls deeper into the buffer. To better align CCAR with the regulatory capital rules as they now stand, we will be considering adoption of a “stress capital buffer” (SCB) approach to setting post-stress capital requirements that would further integrate our capital rules with our stress test and CCAR frameworks. The simplest way to describe it is that the SCB would replace the existing 2.5 percent CCB as a component in each CCAR firm’s point-in-time capital requirements. The SCB would be risk-sensitive and vary across firms, based on the results of the annual stress test. Specifically, it would be set equal to the maximum decline in a firm’s common equity tier 1 capital ratio under the severely adverse scenario of the supervisory stress test before the inclusion of the firm’s planned capital distributions, a simplification from the current practice of calculating the capital positions of the firm separately for each quarter in the scenario horizon. As is now the case with the CCB and other applicable capital buffers, a firm would be subject to restrictions on its capital distributions whenever its capital levels fall below the combined regulatory minima and buffers. Although it is likely that the stress test losses will continue to exceed 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets for most GSIBs, the SCB would have a specified floor at this current CCB level to avoid any reduction in the stringency of the regulatory capital rules. A firm’s buffer requirement would be recalculated after each year’s stress test, and its capital plan would not be approved in CCAR if the plan indicated that the firm would fall into the buffer under the stress test’s baseline projections. Let me use a hypothetical example to illustrate how the SCB would work. Assuming that a firm’s common equity tier 1 capital ratio declines in CCAR’s severely adverse scenario from 13 percent to 8 percent, that firm’s SCB would be the greater of 2.5 percent or the 5 percent decline – thus, 5 percent. Assuming further that this firm is a GSIB with a surcharge of 3 percent and that the countercyclical buffer is not in effect, the firm would be constrained in making capital distributions that would bring its common equity tier 1 capital ratio under 12.5 percent. The 12.5 percent figure is the sum of the 4.5 percent minimum common equity tier 1 risk-weighted capital requirement, the 3 percent surcharge, and the 5 percent stress loss as calculated in annual stress test.10  Because the GSIB capital surcharge already exists as an additional buffer requirement in the regulatory capital rules, the stress capital buffer approach would effectively add the GSIB                                                 9 The countercyclical buffer applies to banking organizations with more than $250 billion in assets or $10 billion in on-balance-sheet foreign exposures and to any depository institution subsidiary of such organizations. See 12 CFR Part 217, Appendix A. 10 Figure 1 further illustrates the stress capital buffer. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  capital surcharge to our estimates of the amount of capital needed under stress. This would generally result in a significant increase in capital requirements applicable to the GSIBs, for most of which CCAR has been their binding capital constraint. But having both the stress loss buffer and the capital surcharge included in our capital requirements is wholly consistent with the reasons for having a capital surcharge in the first place. Indeed, not having the two together has actually been an anomaly that arose from the sequencing of the various capital strengthening measures we have undertaken. The Board adopted the GSIB surcharge requirement as part of its implementation of section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which established the important macroprudential principle that financial firms should be subject to increasingly stringent regulation as their systemic importance increases. As explained in more detail in the white paper that accompanied the Board’s final GSIB risk-based capital surcharge rule,11 the material distress or failure of a GSIB would have an adverse impact on the financial system as a whole that is far greater than the impact on the financial system of the distress or failure of a non-GSIB banking firm. Accordingly, GSIBs should face capital surcharges to compel internalization of those external costs. This should reduce the probability of a GSIB’s failure enough below that of a non-GSIB that the expected impact on the system of a GSIB and a non-GSIB failure are more comparable. Because the difference in the external costs of the distress or failure of a GSIB as compared to a non-GSIB is likely to be at least as high during times of macroeconomic and financial market stress as during ordinary times, there is no reason why the GSIB surcharge should not be a part of the post-stress capital regime. A complementary point is that the extra buffer required by the GSIB surcharge also reflects the fact that even the best-conceived annual stress scenarios cannot capture all tail risks in the financial system. The integration of capital rules and the stress test thus advances our second aim in initiating our CCAR review – the incorporation of more macroprudential elements. As some of you may know, Chair Yellen and I have, on a number of occasions over the past year or so, indicated publicly that we would be considering the effective incorporation of the surcharge into post-stress capital expectations. Some industry representatives have subsequently argued that this step is not warranted. While we will of course address these and other comments as our rulemaking process moves forward, I want to comment now on a couple of arguments, since they seem to reflect a misunderstanding of our stress testing program or of the regulatory structure established by the Dodd-Frank Act. One such argument is that it is duplicative to include both the anticipated losses under stress and the GSIB surcharge in a firm’s capital requirement because two elements of our current stress test, the global market shock and the counterparty default shock, only apply to GSIB firms. However, these additional scenario components capture direct losses to which any firm engaged in material trading activity is exposed. The market shock measures the trading mark-to-market losses associated with sudden changes in asset prices. The large counterparty default measures the losses associated with repricing counterparty exposures based on the market shock, and then assuming the default of the counterparty that represents the largest net exposure. These components of the stress test do not capture the adverse impact of a GSIB failure on the financial system as a whole – the risks that are the basis for the GSIB surcharge. These components of our stress test currently apply only to GSIBs because GSIBs are the only firms currently in CCAR for which these exposures are material. Non-GSIBs currently do not have material trading activities and so would suffer only small direct trading losses as a result of severely stressed market conditions or the failure of a major derivatives or                                                 11 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), “Calibrating the G-SIB Surcharge,” white paper (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 20). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  repurchase agreement (repo) counterparty. As the U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign banks with more material trading businesses in their U.S. operations are added to CCAR, we intend to revisit whether the global market shock and counterparty default component should be applied to firms beyond the U.S. GSIBs. Another argument offered against inclusion of the surcharge as an element of post-stress capital expectations is that the material distress or failure of a GSIB no longer poses a significant threat to financial stability due to the regulations and supervisory programs that are designed to improve GSIB resolvability. These measures include, among others, the proposed total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) rule, the proposed qualifying financial contracts early termination rule and related International Swap and Derivatives Association (ISDA) protocols, and efforts to ensure firms engage in strong recovery and resolution planning. It is true that these efforts have improved GSIB resolvability in recent years. But these efforts are ongoing, rather than complete. More importantly, while there is certainly a relationship between the goals of strengthening the resiliency of the most systemically important firms and making them more readily resolvable should they nonetheless fail, those are still separate regulatory aims. The demise of a very large financial institution would cause substantial damage to the economy and the financial system even if it was not so disorderly as to threaten the system entirely. Note, in this regard, that the Dodd-Frank Act requires both more stringent prudential standards for systemically important firms and a process for promoting the orderly resolution of these same firms. While the complementarity of these and other elements of a regulatory program always warrant consideration, and while adjustments in all aspects of the program should be made as conditions and practices evolve, current work on orderly resolution is surely no argument against the promotion of systemic stability and macroprudential aims by integrating the surcharge requirement with CCAR. Changes to the treatment of planned dividends and share repurchases The shift to a stress capital buffer approach would provide a mechanism for addressing two issues related to capital distribution limitations under CCAR. The first is the arguable inconsistency between, on the one hand, the existing CCAR assumption that all planned dividends and share repurchases would proceed during the two-year planning horizon, regardless of how much stress the bank was under and, on the other, the concept of a capital conservation buffer above minimum capital requirements as it has been added to the capital rules. The second is a soft limitation on dividends put in place by the Board at the inception of CCAR. Both of these features of CCAR reflected supervisory concerns with the fact that, even as the financial crisis was clearly unfolding, some of the largest banks continued to repurchase shares and pay dividends to shareholders and, thereby, depleted capital that proved to be needed later.12  The SCB approach addresses the first of these issues by providing a continuous constraint on any planned distributions that would bring capital levels below the sum of the minimum 4.5 percent of risk-weighted assets plus the firm-specific SCB, plus any applicable GSIB surcharge.13 However, because declines in observed and reported capital levels usually occur with a lag, and the historical evidence that dividends are less likely to be curtailed than share repurchases,14 we would assume a firm will maintain its dividends for one year while                                                 12 See Beverly Hirtle (2014), “Bank Holding Company Dividends and Repurchases during the Financial Crisis (PDF),” Staff Report No. 666 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March). 13 Were a countercyclical capital buffer to be imposed, it would be added to the buffers above the 4.5 percent minimum capital requirement. 14 During the financial crisis, firms began to curtail share repurchases beginning in 2007 but generally did not cut dividends until late 2008. See Hirtle (2014). 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  reducing its repurchases. This would have the effect of requiring a firm to hold capital to meet its stress losses and fund its planned dividends over the next year. The switch to an SCB approach would also give us an opportunity to address a second issue, the soft limit on dividends in CCAR. Since its inception, our policy statements on CCAR have indicated that a capital plan with a planned dividend payout ratio above 30 percent would be subjected to particularly close scrutiny. When this policy was adopted in late 2010, we expected that it would be a useful guideline during a period when most of the CCAR banks would need to continue increasing capital levels for some time but also recognized that at some point we would need to revisit it. Since the new approach of adding one year’s planned dividends to a firm’s capital buffer should act as a disincentive for imprudent or unsustainable levels of dividends, the notion of extra scrutiny on planned dividends may no longer be useful. And we would, in any case, be reluctant to substitute a higher payout ratio for the original 30 percent ratio because it may end up being an implicit target for banks to try to reach. However, firms planning higher dividends should be aware that the operation of the SCB is such that, if a firm planned to pay out all of its earnings in the form of dividends and things did not go as well as expected for the firm, it could end up having to cut its dividend. Balance sheet and risk-weighted asset assumptions Beyond requiring that large banks have the resiliency to weather a period of serious financial stress, an important macroprudential aim of stress testing is to ensure that they can provide credit to households and businesses that remain creditworthy even in such a period. If banks maintain their capital ratios under stress by reducing their balance sheets through asset sales, or reductions in new lending, this crucial intermediation function will be compromised across the economy. The result could be a credit crunch, likely resulting in a more severe or longer-lasting recession. In the first few years of CCAR, we used the banks’ own projections where many banks planned on balance sheet declines as part of their strategy for remaining sufficiently capitalized.15 In the 2014 CCAR cycle, we replaced banks’ projections with our own model, adding a requirement that banks would not restrict the supply of loans during the severely adverse scenario. To date, the model has actually operated to project an increase in the balance sheets of the CCAR banks during the severely adverse scenario, with varying impacts on different portfolios. This assumption, and its somewhat complicated implementation, was designed to be fairly conservative, in a manner not dissimilar to the assumptions about capital distributions. Numerous banks have attempted to show why some of these portfolios or business lines would not be increasing under any reasonable assumptions, and thus that even macroprudential goals do not justify ignoring the likelihood that those portfolios would decline. During our review of CCAR, some banks proposed ways to distinguish among business lines so as to relax what they argued to be an unrealistic assumption, even one with a macroprudential purpose. The complexities of trying to differentiate across idiosyncratic business lines seem to us considerable. We are instead considering replacing this feature of our model with a simple assumption that balance sheets and risk-weighted assets remain constant over the severely adverse scenario horizon. Given that some decline in demand by creditworthy borrowers for loans is inevitable in a serious recession, this simpler assumption would still achieve the macroprudential policy objective that any such decline in lending during a recession is attributable to the impact of the recession, rather than to capital constraints at the large                                                 15 The original stress test undertaken during the crisis did not allow this assumption, precisely because of our aim that the large banks as a group be well-positioned to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers at that time of great stress. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  banks. This change would also make the treatment of balance sheets and risk-weighted assets simpler and more transparent. Toward a more macroprudential stress testing regime The second major objective in our stress testing review was to integrate more macroprudential elements into the program. Of course, combining the GSIB surcharge with the SCB approach promotes an important macroprudential aim, since the surcharges are calibrated to force large, interconnected banks to internalize the additional costs their distress would impose on the financial system. The surcharges are thus at least a partial surrogate for inclusion of various macroprudential features in the stress test. We are also considering a couple of relatively modest revisions we are considering to the Board’s “Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing”16 that are motivated by the macroprudential consideration of reducing procyclicality. The first would be to make the severity of the change in the unemployment rate less severe during downturns. The second would be to replace the current judgmental approach to setting the hypothesized path of house prices by tying this variable to disposable personal income. The result would be a more countercyclical path of house prices and increased transparency into how we determine the severity of this very important element of the scenario. Beyond these steps, we heard many ideas during our review on how we might pursue our macroprudential objective by adding new features to the stress test, especially from official sector representatives and academics. We also reviewed the growing academic literature on this topic. We concluded that, to this point, even the most conceptually promising of the ideas are a good ways from being realized in specific and well-supported elements of our economic models. Many macroprudential risks involve the spread of stress from one firm or market to others. As such, macroprudential elements of stress tests often must estimate not just first-round losses, but also the knock-on effects, which depend significantly on the vulnerabilities and responses of all other major actors in the financial system, including many that we do not regulate. Modelling these effects requires information about the behavior of those actors that may not be observable either to a firm or to us. Notwithstanding these and other practical challenges, many of the suggestions we received have focused on important potential risks that bear further inquiry by regulators. Hence we will be undertaking a research program to pursue these ideas in order to better understand the quantitative consequences of new risks and business activities, potential amplification channels such as fire sales by which stress could migrate from the large banks to the rest of the financial system, and important dynamics between capital and liquidity positions. At a minimum, this research should inform scenario design and the overall regulatory and financial stability functions of the Board. And at least some of the ideas might eventually be translated into features of the stress testing regime. Over the medium term we view three related areas as the highest priorities: funding shocks, liquidity shocks, and spillovers from the default of common counterparties. Funding shocks Funding stresses are a natural starting point. As banks incur losses and their capital base erodes, some of their creditors will demand additional compensation and bank funding costs will increase. This kind of “direct” funding shock is really microprudential because the resulting losses depend largely on the bank’s own decisions about its capital base, asset risk, and reliance on short-term wholesale funding. As such, it should be more straightforward to integrate direct funding shocks into our main stress testing framework than                                                 16 See 12 CFR part 252, appendix A. 
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches  to integrate systemwide effects, and we will consider whether, and how, to do so in the relatively near term. In a “systemic” funding shock, by contrast, each bank’s cost of funds depends on the capital position of the system as a whole. By taking the overall solvency of the system into account, this element captures a key amplification channel evident during the last financial crisis. As the banking system experienced capital losses, the cost of funding increased and some wholesale funding markets shut down even for relatively healthy banks. The potential for this kind of funding shock means that the presence of a poorly capitalized bank might increase funding costs for all banks – a classic kind of macroprudential concern. Liquidity shocks and fire sale dynamics As we saw during the last financial crisis, repo and other funding markets can simply close to distressed institutions, which are then unable to access certain kinds of funds at any price. Such a firm may then be forced to make up the funding shortfall by turning to market sources of liquidity by selling assets – both high-quality liquid assets like Treasury securities and less liquid assets. During the financial crisis, distressed firms sold large amounts of securities as quickly as possible. The fire sale price discounts required for such rapid execution in turn imposed mark-to-market losses on other firms with similar holdings. To understand better this channel of financial contagion, we intend to continue our work on the ability of markets to handle large quantities of asset sales under stress, the capacity and willingness of firms to tap their buffers of high-quality assets, and the susceptibility of bank capital to mark-to-market losses from fire sales. Many commentators have drawn attention to these concerns, and some have advocated an integrated approach to capital and liquidity stress testing. We may or may not be able to achieve this end point. At a minimum, though, research in this area will allow us to move in this direction, perhaps by using the conclusions reached in the annual stress test as a starting point for our annual Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review (CLAR), or vice versa. The results could also shed light on the current calibration of our liquidity rules. Default of a common counterparty and the reaction of central counterparties Currently, the annual stress test incorporates a counterparty default scenario component for the eight G-SIBs that measures direct credit loss. However, this component does not consider the potentially large second-round effects of the default of a major financial institution, including an increase in the probability of default of other counterparties as a result of the initial default and requirements for larger margins from derivatives counterparties. Of particular interest is the role of central counterparties (CCPs) in alleviating or transmitting stress from the default of one of their members. By regulatory design, CCPs have increased in prominence in the post-crisis environment because they can lead to greater efficiency and transparency in trading. But this increased role makes it important to understand the impact they may have in stressed conditions. For example, CCPs collect prefunded resources that can mitigate the impact of a default, but also can call on surviving clearing members for additional financial resources if those pre-funded resources are exhausted. Promoting transparency Transparency has played an important role in making stress testing such a key part of post-crisis prudential regulation. Transparency of the scenarios and results gives investors and analysts valuable information about the condition of the tested banks, thereby contributing to market discipline. It also allows the public to evaluate the job that the Federal Reserve is doing. For example, analysts can compare our loss estimates for specified portfolios under specified stress conditions with their own evaluations – an exercise that can inform both the analysts and us. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11  There are three areas in which transparency considerations need to be applied. First is the set of scenarios applied in the annual exercise. We release essentially all details of the scenarios and, further, have published a policy statement exploring the aims and factors relevant to development of the scenarios.17  Second is the set of results of the DFAST and CCAR exercises themselves. Right from the start – during the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) in 2009 – we adopted what was then the controversial practice of publishing post-stress capital ratio results for each participating firm, along with a breakdown of the projected losses by loan type. Since then, we have substantially increased the breadth of the disclosed results, including a summary of the reasons for any qualitative objection or conditional non-objection to firms’ capital plans. During the course of our review, suggestions were made for more granular disclosures, such as providing more details on different components of projected net revenues. We will make this change, and possibly a few others, over the course of the next cycle or two of stress testing.18  The third area for transparency involves the supervisory models used in the stress tests. Banks involved in DFAST/CCAR have regularly requested more disclosures so that they can better understand the likely impact on their firms. One argument has been that banks will have a difficult time in their capital planning if they cannot predict how loss functions and other model features will affect their stress losses. In part to remove the possibility that a bank would receive a quantitative objection to its capital plan because of a large gap between their loss estimates and those produced by the supervisory model, a few years ago we began allowing banks to revise their capital distribution requests following receipt of their DFAST results. Under the SCB approach, a bank could also adjust its planned capital distributions after receiving the stress test results to avoid having its baseline capital distribution projections fall into the buffer. We have already taken a number of steps to respond to these requests. We currently publish descriptions of all models used in the stress test, including the key risk drivers and scenario variables for each key modeling area. We host an annual conference about modelling practices. We disclose a description of the most material changes to stress test models before each stress test. We are considering further steps, such as disclosing descriptions of changes well in advance of the stress test, and phasing in the most material model changes over two years, so as to smooth somewhat the effects of the changes on projected losses or revenues. Finally, and a bit more tentatively, we are assessing the feasibility of publishing data that represent typical bank portfolios of loans and securities with the losses we would project for those portfolios under various stress scenarios. This kind of information could also help the public trace how changes in risk drivers alter loss projections. Having said all this, let me now say that we do not intend to publish the full computer code in the supervisory model that is used to project revenues and losses. Full disclosure would permit firms to game the system – that is, to optimize portfolio characteristics based on the parameters of the model and take risks in areas not well-captured by the stress test just to minimize the estimated stress losses. In part for this reason, full disclosure could promote a “model monoculture” in which both supervisors and firms use the same models to evaluate                                                 17 See 12 CFR Part 252, Appendix A. See 12 CFR 252, appendix A; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), “Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing (PDF),” Final Rule; Policy Statement, November 29. 18 Quite recently some banks have also suggested disclosing some version of the supervisory letters we send following the annual CCAR to each participating firm detailing our assessment of their capital planning processes. These banks believe that analysts and investors could benefit from knowing more detail on the concerns of the supervisors. We had already been considering how to increase the information provided around qualitative objections or conditional non-objections and will factor these latest observations into this decision. 
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches  risks. A critical part of the DFAST/CCAR process is that firms use their own models to assess their risks. We do not want them simply to copy the supervisory model and thereby increase the vulnerability of the financial system to the inevitable blind spots in even the best models. In short, this is not like using a model to develop a regulation that, for example, limits emissions of polluting substances. In such a case, adherence to the precise model output would itself achieve the regulatory purpose. Here, by contrast, the very purpose of the regulatory regime would be undermined. Remember, this is a stress test. The shifts in activities of banks and in the economy create a dynamic set of risks. Effective prudential regulation must be equally dynamic and should try to avoid pushing major financial firms toward measuring all of their risk positions in exactly the same way. There is, however, one additional consideration. Because the stress tests would be undermined by giving the models to the banks, there are of course limited opportunities for external parties to assess the models. To promote the integrity of the models in these circumstances, we established a Model Validation Group, which is composed of modelling experts who are not involved in the design and application of the stress test models. They make regular assessments and offer suggestions for improvement. We expect to be providing the public greater information on our internal validation processes. Eliminating the qualitative CCAR exercise for smaller firms As you can already tell, our responses to the need for better alignment of the stress test with our capital rules and to the desirability of more macroprudential emphasis each required a good bit of explanation. In contrast, our response to the issue of the unnecessary burden on smaller, less complex CCAR firms is both simply stated and simply achieved. In a notice of proposed rulemaking that the Board is releasing today we are proposing that banks with less than $250 billion in assets that do not have significant international or nonbank activity would no longer be included in the annual CCAR qualitative review. As noted earlier, many of these firms have already met supervisory expectations. We do not intend for less complex firms to invest in stress testing capabilities on par with the most complex firms and, given their profile, we feel these firms can maintain the progress they have made through the normal supervisory process, supplemented with targeted horizontal reviews of discrete aspects of capital planning. This shift will reduce the intensity of supervision of their capital planning processes, remove any uncertainty as to supervisory expectations for their firms relative to the largest firms, and eliminate the possibility of a public objection to their capital plans on qualitative grounds. They would still be included in the quantitative side of the stress test and the proposed stress capital buffer. But we are also proposing to reduce the amount of data these firms are required to submit for the purpose of running the stress test, on what we call the Y-14 regulatory reports. Unlike the other substantial changes we are contemplating to CCAR and our stress test, we are proposing that these changes would be effective next year, for CCAR 2017. Conclusion This set of changes we are considering for our stress testing regime has been motivated by somewhat different considerations, against the backdrop of what we intend to remain a dynamic regulatory instrument whose procedures will be regularly refined and whose substance will be regularly adapted to changing economic conditions and industry practices. Still, in pulling this package of modifications together, we have consciously shaped them in accordance with the principle that financial regulation should be progressively more stringent for firms of greater importance, and thus potential risk, to the financial system. Two features of the package reflect this principle. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 13  First, of course, is the elimination of the qualitative portion of CCAR for nearly all the firms with less than $250 billion in assets, along with some record keeping and reporting requirements. The second key feature is the differential impact the better alignment of CCAR with our capital regulations will have on the roughly 30 firms that are covered. Let me note at the outset that the precise effects on the capital requirements of individual firms cannot be determined because of the very nature of the stress test regime. The scenarios vary from year to year, and the resulting projected effects on losses and revenues may also vary materially depending on the composition of a firm’s balance sheet and activities. However, to provide some idea of what the impact may be, we assessed how the various changes I have mentioned would have affected capital requirements in the two most recent CCAR cycles. On average for the eight GSIBs, integration of the surcharge with the post-stress requirements would have been somewhat less than half offset by the simplifying changes in the prefunding of capital distributions and balance sheet assumptions. The impact on capital requirements will likely be greater for firms with larger GSIB surcharges. For the other CCAR firms, for which there are no capital surcharges, these simplifying assumptions will result in some reduction of post-stress capital requirements. We estimate that the aggregate impact of these changes for the CCAR firms as a whole should be a modest increase in the total amount of required capital. But this increase will be totally due to the impact on the eight GSIB firms, whose increased capital requirements will more than offset the reductions for the other firms. In short, the GSIBs will see their capital requirements rise. All other CCAR firms will see some reduction in their capital requirements. And firms that have less than $250 billion in assets and do not have extensive international or nontraditional banking activities will also transition to a more tailored set of capital planning expectations outside the CCAR process.  
   Speech   Page 1/6    Embargo 26 September 2016, 11:30 am  Financial market infrastructures: Walking the line between stability and innovation Sibos 2016  Thomas J. Jordan  Chairman of the Governing Board, Swiss National Bank* Geneva, 26 September 2016 © Swiss National Bank, Zurich, 2016              ∗ The speaker would like to thank Giuseppe D’Alelio and Andreas Wehrli for their valuable support in preparing this speech. He also thanks Simone Auer, Petra Gerlach, Sébastien Kraenzlin and SNB Language Services for their assistance. 
     Page 2/6   Introduction I am delighted to open Sibos 2016 and welcome you all warmly to Geneva. Sibos is the annual gathering for financial market service providers. This sector, which is responsible for nothing less than the backbone of the financial system, is currently experiencing a surge of innovation. It is therefore a great honour for Switzerland to be hosting this important conference at this time of transformational change. Around the world, Switzerland is often seen as a haven of stability and continuity. The highly international Swiss financial sector benefits from the exceptional stability of our country’s political and legal structures. At the same time, Switzerland manages to be innovative; it is regularly among the top performers in global innovation rankings.1 The Swiss financial industry plays an important role here. You will not find the ‘Crypto Valley’ on any map, but a financial technology (fintech) cluster going by this name has sprung up in the Canton of Zug. The city of Zug has recently even launched a pilot project allowing certain public services to be paid for using a crypto-currency. But even those of us who prefer more traditional payment methods can benefit from many innovations in Switzerland. For instance, cash can now be withdrawn from ATMs without a bank card – simply by using a smartphone. Like Switzerland, central banks are associated with stability and continuity. And yet, since the financial crisis, they too have had to adopt ever more inventive policies to shield their respective economies from serious harm. The Swiss National Bank has likewise had to mobilise its innovative resources. We have developed and deployed new monetary policy instruments, which have enabled us to carry out our mandate as fully as possible. When it comes to implementing monetary policy, financial market infrastructures are vital. In Switzerland, these infrastructures are run by SIX Group and the SNB is actively involved in shaping the strategic direction of certain functions. Without safe and efficient infrastructures we would be unable to fulfil our mandate. This fact alone explains our keen interest in ensuring their smooth operation. But our interest goes beyond monetary policy implementation. The infrastructures also play a major role in enabling the SNB to perform other statutory duties, such as facilitating and securing the operation of cashless payment systems and contributing to the stability of the financial system. As mentioned, the financial sector is experiencing a surge of innovation. The financial market infrastructures, and hence the central banks, stand to be affected by these changes. As this process unfolds, the SNB’s task is to strike the right balance between maintaining stable conditions and promoting useful innovation. In this speech I will outline why we are most likely to achieve safe and efficient outcomes if we can balance the interests of market participants, regulators and central banks.   1 Switzerland has topped the Global Innovation Index (www.wipo.int) for the last six years. 
     Page 3/6   Financial industry – same core functions, evolving technology The theme for this year’s Sibos conference is ‘Transforming the landscape’. New technologies are paving the way for new financial services. While there are certainly some interesting innovations in the offing, it is important to recognise that many of the financial industry’s core functions will remain largely unchanged. The role of financial intermediaries is, first, to help their clients fund new investments and, second, to offer them investment opportunities and asset protection strategies. Their third role is to facilitate securities safekeeping, and their fourth is to execute payments on behalf of their clients. Customers have long required these basic services, and they will continue to need them in the future. In short, the economic function of the financial industry has not changed. However, the technologies and channels by which financial services are requested and delivered are changing. The digitalisation of payment transactions, for instance, has helped to make cashless payments cheaper and simpler for customers – even if efficiency could still be further improved, especially where cross-border payments are concerned. The advent of dematerialised securities years ago is another example of innovation within the financial industry; this change greatly increased the efficiency of securities settlement and safekeeping. The digital transformation has also added value in another way: it has enabled bank customers to execute transactions with greater temporal flexibility and geographical independence. These days, traditional bank counters have morphed into apps that live on our smartphones. Such useful innovations have the potential to improve aggregate economic welfare. The challenge for regulators and central banks is to make sure they fully understand the effects – and side-effects – of these new mechanisms at an early stage. The same goes for innovations affecting financial market infrastructures – especially those that are systemically important. Such assessments of new technologies are based on a set of internationally accepted guidelines called ‘Principles for financial market infrastructures’.2 These principles define the criteria that infrastructures must meet, thereby setting standards for innovation in this field. Central banks and regulators have a duty to pass legislation guaranteeing the safety of financial market infrastructures – by protecting their stability, resilience and availability, irrespective of technological change; but they must also take on board the efficiency goals of infrastructure providers and their participants. Regulatory adjustments may be needed to catalyse the positive effects of certain innovations.3   2 Cf. Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (now Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures, CPMI) and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), ‘Principles for financial market infrastructures’, April 2012. 3 The Federal Intermediated Securities Act (FISA) introduced in Switzerland in 2008 is a good example of a regulatory change – in this case designed to manage the transition to dematerialised securities at central depositories. Dematerialisation and the associated regulatory changes also significantly improved the efficiency and safety of repo settlement and hence of monetary policy implementation. 
     Page 4/6   From centralisation to decentralisation – how far should it go? Until very recently, safety and efficiency were considered to be functions of centralisation. This trend is reflected in the evolution of central securities depositories4 and in the emergence of cashless payment transactions. In Switzerland, centralised clearing houses in the 1940s and centralised data processing in the 1970s were waypoints on a journey of convergence. This development culminated in the creation of the centralised ‘Swiss Interbank Clearing’ (SIC) payment system in 1987.5 Another – more recent – example is the settlement of OTC derivatives via central counterparties.6 This centralisation process and related economies of scale both reduced costs and improved safety. However, with the arrival of the latest technologies, these third-party clearing and settlement services are increasingly seen as superfluous cost factors; the keywords here are ‘distributed ledger’ and ‘blockchain’.7 The underlying technology promises first and foremost to reduce costs. For instance, such systems would render the reconciliation of transaction and balance data between banks and a third-party system obsolete. The paradigm seems to have been turned on its head: decentralisation – not centralisation – now appears to promise the greatest efficiency gains. I do not, however, believe that decentralisation will become the ‘new normal’ in all financial market functions and infrastructures. Many existing financial market infrastructures are already highly competitive, and barriers to entry for new technology are correspondingly high. The conventional, centralised model they are built on is already low-cost and meets high safety standards. And improvements are being made all the time. Distributed ledger technology, meanwhile, has yet to prove it can outperform the existing set-up with respect to safety and efficiency. Having said this, there may be some scope for deploying distributed ledgers in certain complex financial market functions or infrastructures. The settlement and safekeeping of securities is one example. In the end, we may well see conventional and new technologies co-existing or blending. Staying with the securities example: it is conceivable that we will see a hybrid scenario. This could entail security-specific information being settled via a distributed ledger, while the payment leg could continue to be effected via a traditional, centralised payment system.   4 Cf. Diana Chan, Florence Fontan, Simonetta Rosati and Daniela Russo, ‘The Securities Custody Industry’, European Central Bank, Occasional Paper Series, No. 68, August 2007. 5 In 1949, the banks started bundling interbank transactions in various clearing houses categorised according to bank type. Thirty years later, in 1979, the data processing systems of these clearing houses were also centralised. This laid the groundwork for the current SIC system, launched in 1987, which has led to the centralisation and standardisation of all Swiss interbank payment transactions via SNB sight deposit accounts. Cf. Fritz Klein and Guido Palazzo, ‘Kulturgeschichte des Geldflusses. Die Entwicklung des Zahlungsverkehrs mit Fokus Schweiz’, 2003, Verlag SKV. 6 The G20 countries committed to the principle of settling OTC derivatives via central counterparties at the Toronto Summit in 2010 before passing national legislation on the matter (art. 97 of the Financial Market Infrastructure Act [FMIA] in Switzerland, the European Market Infrastructure Regulation [EMIR] in the European Union, and the Dodd-Frank Act in the US). 7 The terms ‘distributed ledger’ and ‘blockchain’ describe a concept that enables the operation of a distributed, synchronised database. Such a database allows participants to exchange digital assets without involving a centralised third party. 
     Page 5/6   Such new technology is highly relevant for central banks, especially in the context of the ongoing debate about central bank money potentially being issued via a distributed ledger. This idea raises a host of central bank-specific questions that will need to be examined in more detail. The SNB is following and analysing developments in this arena closely and is actively involved in discussions with market participants, regulators and other central banks. Recent developments in the SIC system Amid all these longer-term visions, we should be careful not to overlook changes that are just around the corner – or indeed, have already been introduced. So let me return to the present and talk about developments in cashless payment transactions that are already having a tangible effect on central banks around the world. For obvious reasons, my remarks will be based on the situation in Switzerland. As I have already mentioned, one of the SNB’s statutory mandates is to facilitate and secure the operation of cashless payment systems. One of the key ways in which we perform this duty is through our strategic guidance of the SIC payment system. This includes approving technical changes to the system and the rules of conduct for system participants, fixing operating hours and rates, and deciding who is granted access to the SIC system. At the same time, the SIC system is operated not by us, but by SIX Interbank Clearing; system participants are involved in the decision-making process and therefore play a direct part. This configuration makes SIC a market solution. Another feature is that the SIC system is used to settle not only interbank payments, but also a large proportion of retail payments.8 By virtue of its role in SIC, the SNB has a substantial influence on retail payments in Swiss francs and is, in turn, also impacted by dynamic forces at work in this area. The SIC system takes account of such forces and sets the stage for cashless payment innovations, which ultimately benefit customers. This is reflected in the launch of the fourth generation of the SIC system in April this year. SIC now supports ISO 20022, the emerging standard in payment messaging.9 Thanks to the IT architecture of the new SIC system, innovative services can now be maintained and developed more flexibly and cost-effectively than in the past. Furthermore, SIC’s operating hours are due to be changed next year; this will extend the window in which customers can submit payments with same-day value date.10 The possibility of adjusting the regulatory framework that I touched on earlier is also very  topical in Switzerland at the moment. Specifically, this concerns the issue of lowering barriers to market entry for fintech companies. FINMA, the Swiss Financial Market Supervisory   8 In terms of numbers of transactions, SIC is practically a retail payment system, since around 95% of transactions are conducted for this purpose. 9 The ISO 20022 standard for electronic data interchange aims to harmonise the exchange of data between participants in differing areas of finance, including payment transactions. Essentially, the processes behind this data exchange and the messages’ data formats will be unified, leading to improved settlement of transactions. 10 As of 15 May 2017, the end of the SIC system’s clearing day will be extended from 4.15 pm to 6.15 pm. 
     Page 6/6   Authority, supports the introduction of a new licensing category for fintech companies.11 New FINMA-regulated participants establishing themselves in retail payments could also seek access to the SIC system in the future. As these examples show, the SIC system is moving with the times. SIC is systemically important and critical to the fulfilment of our mandate; we therefore support innovations which will improve its efficiency without compromising its safety. Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen, financial technology is evolving rapidly and calling many existing structures into question. Despite this, it is important to bear in mind that the fundamental needs of companies and households that are met by financial services remain largely unchanged. The usefulness and success of new technologies will hinge on whether they can meet these basic needs more cheaply, more securely and in a more customer-friendly manner than existing solutions. The SNB is neutral vis-à-vis the technologies underpinning financial market infrastructures. It assesses innovations in terms of their implications for the fulfilment of its statutory mandate. Our focus is on safety and efficiency, and we analyse the effects – and side-effects – of innovations closely through this lens. For this analysis, dialogue between market participants, regulators and central banks is essential. This is especially true in view of current technological changes, which make walking the line between stability and innovation particularly challenging. This exchange of views with practitioners helps us to correctly assess the uses and risks of new technologies. Such discussions are critical if we are to exploit the technologies of the future at the right time and under the right conditions. I would therefore like to extend my sincere thanks to the organisers of the Sibos event for this excellent opportunity to share ideas. As home to many international organisations, Geneva is an ideal location for this dialogue. We are certain to find fertile ground here. I wish you all a successful conference with many enlightening discussions.   11 Cf. FINMA press release ‘FINMA reduces obstacles to FinTech’, 17 March 2016. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Süddeutsche Zeitung Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in Süddeutsche Zeitung, conducted by Mr Markus Zydra on 22 September 2016, and published on 26 September 2016. *      *      * Mr Cœuré, Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank (ECB), will meet members of the Bundestag next week. Does this mean the ECB still has a problem with Germany? No, not at all. We are legally accountable to the European Parliament but we are always willing to exchange views informally with national parliaments. It is a very useful exercise for us. The President had the first such exchange four years ago in the midst of the financial crisis in Europe. Now we have made headway, growth has returned and the overall economic situation has improved a lot, partially thanks to our decisions. This makes it a good time to explain what we have been doing, to show the results of our actions and to respond to any concerns that might be voiced. The ECB has been accused by some German politicians of fuelling populist parties like the Alternative für Deutschland (AfD). How would you react to such remarks? The ECB is not a political institution. Our mandate is to maintain price stability. Political issues must be handled by politicians and monetary issues by central bankers. We should not mix these two things. For many politicians the ECB is seen as the bogeyman… There is a temptation everywhere, also outside Europe, to drag central banks into political discussions. Some expect too much of us and want solutions to high unemployment or long-term growth problems, while others blame us for the political outcome. Politics and monetary policy don’t belong together. The ECB continues to give advice to governments. Is that legitimate? In Europe, there is a long tradition of central banks giving economic policy advice. The Deutsche Bundesbank has always done this and so have other European central banks. The ECB gives advice, only insofar as it relates to monetary policy. Price stability relies on economic and social stability. We have a duty to speak our mind and tell citizens what we see as being the right conditions for us to fulfil our mandate properly. However, there is a line that should not be crossed and it is certainly not our role to tell national governments precisely what they should do. The ECB has asked Germany to use its “fiscal space” and spend more public money… What matters to us is the stability of the euro area economy. A growth model that relies excessively on external demand poses risks because it puts the fate of recovery in the hands of American or Chinese consumers. We need strong consumption and investment in the euro area. The good news is that this is starting to happen. Internal demand is picking up in the euro area as a whole, also in Germany. So Germany should export less and import more? Strong exports are a sign of competitiveness. They are an asset for Germany and therefore for Europe. Nevertheless, increased investment in Germany would make the economy even stronger and prepare it for the future. In France and Italy, preparing for the future means giving priority to reforming labour markets and reducing debt. In Germany, debt has already been greatly reduced which makes it possible to increase investment for the future. This would also help to foster long-term growth and address demographic challenges. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches You are said to be politically to the left. What does that mean to you? We all come from different backgrounds in the Governing Council and it does not influence at all how we conduct monetary policy. I personally believe that we need strong social systems to protect the poorest people in our societies, which also implies that these systems should be reformed to make them sustainable. But, given the challenges we see today both globally and in Europe, the defining question is not about being left or right. It is about protecting our societies and keep them open and it is about the role that Europe can play in doing so. Europe needs to be reformed. It needs to demonstrate in a convincing way that it can cope with the inequalities created by globalisation and by new technologies and that it can keep our economies and societies open, while still protecting people. But it is the ECB’s monetary policy that makes the rich people in Europe even richer. A recent study by the Deutsche Bundesbank points out that our accommodative monetary policy has helped unemployed people to find new jobs. Try to imagine the situation if, from 2007 onwards, the ECB had done nothing in response to the crisis. Would the poorest people be better off now? I don’t think so, because the crisis would have been far worse. The ECB has been pumping money in the financial system for years. Are you now also planning to buy shares and bank bonds or even to distribute helicopter money? We haven’t discussed these options in the Governing Council. And I am not in favour of buying bank bonds. It would create the wrong incentives for banks to reform, to get rid of their non-performing loans and to identify new business models. As for helicopter money, it clearly blurs the line between monetary and fiscal policy. Will the ECB take further action or will it end its monthly asset purchase programme in March 2017 as planned? When the Governing Council met on 8 September 2016, economic and monetary data did not justify changing our plans. There are downside risks but the economic recovery has been resilient. We will continue to purchase assets on a monthly basis until March 2017 or beyond if necessary; and in any case until we see a sustained adjustment of inflation towards 2%. Do you think it is possible to exit the zero interest rate strategy without causing turbulences in the financial markets? It will be a long time before we can even start to think about exiting our accommodative monetary policy. When we reach that point, it will be essential for the financial sector to be robust enough to adapt to higher interest rates. We won’t stand for our monetary policy being reigned in as a result of concerns that it could pose problems for the banking sector. Before the financial crisis central banks were only closely followed by specialists – nowadays central banks are always in the spotlight. Do you find that helpful? Sometimes we have to be in the spotlight in order to fulfil our mandate. In the first years of the crisis it was all about maintaining monetary and financial stability. We had a natural role to play in that context and we were at the forefront alongside all the other major central banks. Now the challenge is to create long-term growth and jobs in a sustainable way. The ECB cannot do much in those areas. It is high time for the focus to shift away from central banks. What if politics fails? We live in democracies and I can’t simply assume that democracies will not be able to deliver good solutions to the problems they face. It takes time because the problems our societies face today are exceptionally complex and interrelated. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 The ECB was considered a hero in 2012. Now people frown upon the ECB’s zero interest rate policy. How does that feel? We don’t want to be a hero, and it is not decisive whether or not we are popular. People should trust in the fact that we will achieve price stability. That is why the Treaties made the ECB independent. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mario Draghi: Working together for growth in Europe Introductory remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Deutscher Bundestag, Berlin, 28 September 2016. *      *      * Introduction Mr Chairman, Honourable Members of the Bundestag, Ladies and gentlemen, Thank you for your invitation. It is a pleasure to speak here in in the halls of the Committee on the Affairs of the European Union, where you bring the debate about European integration to the Bundestag, the heart of German democracy. As President of the ECB, I am here today to explain our policies and discuss with you how the ECB is acting to fulfil the mandate that was democratically conferred upon us by the Treaty. As members of the Bundestag, you know what the concerns of the German people are. I look forward to hearing about these concerns and addressing them today. When I came to the Bundestag four years ago, we were at the height of the crisis. Today, the euro area is in better shape. To protect price stability, the ECB used its instruments in a manner it had not done before and developed new tools – all within our mandate. We reduced our interest rates to very low levels, provided targeted financing to support banks’ lending to firms and households, and started a large-scale asset purchase programme. In my introductory remarks I want to make three points. First, I want to explain why we are pursuing our policies. I want to show how our monetary policy has maintained price stability and countered the threat of a new “Great Depression”. Our measures are working: they are contributing to keeping the recovery on track, thus creating jobs and ensuring a recovery that ultimately also benefit savers and pensioners in Germany and the euro area as a whole. But I do understand that people have concerns. We take these concerns seriously. I will therefore discuss in more detail – and this is my second point – how our measures affect people’s finances and welfare. As with any monetary policy decision, our measures have distributional effects on citizens. But, on balance, savers, employees, entrepreneurs, pensioners and taxpayers across the euro area, including in Germany, are better off because of our actions – today and tomorrow. Finally, I will talk about what else is needed. The ECB does not operate in a vacuum: other economic policies are essential to complement our monetary policy. Without them there will be no strong and sustainable recovery. These other policies are a precondition for interest rates to rise again. The ECB’s actions have safeguarded price stability Let me start with the reasons for our actions. The ECB acted because inflation drifted away from our aim of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The EU Treaties gave the ECB the primary objective of maintaining price stability in the euro area as a whole. This objective binds me and my colleagues in the ECB Governing Council, where our decisions are the result of collegial debate. We are held accountable for these decisions in the European Parliament, where I attend four regular hearings per year. Furthermore, our decisions are subject to judicial review. This is what I mean when I say: with our measures, we follow the law. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Sometimes people wonder whether price stability doesn’t mean inflation of 0%. It does not, because both inflation that is too high and inflation that is too low for too long can damage the economy. A steady, measured rate of inflation below, but close to, 2% in the medium term acts like a cushion that protects our economies from drifting into the dangerous territory of negative inflation even when there is just a minor economic shock.1 Once expectations of falling prices become ingrained, consumers postpone purchases in anticipation of even lower prices, while firms hold off making investments because they do not know whether they will pay off. This downward spiral continues until the economy collapses. There are therefore very good reasons why central banks are so careful to avoid inflation that is either too high or too low. You would rightly expect us to act if inflation is significantly above our objective of price stability. We also need to act when inflation is close to 0%. How do we achieve our price stability objective? When inflation is too high, central banks raise interest rates to break the upward trend; when inflation is too low, they lower interest rates to achieve the opposite. Lower interest rates ease overall financing conditions in the economy. This in turn stimulates investment and consumption, which then induces inflation to pick up. But when lowering interest rates alone may not be sufficient to return to inflation rates that are in line with price stability, central banks may need to use other instruments to ease monetary and financial conditions. This is why we launched other measures, such as our asset purchase programmes. And we are by no means unique in this. Around the globe, central banks of the major advanced economies like the US, the UK and Japan have all embarked on large-scale sovereign bond purchase programmes to fulfil their mandate. Our measures have delivered. We estimate that they will raise the inflation rate by more than half a percentage point, on average, over 2016 and 2017. They will also contribute to increasing real euro area GDP growth by more than one and a half percentage points cumulatively between 2015 and 2018, which will support job creation. The effects of our policies Low rates are a symptom of the underlying economic situation. They reflect weak long-term growth trends and the protracted macroeconomic slump that has resulted from the crisis. And the ECB’s monetary policy has provided significant accommodation to limit the negative effects of the global and euro area-specific shocks on the economy, thereby mitigating their disinflationary impact. But very low rates are not innocuous. They affect people’s finances and welfare. Let me start with the effects of our policies on savers. Yes, the current low interest rate environment reduces the nominal return on saving accounts. But what counts for savers is not the nominal interest rate but the real interest rate, which is the nominal interest rate minus inflation. Real rates are also low, but there have been many episodes of low, or even negative real interest rates in Germany well before the introduction of the euro, as a recent Bundesbank study has shown.2 Moreover, savers can on average still earn satisfactory rates of return from diversifying their assets, even when interest rates on deposit and savings accounts are very low. This has also been the case in Germany according to another recent Bundesbank study.3 But most                                                 1 See Praet, P., “The ECB’s fight against low inflation: reason and consequences”, speech by Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, at Luiss School of European Political Economy, Rome, 4 April 2016. 2 See Deutsche Bundesbank , “Nothing new about negative real interest rates on deposits”, 30 June 2014, https://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Topics/2014/2014_06_30_nothing_new_negative_interest_rates.html. 3 See Deutsche Bundesbank , “German households’ saving and investment behaviour in light of the low interest rate environment”, Monthly Report October 2015. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  importantly, whatever financial assets savers hold, they will benefit from a recovery of the economy. So the interest of all of us, including German savers, is the highest possible sustainable growth in Germany and the euro area. Through our efforts to bring inflation back towards 2%, we have contributed to higher growth and the creation of more jobs. In Germany, exports are benefitting from the recovery in the euro area, unemployment is at its lowest level since reunification, people’s take-home pay is increasing noticeably, and venture capital is pouring into Berlin’s silicon alley. We should also not forget that people in your constituencies are affected in different ways by our measures. They are affected as savers, borrowers or taxpayers, and in many cases as all three. What a household may lose in terms of little interest on their bank account, it might save in lower mortgage payments for their home. And it might benefit from rising bond and stock prices in their retirement fund. In fact, evidence shows that between 2008 and 2015 interest payments by households in Germany, as a percentage of gross disposable income, fell more sharply than interest earnings.4 And the low financing costs for government bonds help to balance the budget and reduce debt at a considerable speed. This is good news for the Finance Ministry – and thus for taxpayers – which saved in 2015 alone approximately EUR 28 billion on lower than expected interest payments. We should also consider the full effect of low interest rates on banks. Those who blame ECB policy for the mixed performance of certain German financial firms have been very vocal. But what has been forgotten is that many banks have been able to more than offset declining interest revenues with higher lending volumes, improved loan performance and lower interest expenses, all of which are beneficial to both the banks and their customers.5 The ECB’s monetary policy is not the main factor for the low profitability of banks. While some banks’ business models may indeed need to adapt to the current low interest rate environment, they also need to address their own structural issues, such as overcapacity, the stock of non-performing loans and the potential impact of technological innovation. Low profitability is closely linked to low operational efficiency. In Germany cost to income ratios are on average relatively high compared to other jurisdictions. Let us be clear, however, there is no one size fits all banking model and we have different types of banks that are successfully operating in Germany and in the euro area. Of course, low interest rates for a long period might carry the risk of overvaluation in asset markets as a result of the search for yield. This is why we closely monitor potential risks to financial stability that might emanate for instance from local real estate markets. But at the moment we are not seeing any overheating in the euro area or the German economy as a whole. While we do observe a somewhat stronger increase in residential real estate prices, notably in large cities in Germany, such increases are not the reflection of a bubble, as lending is growing only moderately. Moreover, overall household debt-to-income levels are comparatively low and stable. Where signs of excessive risk-taking emerge, macroprudential measures at the national level should be the instrument of choice. They allow exuberant financial developments to be addressed in a more targeted way, while monetary policy contributes to the stability of the euro area as a whole. So far I have discussed the reasons for our measures and their effects. To summarise, our policies allow the recovery to take hold so that we will be able to raise interest rates again. After all, the interest earnings that the savers understandably crave need to be generated first in the real economy. In a stagnant economy there is little to be shared out. It should also                                                 4 See ECB, “Low interest rates and households’ net interest income”, Box 3, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4/2016. And this is without taking into account the positive impact on households’ income and wealth of rising stock and bond prices as a result of lower interest rates. 5 See Cœuré, B., “Assessing the implications of negative interest rates”, speech at the Yale Financial Crisis Forum, Yale School of Management, New Haven, 28 July 2016. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  be noted that the level to which real interest rates can eventually return when the economy strengthens is not determined by monetary policy. Instead, it depends on the economy’s long-term growth prospects. Productivity and demographics play a decisive role in this, and the development of these factors has not been favourable in Europe in recent years. This is a phenomenon we also see in Germany. For long-term interest rates to rise in the future we therefore need more investment and structural reforms to lift growth and productivity. As Wolfgang Schäuble said in this house a couple of weeks ago when he presented the budget for 2017: we will only get out of this phase of low interest rates if we have more sustainable growth in Europe. The need for decisive action at the national and European level This leads me to my final point: policy-makers across the euro area, need to seize the opportunity to deliver reforms. At the height of the crisis, all Member States and citizens showed an enormous commitment to keeping the euro area together when the critics were already talking about the euro’s demise. But we cannot stop here: we need to make sure not only that the euro survives, but that our Economic and Monetary Union thrives. If we want to succeed, we will need to find common solutions for the problems that we all face. If we want to preserve the European social model, we will need to bring labour and product markets in line with the realities of the digital and globalised world of the 21st century. If we want savers to benefit from higher interest rates in the future, we will need to create investment opportunities to put these savings to a productive use. This is about raising productivity and employment.6 This is about structural reforms that are a necessary complement to our monetary policy. And Member States have to do their part. I have highlighted this many times in the past.7 In fact, I emphasise it every six weeks at the ECB’s press conference. And where we face common supranational challenges, and currently there are several such challenges, there is no alternative to acting jointly as Europeans. Consider the transformative power of the deepening of the Single Market at the end of the 1980s. This opened up new opportunities and it continues to benefit European companies and individuals alike. Consider what can still be achieved with the Digital Single Market, the energy union and the capital markets union. Without a well-functioning Single Market, our firms would lose access to a market of 500 million consumers. Without a Single Market, we Europeans would have little global leverage to uphold our values, such as our respect for the right to privacy on the internet. Together we are immeasurably stronger.8 Conclusion Let me conclude. The ECB is vigorously counteracting risks to price stability using all necessary tools within its mandate. Our monetary policy has supported growth and employment and will eventually bring inflation back to our aim of below, but close to, 2%. Low interest rates today are                                                 6 See Cœuré, B., “Structural reforms on the way to a complete Economic and Monetary Union”, speech at the International Conference on Structural Reforms in Advanced Economies, Hertie School of Governance, Berlin, 17 June 2016. 7 See Draghi, M., “On the importance of policy alignment to fulfil our economic potential”, 5th Annual Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa Lecture at the Brussels Economic Forum 2016, Brussels, 9 June 2016. 8 See Draghi, M., “Reviving the spirit of De Gasperi: working together for an effective and inclusive Union”, speech at the presentation ceremony of the De Gasperi award, Trento, 13 September 2016. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  necessary for a return to higher interest rates in the future. What we need now is to allow our measures to develop their full impact. And in order to reap the full benefits of our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must contribute much more decisively, both at the national and at the European level. Thank you for your attention. I look forward to your questions. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Developing Malaysia’s financial sector for the future Keynote address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Future Finance Conference 2016, Kuala Lumpur, 23 September 2016. *      *      * This conference gathers the leaders of the industry to discuss opportunities and develop substantive ideas for the development of our financial sector relevant to Malaysia’s future. In the weeks leading up to today, some ideas have been exchanged among us and further refined. It is our intention that the industry can come to an understanding on implementing substantive and collective solutions to the four subjects that we had identified: going beyond access to promote financial inclusion, creating opportunities for underprivileged children, financing the new economy and improving insurance penetration. We will also have the opportunity to hear from international speakers and financial technology (fintech) companies on how the world around us is changing, and how the financial industry will need to evolve with it. Part I: Progress and achievements so far Five years have now passed since the Financial Sector Blueprint was released in 2011, with the clear vision of creating a financial system that can navigate Malaysia’s transformation into a high-value added, high-income economy. As the title of the Blueprint “Strengthening the Future” suggests, the goal was to move the financial system towards higher levels of stability, efficiency and competitiveness in the financial sector to power the economy of tomorrow. Judging by the financial data, we are pleased to note that the financial sector is steadily advancing towards these goals. We have significantly strengthened our legal and regulatory foundations for a safe and stronger financial system with the enactment of the Central Bank of Malaysia Act 2009, and the Financial Services and Islamic Financial Services Acts of 2013. We have continued to update our prudential guidelines in line with international standards, a contributory factor in supporting the regional and global expansion of our financial institutions. The changes that we had made also ensured a highly resilient banking and insurance sector amid much more challenging conditions. The capital buffers of banks and insurers today collectively stand in excess of over RM140 billion above the regulatory minimum levels. Ongoing efforts of financial institutions to strengthen risk management, governance structure and a strong focus on effective supervision further reinforce the strength of our financial system. Collaborative efforts between the industry and the Bank had resulted in significant investments to build a strong talent pipeline for the financial services sector, including the transformation of the key industry professional bodies and training institutes. At the same time, the financial sector has continued to play its intermediary role in financing the economy, in particular the SMEs. As at end July 2016, financing by the banking system to businesses and SMEs stood at RM533 billion, growing at an average annual rate of 9.9% between 2011 and 2015. Banks remain the largest financiers to SMEs, and this relationship is expected to remain, thanks to the high approval rates of close to 80%. In Islamic finance, the introduction of investment accounts and the subsequent operationalisation of the Islamic bank-backed Investment Account Platform (IAP) will further expand access to financing for a wider cross-section of businesses with different profiles and at different stages of development. The industry is making encouraging headway in introducing more diverse products and services in the financial system. For example, the 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  successful migration of deposit products into investment account which now constitute 10% of all Islamic funding in just over a year since Islamic banks were required to clearly distinguish between principal guaranteed and investment accounts consistent with Shariah principles. Also important has been the development of a stronger consumer protection framework and more inclusive financial system. Earlier this week, over 500 policymakers and industry participants from 30 countries were in this building to address the immense challenge of reaching more than 2 billion adults worldwide who remain excluded from the formal financial system. At that forum, a point was made that, it is an important moral obligation for all of us to do more, to help the millions who are still living in abject poverty or those who are highly vulnerable to financial hardship, with no means or opportunity to change their circumstances. Financial inclusion has also received greater attention by global leaders, including the international standard setting bodies which has considered the important characteristics of financial inclusion in formulating global standards. Malaysia continues to play an active role in this aspect. We have achieved important strides since the release of the Financial Inclusion Framework in 2011 which outlined strategies to promote greater financial inclusion over the coming decade. The level of financial inclusion in Malaysia as measured by the Financial Inclusion Index has risen significantly from 0.77 to 0.90. Today 97.4% of mukims in Malaysia have financial access points, reaching out to 99% of Malaysia’s population. Agent banking in particular, has been a highly effective game changing initiative in expanding financial accessibility while protecting the integrity of financial transactions. In the insurance and takaful sector, we have also carefully laid the ground for wide-ranging reforms that are ultimately aimed at increasing insurance penetration and reducing the protection gap among Malaysians. The detariffing exercise is set to fundamentally change the general insurance business in Malaysia. In our effort to chart the growth and development of the industry over the next 10 years, we have established an Insurance Development Department that will serve as the primary reference for the insurance industry. I also wish to highlight the important role played by development financial institutions in contributing to the inclusion agenda, which includes participation as agent banks as well as supporting the development of SMEs, the agricultural sector and co-operatives. To further improve the operational efficiency and resilience of these institutions, amendments to the Development Financial Institutions Act were made and came into effect in January 2016. The amendments further strengthen important areas such as governance and consumer protection. The strengthened legislation will ensure that development financial institutions can better contribute to the next phase of Malaysia’s socio-economic developments, building on achievements over the past decade. Finally, the Malaysian financial system has become more regionally integrated to support stronger economic and financial linkages with our strategic trading partners. This has been characterised by the push for regional economic and financial integration in ASEAN, which includes the continuing proliferation of local currency settlement arrangements with banks serving as key enablers in these mechanism, and the deepening of regional financial markets. Greater banking integration within the ASEAN region is gaining traction under the ASEAN Banking Integration Framework, with attention now turning to the formulation of a similar framework for insurance integration. Malaysia’s commitment to support multilateral-cooperation and development is also reflected in the international organisations that have chosen to base their headquarters or offices in Malaysia, including the World Bank, the Alliance for Financial Inclusion and the Islamic Financial Services Board. This will benefit the country, by enriching the domestic talent pool, building intellectual capacity, and originating research and policy recommendations, that address today’s key 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  financial and economic challenges, and placing Malaysia as a centre of excellence for training and capacity development. It would also benefit many countries where member countries will be able to share experiences in developing their economy. Part II: Reassessing our position – are we heading in the right direction? These developments that I outlined above have enhanced the breadth, depth and resilience of our financial system. It is important that we continue to stay the course to reinforce these core strengths of our financial system. More work still lies ahead to achieve specific outcomes that were envisioned in the Blueprint. In Islamic finance, encouraging greater product diversity supported by strong institutional capacity remains critical to increase the share of Islamic banking assets to 40% of the banking system by 2020. Similarly, insurance and takaful penetration, currently around 5% of GDP, remains low. This is compounded by an enormous protection gap ranging between RM550,000 to RM723,000 per household. A focus on consumer education, product development and underwriting capabilities, alternative delivery channels and service quality remains important to increase penetration. The Malaysian financial sector has achieved a significant milestone in facilitating the country’s cross-border linkages with other economies. Yet, there remains vast potential for our onshore financial institutions to support the growing financing needs of domestic and foreign corporates operating in Malaysia. For example, over the last five years, offshore corporate borrowings have risen to RM233 billion or 19.7% of GDP. From a macroeconomic perspective, total offshore corporate borrowing remains lower relative to the position observed during the Asian Financial Crisis at 47.1% of GDP. Furthermore, these borrowings were largely hedged, either naturally through foreign currency earnings or through the use of financial instruments. The bulk of these borrowings reflected intercompany loans extended by the parent of multinational companies operating in Malaysia, which tends to be more favourable in their terms and are more flexible on requirements for collateral and borrowing tenures. In sum, the macroeconomic prognosis of our offshore corporate borrowings suggests that they are manageable and within prudent levels. On the other hand, when viewed from the perspective of banking and financial opportunities, onshore banks and financial institutions could do more to tap this opportunity. Onshore banks would need to increase competitiveness by increasing its skill and strengthening capacity and offering innovative and tailored financing solutions, while at the same time play an important role in helping businesses manage the attendant risks from these transactions. This requires more discerning credit assessments of prospective borrowers and competitive financial solutions. By itself, the banking sector will however not be able to cater for all the increasing and expanding needs of the economy of the future. This is precisely why we need to develop the role of market-based financing institutions as a new source of funding. Niche institutions such as factoring and leasing companies, angel funds and alternative credit providers of various industries such as motor, housing and consumer retail sector can play an important role in contributing towards providing consumers with greater funding choices. There, however exist a high bar and strict preconditions that must be met before this funding model can take root and flourish. The presence of a strong regulator, a sound and resilient supervisory and regulatory framework as well as robust consumer protection statute are some of the critical foundation required to ensure these institutions ‘clear the hurdle’ to become a viable source or financing and benefit our economy. The ultimate aim remains in protecting consumers’ interests, preventing predatory practices, managing debt levels, including high household debt, and preventing borrowers from falling into financial hardship due to inability to service debt. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  At the same time, we must not ignore important changes in the global and domestic financial landscape that will affect current and future priorities to deliver a financial system that effectively serves our economy. One of the most significant changes has been the commoditisation of financial services. This has been largely driven by technological advancements, enabling financial products and services to be delivered by a broader set of institutions while driving lower margins for traditional providers such as banks and insurance companies. These “disruptions’ introduce new ways of interacting with consumers as well as changes to the nature of financial intermediation itself. The implications are far reaching and call for a re-thinking of business models and growth strategies, regulatory frameworks and customer relationships. The global economy and financial systems have also become more interconnected. While this development augers well for businesses and trade, it also dramatically compounds the economic and social costs of financial failures. At a macro level, low to stagnant economic growth has become a ‘new normal’. Growth in the developed economy is still anaemic and below pre-recession levels. Depressed long-term interest rates have impacted net interest margins for banks and investment income for insurers. With projections for a sustained period of low growth, traditional growth models and strategies are coming under increasing pressure, with focus turning to new engines of growth. Bank Negara Malaysia is moving on a number of fronts in response to these developments. To support financial innovations and new business and growth models of financial institutions, we have recently introduced a discussion paper on the regulatory sandbox that provides a collaborative opportunity for fintech firms, financial institutions and the Bank to evolve responsible innovations and sensible regulation. The final policy document on the regulatory sandbox is targeted to be issued by early October 2016. Later today, you will also have the opportunity to see some of these solutions and consider how they can complement your own businesses. We are also working with the Government to introduce consumer credit legislation that will provide consistent protection to businesses and households that deal with financial intermediaries that are not licensed financial institutions. Appropriate arrangements are also being considered to drive and support the development of alternative financing vehicles to serve the financing needs of small businesses. To address an increasingly interconnected domestic and global financial system, we are coordinating the development of a recovery and resolution framework with Perbadanan Insurans Deposit Malaysia (PIDM). This is a multi-year project and an important priority of the Bank to ensure that financial institutions are well prepared to manage potential stress, and to preserve the broadest options for managing any failure of a financial institution with minimal impact on financial stability. The Bank and PIDM will be initiating a series of engagement sessions with the industry from early next year to share more details on this work and how it will affect your institutions. Part III: Reinventing the future – financing growth and innovation We are entering a new era of economic development of unprecedented nature, one of the most important roles of the financial sector will be financing innovation and supporting businesses in managing the associated risks. Competing objectives and the obligations of financial institutions to depositors and policyholders have suggested that this role is likely to be more limited for traditional financial institutions. However, there are growing prospects for financial institutions to support innovation without compromising the overriding obligations to safeguard deposits and claims by policyholders. Two notable developments have supported this. The first is the evolution of a more comprehensive ecosystem for innovation. This includes incubator programmes that are proving to be highly successful in helping entrepreneurs commercialise ideas and scale up companies. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Such programmes can significantly reduce the cost of innovation for firms, and risks for financiers and risk managers such as insurance providers. Malaysia also has in place well-developed institutions that can play a key role in partnership with financial institutions to support innovative financing solutions. These include the Credit Guarantee Corporation, Cagamas and SME Corporation. Second is the increasing opportunities presented for financial institutions to develop models to evaluate risks associated with innovative ventures by making use of technology and big data. This needs to be further complemented by broader efforts to develop valuation standards and strong protections for intellectual property. The financial industry should organise itself to advance such efforts in coordination with professional bodies and authorities to open up wider avenues for financing innovative businesses in Malaysia. In the final analysis however, a larger role for financial institutions in financing growth and innovation demands a clear, strategic focus on enhancing the organisational capacity to promote innovation. It cannot be achieved with incidental measures and half steps. Financial institutions must be able to effectively mainstream innovation into their operations – across all parts of business, from developing innovative financial and risk management solutions, strengthening learning on innovation within the organisation and reviewing operational models and policies to support responsible practices that promote innovation. As earlier alluded to, the industry must also take a more active role in creating the conditions for innovative finance and insurance to be viable, working with legislators, policymakers, valuers and incubators. It is high time that the industry associations devote a sustained focus with dedicated resources to lead this effort. Innovations must be firmly anchored in a mentality that has the public interest in mind, and customers at the core. Just as innovation propels the financial sector forward, as custodians of public funds, it is trust and integrity that prevents a gulf from forming between finance and real value creation. This not only serves to build public confidence in the financial system, but places finance firmly back in service of society. We ought to aspire for the banking and insurance industry to be the pride of Malaysian, for its professionalism and integrity. If innovation is the source of future prosperity, then financial solutions that promote innovation must surely be its cradle. Over 120 years ago, Thomas Edison banked on his famous invention, the incandescent light bulb, to obtain financing for his start-up, General Electric, which went on to become one of the most enduring and successful global conglomerates of our time. More currently, 18 banks and fund managers have invested USD170 million in Symphony, a secure messaging platform which is being touted as the “Whatsapp” of the financial world. Innovation such as this might or might not work but experimenting new solutions always involve risks and we have learnt that it is an imperative for any economy to grow to the next level of progress. Many other examples of our era exist – each one illustrating the promise of innovative industries that have the potential to create high-skill jobs and new economic opportunities that contribute to growth and development. Let this future finance conference serve as an opportunity for us to critically reflect on the actions that we can take individually and collectively to reinforce existing foundations, and build new ones for sustainable growth in the new economy. The future is in our hands, let us shape it to the advantage of the industry and the nation. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Stanley Fischer: Why study economics? Speech by Mr Stanley Fischer, Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at the Convocation for the Department of Economics, Howard University, Washington DC, 27 September 2016. *      *      * I am very pleased to visit today with the students and faculty of the Howard University Economics Department. First, a fact that you know but others may not: The Howard University Economics Department is the only producer of economics Ph.D.’s among the nation’s historically black colleges and universities, and it has been teaching economics to undergraduates for nearly a century.1 Speaking as one economist to a group among whom I hope will be many future economists, let me start by saying that pursuing a degree in economics can bring many rewards. First, an economics degree provides many possible career paths. The discipline’s logical, structured approach to problem solving is valued in many settings, including academia, banking, business, consulting, government, and law. Economics majors typically receive salaries that represent a good return on their educational investment. Second, in addition to career prospects and financial rewards, economics offers a means of engaging in many of society’s most pressing issues. The study of economics provides a rigorous, analytic perspective on human behavior. It commands respect and has the ability to influence policies that address important issues. A degree in economics will help you understand and participate in these policy debates, putting you in a good position to change the world for the better. Next, I would like to discuss two current questions that economists are actively debating: First, why is participation in our nation’s labor force declining? And, second, what can be done to improve economic mobility (the ability to climb the economic ladder) for children from all groups and from all areas of the country? By doing so, I hope to illustrate the relevance of economics to important, real-life issues. The proportion of adults participating in the labor force – that is, either holding jobs or actively searching for employment – has declined substantially over the past decade. The decline has reflected, in part, the severe economic recession. Millions of people lost their jobs, and many of them experienced great difficulty finding new employment. Some of these people became discouraged and stopped looking for work. In other words, they dropped out of the labor force. However, much of the decline in labor force participation reflects factors that precede the recession.2 Most significantly, our population is aging, and older people participate in the labor market at lower rates than younger adults. In addition, the labor force participation of prime-age males – that is, individuals aged 25 through 54 – has been declining since the mid-1960s, particularly among those with only a high school degree or less education, and has continued to decline in the years since the last recession. Economists are examining a number of reasons why prime-age males are falling out of the labor force. Here there are differences among economists. Some economists have emphasized the role of public assistance programs, such as disability insurance. Some evidence suggests that public assistance income has likely played a role. Other economists have put more emphasis on the effects of the reduction over time in the demand for lower-                                                1  I am grateful to Andrew Cohen and Byron Lutz of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance. Views expressed are mine and are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. 2  See Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF) ,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Fall), pp. 197–255. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  skilled labor.3 Indeed, the wages of high school graduates have fallen sharply in comparison with the wages of college graduates over the past 40 years. Many economists believe that the decline in demand for lower-skilled workers reflects technological changes.4 For instance, the introduction of information technology such as desktop computers may have boosted the wages of highly skilled workers by more than the wages of workers with fewer skills. The slump in demand for lower-skilled labor likely also reflects the effects of globalization, including competition from goods produced and imported from abroad.5  My second current question concerns economic mobility: How likely is a child from a low-income family to move up to a higher income level as an adult? Over the past few years, economists have made important findings using newly available data. First, economic mobility varies substantially across the United States. For example, the odds of a child from the bottom quintile of the income distribution reaching the top quintile of income as an adult are 11 percent here in the Washington, D.C., area but only 4 percent in the Charlotte, North Carolina, region. Second, mobility is significantly lower in areas with greater residential segregation in terms of both race and income. Mobility is also lower in areas with greater income inequality, less family stability, and lower-quality schools.6 However, we need further study and analysis to understand whether these factors cause lower mobility or are merely correlated with it. Thus, despite the gains in our knowledge in recent years, significant gaps remain in our understanding of what factors help and hinder economic mobility. I will conclude by discussing diversity in the economics profession. Our profession currently is not very diverse, but it needs to be. Only about one-fourth of tenured and tenure-track faculty members in U.S. academic economics departments are women, and only around 5 percent are African American or Hispanic. Yet research conducted by economists as well as other social scientists suggests that a diversity of perspectives and ideas lead to better decisions and increased productivity.7 In my own experience, economic policy decisions are better when informed by a wide range of views and experiences. You all here today are crucial to the future of our profession. Indeed, I hope that by obtaining your degrees and working on economic problems, you will help change the field of economics itself. As in many other fields, economics undergoes continual redesign by its practitioners. We need – and by that I mean society as a whole needs – a more diverse set of practitioners in economics, practitioners who may perceive different questions to be important and different answers to be more persuasive. And so, by joining the profession you can acquire the power to change not only the field, but also the broad set of societal institutions that are influenced by the work of economists.                                                 3  See John Bound, Stephan Lindner, and Timothy Waidmann (2014), “Reconciling Findings on the Employment Effect of Disability Insurance ,” IZA Journal of Labor Policy, vol. 3 (11), pp. 1–23. For an opposing view that concludes that disability insurance has significantly suppressed the labor force participation of the less skilled, see David H. Autor and Mark G. Duggan (2003), “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in Unemployment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 118 (February), pp. 157–205. 4  See Daron Acemoglu (2002), “Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 40 (March), pp. 7–72. 5  See David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson (2013), “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market See, for example, Amanda Bayer and Cecilia Elena Rouse (forthcoming), “Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem,” Journal of Economic Perspectives.Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic Review, vol. 103 (October), pp. 2121–68. 6  See Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez (2014), “Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States ,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 129 (November), pp. 1553–1623. 7  See, for example, Amanda Bayer and Cecilia Elena Rouse (forthcoming), “Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem,” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Economists tend to respond to the results of research. And the research shows the importance of diversity in decisionmaking. As a result, many organizations are working very seriously to become more diverse. At the Federal Reserve Board, these efforts include developing connections with the Economics Department here at Howard. Our economists have recently served as visiting faculty at Howard or have given guest lectures here. During the past spring semester, Board economists served as mentors to Howard master’s degree and Ph.D. students. This fall, we are offering a class on statistical programming methods through the university. On October 25th, we will host an open house with the undergraduate economics association here at Howard for students who are interested in learning more about the Federal Reserve. I encourage you to attend. I would also like to make you aware that the Board offers internships to qualified students, including Howard students studying economics. Moreover, the Federal Reserve Board’s Office of Diversity and Inclusion is coordinating an effort to increase the diversity of our staff.8 Everyone at the Board with responsibility for recruiting, hiring, management, and promotion is involved. But I want to emphasize that these are steps on what will be a long road. Finally, Board economists are also working to increase our understanding of the diverse economic experiences of different groups in the economy. For example, staff economists have recently been examining the disparities in wealth across families using our Survey of Consumer Finances. Wealth is an important measure of household well-being; it can be used to start a new business, cover expenses when household income unexpectedly falls, and provide an inheritance to children – all factors that influence opportunities for economic advancement. One study finds that factors such as educational attainment and inheritances almost entirely explain the gap between the wealth of white families and that of Hispanic families. Although these factors also explain most of the gap in wealth between white families and black families, a substantial portion of this gap cannot be explained by such factors.9 Additional research is required to fully explain the difference in wealth across white and African American households. Thank you for inviting me to speak to you. It would be great to see some of you who are here today going on to influence the direction of the country on any number of issues. To put it in a nutshell, I firmly believe that a degree in economics will equip you for a personally productive and rewarding career, will position you to help make progress on some of society’s toughest issues, and will change the field of economics itself. Thank you for listening – and may you all both enjoy and succeed in your future careers, especially in economics.                                                  8  See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), Report to the Congress on the Office of Minority and Women Inclusion (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, March). 9  See Jeffrey P. Thompson and Gustavo A. Suarez (2015), “Exploring the Racial Wealth Gap Using the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF),” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015–076 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September). 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Andrew Hauser: A new RTGS service for the United Kingdom – a platform 9¾ for sterling payments? Remarks by Mr Andrew Hauser, Executive Director for Banking, Payments and Financial Resilience of the Bank of England, on the panel “Towards a single platform for all payments”, at SWIFT’s SIBOS conference, Geneva, 28 September 2016. *      *      * People wanting to travel north out of London by train are spoiled for choice. Spread along a half-mile stretch of the city’s Euston Road are no less than three major stations: Euston, King’s Cross and St Pancras. Each provides slightly different facilities, with trains ferrying passengers at different speeds to different locations. But the basic service – train travel – is much the same in all three cases, and many of the destinations served by different stations are within a few miles of each other. Indeed some are identical. There are for example nearly 100 trains a day to Newark Northgate, split equally between King’s Cross and St Pancras!  The reasons for such an apparently complex system are of course historic, dating back to the period of intense competition between train lines in Victorian times. Euston was built in 1837 for the London and Birmingham Railway, King’s Cross in 1852 for the Great Northern Railway, and St Pancras in 1868 for the Midland Railway. Given a free hand, it is inconceivable that anyone would design such arrangements from scratch today. Yet tens of millions of passengers use each station every year: business is booming. The situation in UK payments today is rather similar. Customers wishing to make a domestic retail payment can choose between physical cash (drawn from their bank, or via the LINK system of ATMs), a paper cheque, a credit or debit card via the Visa or Mastercard systems, a real-time payment over FPS, or a batch payment across Bacs. Wholesale payments may be made through the CHAPS high-value scheme, operated on the Bank of England’s Real-Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS) or through the embedded payment schemes of CREST or LCH. Those making cross-border payments may use their correspondent bank, a direct link to an overseas RTGS system or CLS the foreign exchange settlement service. Taken together, one can easily list 10 or 15 payments pathways without even trying. Each of these systems is devoted to meeting the needs of their customers, which vary materially. Yet at their most basic level, all involve a simple transfer of value. The fragmented way in which that core service is delivered poses at least three types of economic challenge. First, those having to make different types of payment over time must bear the direct costs of meeting multiple different payments protocols, technological requirements, fees and governance standards. Second, those costs create potential barriers to entry for would-be payments providers, holding back innovation and competition. And, third, it is a potential challenge for system-wide resilience, if payments meant for one system cannot easily be rerouted through another in the event of a system outage. Those challenges have been with us for some time. But the pressure for change is intensifying from a number of directions. First, consumers are increasingly demanding a more seamless payments experience – in real time, and indifferent to time zone, country or currency. That pressure has been most evident in retail markets – but is spreading to corporate and larger-value markets too. Second, intense cost pressures on traditional business models since the financial crisis have pushed banks and other financial institutions to look for more radical ways to find efficiency savings, particularly in back office and ancillary services such as payments.  Third, advances in technology have made it much easier to deliver or contemplate genuinely mobile payments platforms and distributed payments and database systems. Fourth, new regulation – building on the painful lessons of the financial crisis – has increased the need for financial firms to be able to mobilise significant stocks of highly liquid assets quickly and seamlessly across systems. And, fifth, the growing threat of cyber-attack and reduced 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  tolerance for operational outages driven by the move to real-time payments has made users ever more demanding in terms of the resilience of payment ecosystems. All of these forces are pushing towards greater convergence in payments systems. But that convergence could take a number of different forms. At its most radical, it could imply a single universal payments system, run on a single platform, and handing all payment types. Or it could mean retaining separate systems, but with a common “backbone”, including a shared language, operating standards and access protocols. Before discussing these alternative models in greater detail, I should say a word about why central banks like the Bank of England have such a central interest in the outcome. Our primary role is to maintain stability in sterling payments arrangements – and we do that in two key ways. First, by ensuring that as many payments as possible settle in (or are backed by) central bank money, we aim to minimise so-called “settlement risk”: the risk that a payment fails to reach its destination because the intermediary fails, or confidence is undermined in the payments medium. Central bank money, whether physical (banknotes) or electronic (reserves) in form, is the ultimate risk-free means of final payment. And, second, central banks seek to maximise the operational resilience of core payments systems, by operating high-value payment systems directly and supervising the other systems through our regulatory powers. Although public debate about operational resilience has, rightly, intensified in recent years, payments systems have a generally good track record: for instance, most operated flawlessly throughout during the financial crisis, unlike some other key bits of the financial system.  It is sometimes claimed that central banks’ focus on stability stands in the way of innovation or consumer interests. But neither needs to be true. Efficiency-enhancing innovation and competition has an important part to play in promoting financial stability, through reducing market concentration, identifying new risk-reducing technologies, and increasing the scope for electronic settlement in central bank money. And surveys regularly identify resilience and safety as being at the very top of consumers’ demands for payments services. So we do want to enable innovation, but only where that can be done without impairing stability. What do we make, then, of those two alternative models for payments convergence I mentioned a moment ago? An all-encompassing payments platform hosted on a single IT system has clear appeal from the point of view of simplicity and clarity of purpose. And there are some important case studies globally – including in Mexico, whose central bank is represented on the panel today. But it would be a big change from the model we have in the United Kingdom today, and poses at least three significant risks. First, it would involve putting all our eggs in one basket operationally: if the system and its backups were to go down, for any reason, all payments in the UK would stop. So, just as it would be unwise to try to channel all 100m passengers a year to Euston, King’s Cross and St Pancras through a single train platform, diversity has some operational merits! Second, it would be potentially very complex to ensure that all of the different functions currently offered by the various payment systems were replicated on the single system. In all probability this would end up being impossible, and compromises would be made – what started as being everything to everyone could end up being much less. Third, someone would need to pay – and there is a good chance that such a large project might fall to the public authorities. That is not the model that has developed for UK retail payments – and such a single dominant infrastructure could well have negative implications for innovation and competition. Over the medium- to long-term, it is possible that some of these challenges may be overcome as new technologies – including the distributed ledger – mature. Central banks could themselves have a role to play in the operation or underpinning of any such system, through the issuance of a Central Bank Digital Currency or otherwise. But there are so many big 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  questions around such a scheme – policy, legal, technological, even social – that this is still very much in the realm of research rather than implementation1. In the nearer term, the UK is therefore embracing the second convergence concept – that of joining separate systems together around a common backbone, embracing so-called “interoperability”. Underpinning that, I would pick out two key drivers – the first in wholesale payments, and the second in retail. The first driver is the Bank of England’s consultation on a new medium-term vision for its high-value RTGS service, which we published just a few days ago2. RTGS has delivered an extended period of stability in sterling payments, has a range of risk-mitigation features that is at least the equal of other systems globally, and is generally well thought of by its users. But, after two decades of operation, its capacity to deal with the accelerating pace of change in payments that I described earlier is limited. That poses three risks to the achievement of the Bank’s mission over the medium term. First, we could see a reversal in the proportion of payments settled in central bank money if systems develop outside the RTGS net, harming financial stability. “Ubering” for central banks, if you like. Second, we may end up impeding stability-enhancing innovation and competition. And, third, we risk a future diminution in service quality, whether in terms of meeting user needs or operational continuity. Our consultation paper sets out a vision for responding to that change – retaining the core risk-mitigating functions of the current generation of RTGS, but fundamentally refreshing the technological base of the service and delivering strategic change in four key areas: broader access (including for smaller banks, and non-banks); even greater resilience (in particular to cyber-threats); stronger inter-operability (including through the adoption of ISO 20022); and better user functionality (including true or near-24x7 operating capability, better liquidity management tools and richer data provision). Further detail is given in Table A. Taken together, these changes aim to safeguard stability in a rapidly-changing payments ecosystem whilst enabling that innovation to take place: by putting a modern and responsive RTGS service at its heart. We are seeking feedback on these proposals by 7 November, and will publish a final blueprint in early 2017. Alongside that change to RTGS, reform is also underway in the sterling retail payment systems. In many respects, the UK starts from a good position: for instance, we have high rates of mobile and internet banking access, and have had real time retail payments available on a 24/7/365 basis since 2008, when Faster Payments was introduced. But, as I noted at the start, the landscape is quite a fractured one, using different messaging standards and technology platforms, with relatively high levels of tiering. Last year saw the establishment of a Payments Strategy Forum, drawing together a wide range of industry and user participants to plot a new vision for retail payments. The forum’s own consultation on a future strategy has just concluded, and includes a number of recommendations for the simplification and streamlining of both the governance and technology underpinning retail payments. This touches on some of the same themes as the Bank’s proposals, including in particular a recommendation to move to a common interoperable messaging standard. An important and as yet not fully answered question is whether interoperability in retail payments means just the adoption of common messaging standards, governance and access criteria by otherwise-separate retail technologies – or whether it also means limited technological convergence, for example with multiple “overlay” services using a common “pipe” to receive and transmit payments. Such a model would be consistent with the increased use of Application Programming Interfaces (or APIs) and regulation such as the Second Payments                                                 1 The Bank of England is actively engaged in this work through its digital currency research programme (http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/banknotes/Pages/digitalcurrencies/default.aspx) and its fintech accelerator (http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/Pages/fintech/default.aspx). 2  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/paymentsystem/cp160916.pdf 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Services Directive. But significantly further thought is required about the form any such pipe might take, how it could be designed in a general enough way to accommodate multiple different payment services, and who would pay and operate it. A high-volume retail payments pipe would have a number of characteristics of a public utility – but, unlike in some other countries, we would not envisage that the Bank of England would build or operate this type of infrastructure. These types of challenge are eminently solvable – and are in no way unique to payments. To return to where I began, the UK railways have explored ways to combine common ownership of the track network and timetable with competing rail service providers whilst making use of those old, eccentrically-located stations. And energy and telecommunications have found their own solutions to similar problems, including across national borders. But the history of those industries suggests it will not be entirely plain sailing: and the stakes in payments are particularly high. That is why the Bank of England and the Payment Systems Regulator are working very closely together to ensure that their twin statutory objectives of systemic stability and enhancing competition are met by whatever structure ends up being proposed. I said earlier that I thought that a genuinely single technology platform for the UK was unlikely to be feasible in the near term, drawing an analogy with having a single platform for those three train stations. If a spread of platforms, drawn together through a common set of standards and norms, is a more plausible target, how does RTGS fit in? Those of you particularly familiar with London’s King’s Cross station will know that there is a spot (ironically between platforms 8 and 9), where a half-submerged luggage trolley commemorates the mythical “Platform 9¾” from Harry Potter. Platform 9¾ is of course the gateway to the magical secrets of Hogwarts – but is invisible to “muggles” (ie normal human beings), requiring travellers to fling themselves head first at a potentially unyielding wall to gain entry. If there may have been some parallels between this fictional construct and the role of RTGS in the past – both in the vital role it plays, and in its relative obscurity – it is our firm intention that there should not be in the future. The vision we have just published is designed to underscore and throw new light on the special role that RTGS has, of maintaining stability by providing final settlement in central bank money for all payments, and on a real-time gross basis for those that are most systemically important. But it also recognises the need to broaden access to RTGS and improve its ability to communicate with a wide range of other systems seamlessly and resiliently if it is to keep pace with a changing environment. We look forward to hearing the responses to our consultation. Thank you.   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5   Source: “A new RTGS service for the United Kingdom: safeguarding stability, enabling innovation”, available at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/paymentsystem/cp160916.pdf  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mario Draghi: Researching the macroeconomic policies of the future Welcome address by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the first ECB Annual Research Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 28 September 2016. *      *      * Let me welcome you all to the European Central Bank’s first Annual Research Conference (ARC). This is of course not the first gathering to discuss research that the ECB has held in its 18-year history. But the ARC is deliberately greater in scale than the many smaller workshops we have held in the past, covering the whole range of research relevant for central banks. Our aim is to bring together academia and central banks working at the cutting edge of economics. The ARC will be our flagship research event each year, making today’s conference the first of many to come. The ECB commits significant resources to research because good research is the foundation of good policy. It strengthens the theoretical underpinnings of our policy framework, lays the groundwork for the models we use in our conjunctural analysis, and helps battle the terrible twins of empirical macroeconomics: endogeneity and identification. The ability of research to identify counterfactuals allows us to analyse the ex post effects of our measures, and to understand the ex ante impact of new policies prior to their launch. As the crisis in the euro area has progressed through its various phases, our need for such research has evidently increased sharply. To meet our inflation objective we have had to deploy a wide array of new measures, some of which had no precedent in recent monetary history, or at least no track record in the euro area. In doing so, we have drawn heavily on the body of academic research into unconventional monetary policies that has built up during the crisis. But at times we have also had to act faster than academia has been able to follow. We have depended crucially on internal research by ECB staff to design, assess and recalibrate monetary policy. The fragmentation of the euro area financial system in 2011–12, for example, required us to fundamentally deepen our understanding of the monetary transmission mechanism. A declining real equilibrium rate has caused us to adopt a negative interest rate policy to provide the right degree of monetary stimulus, which in turn requires a closer study of the effects of breaking through the zero bound. We have had to learn how an asset purchase programme works in the special conditions of the euro area, characterised by segmented asset markets and bank-based transmission. We had little choice but to conduct both policy and research in real time. In many cases we were operating in largely unchartered waters. But the important point is that, in each case, we were able to design effective monetary policies to cope with an unprecedented series of shocks. And we did so based on the best insights that research could provide at the time. But if our internal analysis has inevitably moved ahead of academia during the crisis, we are now eager for academia to catch up. We depend on both internal and external research to help us evaluate what we have done, to scrutinise the various measures we have taken, to offer insights and analyses that equip us for the future. Good policymaking can only benefit from such scrutiny, and we welcome it. And looking forward, we depend on research to help us in other ways, too. Perhaps most salient today is the theme of the interactions between monetary policy and other policies – what I have elsewhere called “independence in interdependence”.1                                                 1 Draghi, M (2016), “On the importance of policy alignment to fulfil our economic potential”, 5th Annual Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa Lecture at the Brussels Economic Forum 2016, Brussels, 9 June 2016. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  To my mind it is increasingly evident that, when we operate near the lower bound, such interactions are heightened. Properly aligned policies can help buttress each other, while misaligned policies can produce greater side effects. To ensure that monetary policy can be implemented with maximum effectiveness and minimum side effects we need to understand those interactions better. For instance, we know that if interest rates are to rise safely away from the lower bound, we need structural reforms to raise potential output in the euro area and boost long-run interest rates. But the term structural reform remains somewhat vague. What are the key reforms needed to lift total factor productivity growth, by ensuring optimal rates of innovation and re-allocation of resources to where they are most productive? How do they differ among countries and at different stages of the cycle? Structural reforms are politically difficult, so they need to be based on rigorous research and optimally sequenced to yield quick and tangible results to bolster momentum for continued reform. Along the same vein, we need more robust policy prescriptions on the optimal composition of fiscal policy to promote growth. We also need to understand better how monetary policy works in the new post-crisis financial landscape. Since the crisis, much research has focused on the role of financial intermediation in macroeconomic dynamics. But given the ECB’s newly acquired powers, more research is needed on the interactions between macroprudential regulation, microprudential supervision and monetary policy to help guide policymakers on their optimal mix. Research can also underpin the policies required to complete capital markets and banking union which are key to safeguarding monetary transmission in the face of shocks. Finally, we need to understand the optimal balance of policy tools in terms of efficiency and equity. We know that failure by central banks to act during the crisis would have had distributional consequences not only on asset and debt holders, but also on the most vulnerable in our society who are disproportionately affected by unemployment. But little is known to date of the distributional consequences of the unconventional tools we have used, either in respect of their impact or over the medium term. Of the range of tools that are effective at delivering our inflation objective, which have the least redistributive effects? And how should we combine those tools and other policies to yield the same benefits while mitigating the costs? The complex interlinkages between monetary policy and other policies in the aftermath of the crisis have challenged central bankers and academics alike. Setting policy effectively in the new global environment requires a solid foundation of high-quality research. Conferences such as this first ARC provide an excellent opportunity to strengthen the links between policymakers and academics and help create that solid foundation. I look forward to the new insights that these next two days will bring. And, having identified the key areas of further research required for strong and stable growth in the euro area that is shared by all, I look forward to hearing your ideas and analysis at next year’s second ARC.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Janet L Yellen: Supervision and regulation Testimony by Ms Janet L Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, Washington DC, 28 September 2016. *      *      * Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve’s regulation and supervision of financial institutions. One of the Federal Reserve’s fundamental goals is to make sure that our regulatory and supervisory program is tailored to the risk that different financial institutions pose to the system as a whole. As we saw in 2007–08, the failure of systemically important financial institutions can destabilize the financial system and undermine the real economy. The largest, most complicated firms must therefore be subject to prudential standards that are more stringent than the standards that apply to other firms. Small and medium-sized banking organizations – whose failure would generally pose much less risk to the system – should be subject to standards that are materially less stringent. The Federal Reserve has made substantial progress in building a regulatory and supervisory program that is consistent with these principles. We have implemented key standards designed to limit the financial stability risks posed by the largest, most complex banking firms. We continue to work on some remaining standards and to assess the adequacy of this package of measures. With respect to small and medium-sized banks, we must build on the steps we have already taken to ensure that they do not face undue regulatory burdens. Looking forward, we must continue to monitor for the emergence of new risks, since another key lesson from the crisis is that financial stability threats change over time. Strengthening the regulation and supervision of the largest financial institutions The Federal Reserve’s post-crisis efforts to strengthen its regulation and supervision of large banks have focused on promoting the safety and soundness of these firms and on limiting the adverse effects that their distress or failure could have on the financial system and the broader economy. This orientation is consistent with section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act), which directs the Board to impose enhanced prudential standards on large banking organizations “in order to prevent or mitigate risks to financial stability.” Our efforts to mitigate financial stability risks posed by large financial institutions generally fall into one of two categories. First, we aim to make large financial institutions more resilient in order to reduce the likelihood of their failure or distress. And second, we aim to make large financial institutions more resolvable to limit the damage that their failure would have on the rest of the financial system and on the broader economy. Resiliency To increase the resiliency of the largest banking organizations, the Federal Reserve has established a broad set of enhanced prudential standards for large domestic and foreign banking organizations. Together with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, we have implemented capital rules that require large banking organizations to hold substantially larger amounts of high-quality capital than they were required to hold before the 2007–08 crisis, and we have adopted a liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) that requires these organizations to hold a buffer of high-quality, liquid assets sufficient to meet liquidity outflows during a 30-day period of severe funding stress. We have also proposed single-counterparty credit limits that are designed to guard against the build-up of excessive concentrations of credit risk and, along with the other federal 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  banking agencies, proposed a Net Stable Funding Ratio that would require banks to maintain a minimum level of stable funding relative to the liquidity of their assets over a one-year horizon. In addition to strengthening the regulation of the largest, most complex financial institutions, we have also transformed our supervision of firms that pose elevated risk to U.S. financial stability through the creation of the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC).1 The LISCC is distinguished by several characteristics. First, the LISCC has implemented a centralized, multidisciplinary approach to supervision by bringing together experts from around the Federal Reserve System in the areas of supervision, research, legal counsel, financial markets, and payments systems. Second, major areas of focus for the supervision of firms in the LISCC portfolio are capital and liquidity resiliency under normal and potentially adverse conditions in the future, as well as recovery and resolution preparedness. And third, the LISCC complements traditional, firm-specific supervisory work with annual “horizontal” programs that examine these firms at the same time and on the same set of issues in order to promote better monitoring of trends and consistency of assessments across all of the LISCC firms. With regard to capital adequacy, the introduction of capital stress testing for large banking organizations has been one of our signature innovations since the financial crisis. As events during the financial crisis demonstrated, capital buffers that seem adequate in a benign environment may turn out to be far less than adequate during periods of stress. For this reason, consistent with the stress-testing mandate in the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve conducts supervisory stress tests each year on banking organizations with $50 billion or more in total assets to determine whether they have sufficient capital to continue operations through periods of economic stress and market turbulence, and whether their capital planning frameworks are adequate to their risk profiles. The expectation embodied in our stress testing program that large banking organizations should maintain sufficient capital buffers to withstand a period of significant stress promotes the resilience of those firms and of the financial system more generally. While our stress testing program has been successful since it was first introduced in 2009, the crisis reinforced the need for regulators and supervisors to continually revisit the effectiveness of their tools and adjust as needed over time. We therefore launched a review of the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) program last year with the aim of re-assessing our stress testing practices on a comprehensive basis. As part of this process, we met with a wide range of stakeholders, including academics, analysts, bankers, public interest groups, and others. We are now considering making several changes to our stress testing methodology and process. The leading idea that has emerged from our comprehensive CCAR review is to integrate CCAR with our regulatory capital framework. More specifically, the regulatory capital rules now include a firm-specific, risk-based capital surcharge for each global systemically important bank (GSIB) and a uniform capital conservation buffer requirement above the regulatory capital minimum for all firms. Under the approach we are considering, the existing capital conservation buffer would be replaced with a risk-sensitive, firm-specific buffer that is sized based on stress test results. Each firm’s buffer requirement would be set equal to the decline in its common equity tier 1 capital ratio in the supervisory stress test. The buffer requirement would be floored at 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets, the current level of the                                                 1 The firms currently in the LISCC portfolio are American International Group, Inc.; Bank of America Corporation; The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation; Barclays PLC; Citigroup Inc.; Credit Suisse Group AG; Deutsche Bank AG; The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.; JPMorgan Chase & Co.; Morgan Stanley; Prudential Financial, Inc.; State Street Corporation; UBS AG; and Wells Fargo & Company. Further information on the LISCC is available on the Board’s website at www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/large-institution-supervision.htm. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  capital conservation buffer, to avoid any reduction in the stringency of the regulatory capital rules. We call this idea the “stress capital buffer,” and it would effectively move the stress test to the center of our regulatory capital framework. For the eight U.S. GSIBs, the move to the stress loss buffer – which would be similar in effect to including the GSIB capital surcharge in the CCAR post-stress minimum – would result in a significant aggregate increase in capital requirements. Thus, in addition to simplifying the capital framework by integrating CCAR with our regulatory capital rules, the stress loss buffer would advance our macroprudential goal of making GSIBs more resilient. In contrast, the move to the stress loss buffer approach generally would not entail a toughening of our requirements for the 25 large banking firms that are subject to CCAR but are not GSIBs. Nor would the move have any impact on community banks or other firms with less than $50 billion in assets. We are also considering making certain changes to the stress test assumptions used in CCAR. For example, under the current CCAR program, a firm’s capital adequacy is assessed by assuming that the firm continues to make its baseline capital distributions over the stress test’s two-year planning horizon. We are considering changing this conservative assumption, in significant part because of the advent of the capital conservation buffer in the regulatory capital rules, which limits the ability of a firm to make capital distributions when its capital ratios are lower than the buffer requirement. Instead, we are proposing that firms simply add one year of planned dividends to their stress capital buffer requirement in recognition of the fact that firms generally are more reluctant to reduce dividends than share buybacks. On this and other changes to CCAR that we are considering, we will of course seek public input before moving to adopt them. Resolvability During the crisis, fears about the systemic consequences that would result from the bankruptcies of systemically important firms motivated extraordinary government actions. The fears proved well-founded: The bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers significantly exacerbated the crisis. To reduce the potential that resolution of a large financial firm in bankruptcy will be disorderly, section 165(d) of the Dodd-Frank Act requires large banking organizations to produce living wills that help these firms prepare to be resolved in an orderly way under the Bankruptcy Code. Although the Bankruptcy Code provides the default legal framework for resolving a failed bank holding company, the Dodd-Frank Act also creates a backup resolution authority that can be used if the resolution of a failed financial company under the Bankruptcy Code would have serious adverse effects on U.S. financial stability. The orderly liquidation authority in Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act has several features that could reduce the systemic impact of a firm’s resolution, including an orderly liquidation fund and provisions to prevent the chaotic unwinding of a firm’s derivatives, securities financing transactions, and other qualified financial contracts. In the unlikely event that the orderly liquidation fund does incur losses, these losses would be covered by assessments on major financial firms and would not be passed on to taxpayers. The Federal Reserve has recently proposed important new rules to increase the prospects for the orderly resolution of a GSIB. Last October, the Board proposed to require the eight U.S. GSIBs to meet total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) and long-term debt requirements. The proposal would require these systemically important firms to maintain outstanding a large quantity of long-term debt that could be used to absorb losses and recapitalize the firm in resolution. Because, by definition, the actual equity of a bank will have been substantially depleted – if not totally eliminated – by the time it fails, a separate long-term debt requirement is essential to ensure that the resolution authority has the raw material from which to manufacture new equity in resolution to recapitalize and stabilize the failed firm. For this reason, the proposed long-term debt requirement would more assuredly enhance the prospects for successful resolution – and thereby contribute to solving the too-big-to-fail problem – than would a TLAC requirement on its own. The proposal would also restrict the 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  operations of GSIB holding companies, so that those legal entities could go through resolution without setting off short-term wholesale funding runs or otherwise jeopardizing financial stability. In May this year, the Board issued another proposal to make GSIBs more resolvable. This second proposed rule would impose restrictions on GSIBs’ qualified financial contracts –  including derivatives and repurchase agreements (repos) – to guard against the rapid, mass unwinding of those contracts during the resolution of a GSIB. The proposed restrictions are a key step toward GSIB resolvability because rapidly unwinding these contracts could destabilize the financial system by causing asset fire sales and toppling other firms. Acting in conjunction with the FDIC, the Board has also sought to increase GSIB resolvability through the living wills process. In April this year, the Board and the FDIC announced the results of their review of the eight U.S. GSIBs’ 2015 resolution plans. During this review, the agencies evaluated the plans based on the firms’ capital, liquidity, governance mechanisms, operational capabilities, legal entity rationalization, derivatives and trading activities, and responsiveness to prior agency feedback. The agencies found that five of the GSIBs’ plans fell short of the resolvability standard set by the Dodd-Frank Act and required those firms to fix deficiencies in their plans by October of this year or potentially face more stringent prudential requirements. If the agencies jointly determine that a firm has failed to adequately remedy the noted deficiencies, the agencies may jointly determine that the company or its subsidiaries will be subject to more stringent capital, leverage, or liquidity requirements or to restrictions on the growth, activities, or operations of the firm. The agencies also identified less-severe shortcomings in the plans of all eight U.S. GSIBs, which are expected to be addressed in the next round of resolution plan submissions, due in July 2017. The resolution planning process requires firms to demonstrate that they have adequately assessed the challenges that their structure and business activities would pose during resolution and that they have taken action to address those issues. Firms must also confront the resolution consequences of their day-to-day management decisions on a continual basis, particularly those related to structure, business activities, capital and liquidity allocation, and governance. Firms are also expected to create a meaningful set of options for selling operations and business lines to generate resources and to allow for restructuring under stress, including through the sale or wind-down of discrete businesses that could further minimize the direct impact of the firm’s distress or failure on the broader financial system. The deficiencies and shortcomings issued in the most recent plan review focus on steps necessary to ensure these objectives are met at each GSIB on an ongoing basis. In addition to providing the firms with our feedback on their resolution plans, the agencies took several steps in April to improve the transparency of the resolution planning exercise. These steps included publicly releasing the firm feedback letters, a paper outlining the resolution plan assessment framework and firm determinations, and a document detailing the expectations of the agencies regarding the firms’ 2017 resolution plan submissions. The expectations articulated for the 2017 plan contents build on detailed guidance previously provided to the GSIBs in 2014 and 2015. While the five firms that received joint deficiencies are required to fix those deficiencies by October 2016, all of the firms that received agency feedback in April are required to submit a full resolution plan by July 1, 2017. In these plans, firms will be required to address all identified shortcomings, follow all guidance provided by the agencies, and meet all statutory and regulatory requirements for their resolution plans. In meeting these expectations, the actions that firms need to take should be substantially complete by July 2017, as previously communicated by the agencies. Regulation and supervision of large and regional banking organizations In supervising banking organizations with more than $50 billion in assets but outside the LISCC program, the Board focuses on ensuring that companies are well managed, 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  appropriately capitalized, and prepared to withstand potential adverse developments in the business environment. However, because the distress or failure of a non-LISCC firm is unlikely to have the same effect on the financial system and broader economy as that of a LISCC firm, we do not apply the full range of rules that we apply to those in the LISCC portfolio. For example, the Board’s risk-based and leverage capital surcharges, as well as the recently proposed long-term debt and TLAC requirements, only apply to GSIBs. Similarly, the advanced approaches capital rules, countercyclical capital buffer, supplementary leverage ratio, and full LCR only apply to the largest and most internationally active banking organizations. We also scale our examination procedures to reflect the lower level of systemic risk presented by banks with more than $50 billion in assets that are not LISCC companies. As a result of the comprehensive CCAR review I described earlier, we are also considering exempting from the qualitative portions of CCAR any bank that has less than $250 billion in total assets and that does not have significant international or nonbank activity. While we strongly believe the CCAR qualitative review produces significant safety and soundness benefits for the largest firms, we can achieve our supervisory goals at most medium-sized banking firms using our normal supervisory program combined with targeted horizontal assessments of particular aspects of capital planning, as many of these firms are now meeting or close to meeting our supervisory expectations for capital planning processes. As required by statute, these firms would still be subject to the quantitative portion of our stress testing program. But even with respect to the quantitative portions of CCAR, we are considering reducing the amount of data that these firms are required to submit for stress testing purposes. Regulatory and supervisory requirements are further tailored for regional banking organizations, defined as those with total assets between $10 billion and $50 billion. For example, while regional banking organizations must comply with capital rules, they are not subject to a supervisory stress test or CCAR. Rather, as required by the Dodd-Frank Act, regional banking organizations perform their own stress tests. Similarly, these companies are not subject to enhanced prudential standards established under section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act, the LCR, or other related requirements. Instead, we conduct regular inspections of regional banking organizations and evaluate their safety and soundness based on each company’s individual circumstances, in addition to horizontal exams we conduct of regional banking organizations. Because many regional banking organizations concentrate their assets and activities in banking subsidiaries that are supervised by other federal banking agencies, we coordinate supervisory activities closely with the other U.S. banking agencies and rely significantly on the results of their examinations, focusing our own inspections on the parent company and its ability to serve as a source of strength to the subsidiary banks. Community bank supervision I know that community banks play a vital role in many of your districts. Let me say that the experiences and challenges of community banking are not new to me. Before I became Chair of the Board of Governors and Vice Chair before that, I spent six years as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. In that role, I was involved in the supervision of a substantial number of community banking organizations in the nine states of the San Francisco District. Among the lessons that experience reinforced is that when it comes to bank regulation and supervision, one size does not fit all. To effectively promote safety and soundness and to ensure that institutions comply with applicable consumer protection laws without creating undue regulatory burden, rules and supervisory approaches should be tailored to different types of institutions such as community banks. The Federal Reserve supervises more than 800 community banks and more than 4,000 holding companies that control small depository institutions. These are banking organizations with total assets of $10 billion or less. In supervising community banks, we follow a risk-focused approach that aims to target examination resources to higher-risk areas of each 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  bank’s operations and to ensure that banks maintain risk-management capabilities appropriate to their size and complexity. In the wake of the crisis, we have taken steps to refine this process by using the financial data we collect from banks to calibrate our examination procedures based on risk. We believe this will help us to identify and address emerging risks and to ensure that community bank examiners with specialized expertise are allocated to the institutions exhibiting the highest risks. We also implemented a risk-focused consumer compliance examination framework for community banks in 2014 that is intended to allow examiners to spend less time on low-risk compliance issues so that issues more likely to result in harm to consumers get more attention. The Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies are currently in the process of completing the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA) review. Under EGRPRA, the federal banking agencies are required to conduct a joint review of their regulations every 10 years to identify provisions that are outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome. The Federal Reserve views this review as a timely opportunity to step back and identify ways to reduce regulatory burden, particularly for smaller or less complex banks that pose less risk to the U.S. financial system. In carrying out this review, the agencies sought public comment on their regulations and held several roundtable discussions with bankers and interested parties to gather additional feedback on sources of burden. Themes emerging from these comments include streamlining the Call Report, reducing examination frequency, raising long-standing dollar-based thresholds for appraisals, and reducing the complexity of capital requirements for smaller banks. In response to public comments on examination frequency, the agencies have already approved interim rules to implement a provision of the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation Act (FAST Act), which raises the asset threshold for insured depository institutions that are eligible for an 18-month examination cycle from $500 million to $1 billion. As a result of raising the threshold, eligible institutions will be subject to fewer safety and soundness and Bank Secrecy Act exams. The agencies are also exploring potential options for alleviating some burdens of appraisal requirements and are actively considering proposals to simplify regulatory capital requirements for community banks. In addition, the banking agencies, under the auspices of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, recently issued a proposal for a new and streamlined Call Report for community banks. The proposal would eliminate certain data items and reduce the reporting frequency of many other data items. As a result, banks with less than $1 billion in total assets would submit a Call Report with about 40 percent fewer data items than the existing Call Report. The proposal incorporates comments the banking agencies received from community banks during several outreach events used to gather information on the challenges faced by community banks in preparing Call Reports. Congress may also wish to consider carving out community banks from two sets of Dodd-Frank Act requirements: the Volcker rule and the incentive compensation limits in section 956. The risks addressed by these statutory provisions are far more significant at larger institutions than they are at community banks. In the event that a community bank engages in practices in either of these areas that raise heightened concerns, we would be able to address these concerns as part of the normal safety-and-soundness supervisory process. While the banking agencies have tailored the Volcker rule and have proposed significant tailoring of incentive compensation rules, community banks and supervisors would benefit from not having to focus on regulatory compliance for matters that are unlikely to pose problems at smaller banks. Current conditions Having reviewed some of the major elements of our regulatory and supervisory programs, let me offer a few brief remarks about the current state of the firms we regulate. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  In response to regulatory and supervisory pressures, the financial condition of the U.S. GSIBs has strengthened considerably since the crisis. Common equity capital at the eight U.S. GSIBs alone has more than doubled since 2008, representing an increase to almost $800 billion. Moreover, these firms generally have developed much more stable funding positions. The largest banking organizations have increased their holdings of high-quality liquid assets by over $1 trillion over the past five years, at the same time as they have substantially reduced their reliance on run-prone sources of funding. Reducing run-risk is a central goal of post-crisis regulation and supervision. Our examinations have found large and regional banks to be well capitalized. Both large and regional banking organizations have shown improved profitability since the depths of the financial crisis, although these banks have also faced challenges in recent years because of weak growth in interest and noninterest income. Both large and regional institutions have seen robust growth in commercial and industrial lending, which supports sustainable job creation. Finally, community banks are significantly healthier. More than 95 percent are now profitable, and capital lost during the crisis has been largely replenished. Loan growth is picking up, and problem loans are now at levels last seen early in the financial crisis. Conclusion In conclusion, our post-crisis approach to regulation and supervision is both forward-looking and tailored to the level of risk that firms pose to financial stability and the broader economy. Standards for the largest, most complex banking organizations are now significantly more stringent than standards for small and medium-sized banks, which is appropriate given the impact that the failure or distress of those firms could have on the economy. As I have discussed, we anticipate taking additional actions in the near term to further tailor our regulatory and supervisory framework. Yet even as we finalize the major elements of post-crisis reform, our work is not complete. We must carefully monitor the impact of the regulatory changes we have made and remain vigilant regarding the potential emergence of new risks to financial stability. We must stand ready to adjust our regulatory approach where changes are warranted. The work we do to ensure the financial system remains strong and stable is designed to protect and support the real economy that sustains the businesses and jobs on which American households rely. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Benoît Cœuré: Having confidence in Europe Keynote speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at a conference organised by the Istituto Affari Internazionali, Rome, 26 September 2016. *      *      * I would like to thank Stephanie Bergbauer and Florian Walch for their assistance in preparing this speech. All views expressed herein remain mine. The European Union is going through a difficult phase. The economic crisis, the threat of terrorism and the arrival of an unprecedented number of migrants are posing challenges to Europeans. The EU’s responses to these challenges have not removed doubts about its ability to act coherently and effectively when common solutions are needed. Following the UK’s referendum on EU membership, Europe has become embroiled in a wide-ranging discussion about its raison d’être. This discussion will however not be successful if it is merely a diplomatic exercise: if Europe is about bringing Europeans closer together, it needs to relate to its citizens and listen to civil society. In other words, the res publica needs to be discussed in the various parts of the forum, not just the Curia, where senators met here in Rome, but also the Comitium, where citizens could openly debate the matters of the time. I am thus grateful for your invitation and the opportunity to speak here at the Istituto Affari Internazionali today and to engage in a discussion with you. What I will present are observations and assessments from the perspective of a European central banker who can analyse and provide suggestions. But, as you will see, quite a number of the issues that I will discuss today lie outside the realm of central banking and can in fact only come about through political debate and ultimately political leadership. In my view, the European Union today lacks confidence in two important ways: First, there is a lack of confidence in Europe; that is, in the ability of European policies to address today’s challenges, reap the benefits of globalisation while controlling its costs, and increase Europe’s economic potential. This lack of confidence is reflected in the low levels of public trust in EU institutions, in the rising support for Eurosceptic parties, and was evident in the outcome of the UK referendum in June this year. Second, there is also a lack of confidence between Europeans. This is compounded by a perceived lack of a strong unifying bond or joint identity as EU citizens. The divergence between national public discourses on economic governance has reached disturbingly high levels in the euro area. Sometimes, there is not even a common analysis on what has gone wrong. Policymakers are increasingly speaking about each other and not with each other. Let’s therefore set aside the preconceptions and ask ourselves how we can restore confidence in Europe and between Europeans. First, I will argue, there is need for resolute actions at national level. Second, there is need to provide clarity and ensure consistency in European integration. And, third, to overcome political fragmentation, there is need to reinforce common fora for debating the future of Europe. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  There are good reasons to have confidence in Europe First, I believe that there are in fact good reasons to have confidence in Europe and I want to mention some of them1. Alongside the United States and China, the European Union is currently one of the three biggest economic blocs in the world, each of roughly equal size in terms of purchasing power parity. Europe protects its citizens from external economic disruption and offers them a unique social model. A social model that we can be proud of and that can inspire the world, provided we can make it sustainable. Furthermore, we have managed to largely mitigate the recent financial and economic crisis, which for many countries in the EU was the most serious crisis since the Second World War. It was only four years ago that the euro area looked into the abyss. But today, we find ourselves in a significantly better environment. In summer 2012, financial fragmentation was at its peak but has since then strongly receded. Five Member States were in economic adjustment programmes, four of them are now again standing on their own feet. Unemployment, although still unacceptably high in some countries, declined in 2016 for the third consecutive year, and employment growth in the euro area has beaten our expectations. The euro, despite the deficiencies in its architecture, has tangible benefits for the people of Europe. It is the second most important currency in the world, and it has delivered measurable economic benefits for Europeans since its introduction2. Investment and competition have likewise benefited from the reduction of currency risks and transaction costs. The euro protected the Single Market by eliminating the possibility of competitive exchange rate devaluations. And without the euro, it is unlikely that our small or medium-sized economies would have better weathered the global financial turmoil. During the crisis, the euro was arguably the greatest bond holding Europeans together: the commitment to protect the single currency and the integrity of the euro area determined key decisions taken by European institutions and Member States. Its force as a common bond is also reflected in public opinion: popular support for the euro has remained high throughout the crisis. In spring 2016, support for the single currency stood at 68% in the euro area3 with a majority of citizens in favour of the euro in all euro area Member States. The ECB as the institution tasked with safeguarding the price stability of the euro has proven that it is able to act decisively within its mandate, even in very difficult situations, and to adapt its policy tools to a changing economic environment. We estimate that all other things being equal the measures we have taken since 2014 will raise the inflation rate by more than half a percentage point, on average, in 2016 and 2017. And they will help to increase real euro area GDP growth more than one and a half percentage points cumulated over 2015–2018. Finally, the establishment of European banking supervision has brought some important improvements to the financial architecture of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). For almost two years the ECB has now been supervising around 130 of the most significant banks of the euro area and indirectly supervising all other banks. And banks have substantially strengthened their capital positions in that time: since 2012, the CET1 ratio for significant banks, for instance, has moved up from 9% to more than 13% today. Moreover,                                                 1 See also Cœuré, B., “The future of Europe: building on our strengths”, introductory remarks at the plenary session on “The Future of Europe” during the fifth German Economic Forum in Frankfurt, 6 December 2013. 2 Consider trade, for example: some estimate that the introduction of the euro has led to a rise in trade of around 50%. See Glick R. and Andrew K. Rose, “How Much Does the EMU Benefit Trade?”, FRBSF Economic Letter, 21 March 2016. 3 Standard Eurobarometer No 85, conducted in 28 Member States from 21 to 31 May 2016. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  ECB Banking Supervision is operating at arm’s length from banks and enforcing a level playing field in the euro area by harmonising supervisory practices. In summary, the EU’s economic potential, the euro as our single currency backed by a single, credible and effective institution and the establishment of the single supervisor are all very good reasons to have confidence in Europe. Nevertheless, I won’t deny that we need to do much better in a number of areas. As mentioned previously, monetary policy has been very effective in supporting output and inflation. But as I have said elsewhere4, our monetary policy measures were taken on the implicit assumption that they would be transient: on the one hand, because monetary stimulus would ultimately help counter the cyclical forces depressing the real equilibrium rate and on the other hand because other economic and fiscal policies would provide cyclical support and tackle the more structural drivers of low real rates. But if fiscal and economic policies do not in fact play this role, we risk being trapped in a low growth, low interest rate equilibrium. Moving from interest rates being “low for long” to being “low forever” would severely limit the room for manoeuvre for conventional monetary policy tools, but even more worryingly, it would threaten the contract between generations as well as risk tearing up our social fabric. Today, building confidence in Europe also means showing that together with national governments, it can steer us away from that outcome. There are two ways in which we need to improve economic and fiscal policies. On the one hand national governments need to live up to their responsibilities for these policy areas. On the other hand, we need to strengthen economic and fiscal policy tools at European level. Let me explain this in more detail. National governments need to live up to their responsibilities The solution to this situation must start at national level. One important cornerstone of the current set-up is the principle that responsibility for economic and fiscal policies lies largely with national governments. There are coordination tools at European level, but ultimately, decisions are made by the elected representatives at national level. Therefore, national governments need to live up to this responsibility: economic and fiscal policies need to be used more decisively so as to reduce structural unemployment and boost potential output growth in the euro area5. Italy has taken key steps in these areas. A comprehensive reform of the labour market was carried out last year. The new rules on open-ended contracts and the subsidy for new hires seem to be having an initial positive impact on the creation of permanent jobs.6 Important measures have also been taken to address the challenges of the banking sector and to reduce the administrative burden on firms and households. However, more structural reforms are necessary in Italy as in all euro area countries. The focus should be on actions to raise productivity and improve the business environment, including the provision of adequate public infrastructure, all of which are vital in increasing investment and boosting job creation. Fiscal policies should also support the economic recovery in a sustainable way. There is room everywhere to focus public expenditure more on items which will raise productivity. Those countries that have fiscal room for manoeuvre                                                 4 See Cœuré, B., “The ECB’s operational framework in post-crisis times”, speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s 40th Economic Policy Symposium in Jackson Hole, 27 August 2016. 5 See Cœuré, B., “Structural reforms: learning the right lessons from the crisis”, speech at the Economic conference organised by Latvijas Banka in Riga, 17 October 2014. 6 See Sestito, P. and Viviano. E. (2016), “Hiring incentives and/or firing cost reduction? Evaluating the impact of the 2015 policies on the Italian Labour Market”, Banca d’Italia Occasional Paper 325. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  should use it wisely; but others that don’t have such room should not bend the commonly agreed rules– that is in their own interest as well as in the interest of Europe. Stretching rules to the point where they lose credibility will not pave the way for a stronger and safer Economic and Monetary Union. Clarity and consistency in integration This leads me my second point: we need to strengthen economic and fiscal policy tools at European level by pursuing clarity and consistency in European integration. Clarity in integration is about making it easy to understand who is responsible for what. In the current set-up, loose coordination of economic policies at European level and ad hoc intergovernmental arrangements may give the impression that a competence has been passed to the European level, when in fact it continues to be exercised largely by Member States. This opens the door to shifting the blame for unpopular measures to the EU when in fact it does not effectively have the power to adopt policies. In addition, a clearer demarcation of competences between the European and national levels would allow the EU to prove to national audiences that Europe is part of the solution and not part of the problem. Clarity is also about pointing out which institution takes which decisions at European level. This is why I support the establishment of a euro area finance ministry, accountable to the European Parliament.7 This body could be responsible for preventing economic and fiscal imbalances, managing crises in the euro area, as well as representing euro area governments in international economic and financial institutions. Consistency in integration means assigning the competences for strongly complementary policy areas to the same level of government. We cannot partially disempower national states without creating – at Union level – the capacity to provide at least as much security to citizens as before. Let me illustrate. The Single Market is a point in case: it requires not only the opening of borders but also joint rules to ensure financial stability and a level playing field with fair competition. And joint rule-setting requires enforcement and judicial review, that is, supranational sovereignty sharing and political procedures that lead to common decisions. And there are some good recent examples where the EU has exercised its power in this area for the benefit of European citizens. Take the recent state aid decisions by the Commission on some national tax schemes or the progressive abolition of roaming charges across the EU. Consistency in integration is equally important – if not more so – for the half-finished construction of EMU. I understand very well, as a European citizen, why political attention is today focused on security and addressing the challenges of migration. But Europe will not build the resources needed to protect itself and manage migration flows without a strong and sustainable economy. Making our Economic and Monetary Union strong and sustainable requires a complete banking union and elements of a fiscal and economic union. None of us want to live in a half-built house because it will get very uncomfortable as soon as the next storm hits. We need to work on completing EMU also after Brexit.8 Today, there are clear disagreements on the balance between private and public risk-sharing, on the mix of national and EMU-wide responsibilities, and on the speed towards                                                 7 See B. Cœuré, “Drawing lessons from the crisis for the future of the euro area”, speech at “Ambassadors Week”, Paris, 27 August 2015. 8 See the Five Presidents’ Report and, more recently, Enderlein, H., Letta, E. et al. (2016). “Repair and Prepare: Growth and the Euro after Brexit”, Gütersloh, Berlin, Paris: Bertelsmann Stiftung, Jacques Delors Institut Berlin and Institut Jacques Delors in Paris. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  possible new arrangements. This discussion will take time. In my view, it should be embedded more broadly in a new convergence process, as suggested in the Five Presidents’ Report. Significant progress towards common convergence criteria would be regularly monitored and would be a condition for members to benefit from further risk-sharing instruments. This way the convergence process would set a clear incentive structure for Member States to overcome the current deadlock and would establish full transparency about the design of EMU. However, for new projects and further integration steps there must be a consensus that joint action is truly necessary and linked to people’s needs. And we know from surveys9 that there are areas where citizens would like the EU to become more active than at present. On that note, I want return very briefly to an aspect that is really for another speech or maybe even another speaker – someone not from the central banking world – to address. It is the lack of confidence between Europeans. Common fora for debate As I have said before, we need to be honest with ourselves: the Single Market and Economic and Monetary Union are not technocratic mechanisms but inherently political undertakings. And as political undertakings they require support and acceptance beyond the legitimacy gained via elected national governments or even through the provision of effective and efficient solutions. As laid down in the Treaty, supranational law and supranational institutions assume that we are not only nationals of our respective countries but also citizens of Europe. Being European citizens is in turn linked to a feeling of common identity. The late President Ciampi embraced this principle emphatically: Our common historical legacy, the awareness of possessing a European identity, our membership of a single value system, the principle of shared sovereignty mark out European citizenship and identify the European Union; they underpin its institutional, political and economic scaffolding.10 A common identity allows us to accept that the political undertakings we pursue together can temporarily produce losers and winners. It enables the minority to accept the decisions taken by the majority. When such an acceptance is not there but only national interests and national perspectives prevail, then confidence between Europeans is seriously undermined. One way of strengthening these conceptual underpinnings of Europe in my view would be to create more space for common debates on European issues. Let me be clear: having common debates should not be understood as having the same view at all times. It is absolutely normal to disagree and it is entirely natural considering that the people of Europe have different histories, have grown up in different circumstances and express a wide variety of preferences. However, the problem starts when we are having 28 or 19 different discussions without channelling them into a common debate. Too often, domestic media and political actors take a national perspective in these debates. Too often the debtor-creditor dichotomy overshadows the debate of how we want to organise the economic governance of the euro area in the future. The result is a fragmentation of the democratic debate on Europe. This fragmentation is heightened by intergovernmental decision-making that involves endless negotiations and highlights the differences between the positions of various Member States. And such a fragmentation of our discourse sets a trap: the more divided we become over common solutions, the less effort we put into implementing them. As a result, Europe cannot deliver                                                 9 Special Eurobarometer of the European Parliament, conducted in 28 Member States from 9 to 18 April 2016. 10 See C.A. Ciampi, “The Identity and the Unity of Europe”, Lecture at the University of Leiden, 5 March 2003. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  effectively and European policies, once again, appear ineffective. This only adds to people’s impatience and dissatisfaction with Europe, making it even more difficult to find effective European solutions. To overcome this fragmentation we need to reinforce our common fora for debate. The European Parliament is an important element, but we should foster dialogues between Europeans also outside of existing institutional structures.11 The result should be a positive “politicisation” of the EU12, on which I understand analytical work is also being carried out here at the institute. Conclusions Confidence in Europe and among Europeans is low. And there are clearly areas where we need to do much better. National governments need to live up to their responsibilities for fiscal and economic policies, and we need a clear and consistent path of integration to avoid half-built houses and allow Europe to deliver. A new convergence process can offer such a path to break the deadlock. And achieving this goal will be much easier if we strengthen our common fora for debate and decision-making. This requires political leadership. But it also will help to meet citizens’ demands for a more effective Europe. We should have confidence in Europe. As Winston Churchill once said, “For myself, I am an optimist – it does not seem to be much use being anything else”. I now look forward to your questions and our discussion.                                                 11 See Cœuré, B., “Towards a political convergence process in the euro area”, speech at the Interparliamentary Conference “Towards a Progressive Europe” in Berlin, 16 October 2015. 12 See Pirozzi, N. and Tortola, P. D. (2016), “Negotiating the European Union’s Dilemmas: Proposals on Governing Europe. Istituto Affari Internazionali Working Paper 16/24. 
Philip Lowe: Monetary policy framework, recent economicdevelopments and Reserve Bank of Australia’s major projectsOpening statement by Mr Philip Lowe, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to theHouse of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Sydney, 22 September 2016.*   *   *Chair and members of the CommitteeThese hearings have become a significant part of our calendar. They are an important waythrough which the Reserve Bank is accountable to the public. I, myself, have been attendingthese hearings for more than a decade in various roles. I look forward now, in my new capacityas Governor, to continuing the tradition of productive engagement between the Committee andthe Reserve Bank. You can be assured that I will do my best to answer your questionsconstructively and I look forward to regular hearings over coming years.In my opening remarks, I would like to cover three sets of issues. The first is the monetary policyframework. The second is recent economic developments in Australia and elsewhere. And thethird is the major projects that the Reserve Bank is currently undertaking.The Monetary Policy FrameworkEarlier this week, the Treasurer and I released an updated Statement on the Conduct ofMonetary Policy. These statements – the first of which was released in 1996 – record thecommon understanding between the Reserve Bank and the Government on key aspects ofAustralia’s monetary and central banking policy framework. They also set out agreedarrangements that promote the transparency and accountability of the Bank.Over recent times, there has been quite a lot of public commentary in Australia and elsewhereabout monetary policy frameworks. As you would expect, we are always studying the variousarguments and have followed the recent debate carefully.Our view is that a flexible medium-term inflation target remains the right monetary policyframework for Australia. This was reaffirmed in the new Statement on the Conduct of MonetaryPolicy, which has also been endorsed by the Reserve Bank Board. The goal remains for CPIinflation to average between 2 and 3 per cent over time.The current framework was introduced in the early 1990s and has served Australia well. Itprovides the community with a reasonable degree of certainty about how the average level ofprices is likely to change over the medium term. This helps people when making decisions abouttheir savings and investments. Low and stable inflation remains an important precondition forstrong and sustainable growth in employment and incomes.It is worth emphasising that ever since the adoption of the current framework, the Reserve Bankhas been a proponent of what is known as flexible inflation targeting. We have not seen our jobas always keeping inflation tightly in a narrow range. We have not been what some have called‘inflation nutters’. We have had a more balanced perspective, recognising that some degree ofvariability in inflation from year to year is both inevitable and appropriate.In particular, a flexible medium-term target is the best way for us to deliver low and stable inflationin a way that contributes to our other broad responsibilities, including employment and preservingfinancial stability. We want to ensure that we deliver an average rate of inflation in Australia ofbetween 2 and 3 per cent over time. It is in the public interest that we do this. It is also in thepublic interest that we pursue this objective in a way that promotes good employment outcomesfor the country and preserves financial stability. In this way, we can best contribute to the 1 / 5BIS Central Banker's Speeches
economic prosperity and welfare of the Australian people as required by the Reserve Bank Act.Our judgement, then, is that a flexible medium-term inflation target remains the right monetarypolicy framework for Australia. While there are arguments for other types of arrangements, noneof them is sufficiently strong to move away from the current framework, which has helpedpromote stability and confidence in the Australian economy.So the new Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy represents continuity with thepreviousStatement. The main drafting change is to make the link between monetary policy andfinancial stability a little more direct. In the previous Statement, monetary policy and financialstability were dealt with in separate parts of the document. Yet, over the years, financial stabilityconsiderations have been a factor in our monetary policy deliberations. Recently, for example,we have considered that a very quick return of inflation to the 2 to 3 per cent range at the cost ofa material deterioration in the health of private sector balance sheets was unlikely to be in thepublic interest. The revised drafting recognises that our inflation target is pursued in the contextof the Bank’s broader objectives, including financial stability.Recent Economic DevelopmentsI would now like to turn to the recent economic data.Our economy continues its transition following the boom in commodity prices and mininginvestment. According to the latest national account, GDP increased by 3.3 per cent over theyear to June. This was a better outcome than was widely expected a year ago. It is also a littleabove most estimates of trend growth in our economy. Partly reflecting this above-trend growth,the unemployment rate has declined by around ½ percentage point over the past year. Again,this is a better outcome than was thought likely a year ago.As is always the case, these aggregate outcomes mask significant variation across industriesand regions. Those parts of the economy that benefited most from the resources boom are nowexperiencing difficult conditions, while other areas are doing considerably better. In these otherareas, business conditions have improved, employment has increased and there are somesigns of a modest pick-up in private investment.Overall, the economy is adjusting reasonably well to the unwinding of the biggest mininginvestment boom in more than a century. This is a significant achievement. We are managingthis adjustment partly because of the flexibility of the exchange rate and the flexibility of wagesand through the support provided by monetary policy.The story on income growth has been less positive, with growth in nominal GDP beingdisappointing. Over the past five years, nominal GDP has increased at an average rate of around3 per cent per year. To put this number in context, between 2000 and 2007, nominal GDP grewat an average rate of 7½ per cent per year. This is quite a change. It goes some way toexplaining the sense of disappointment in parts of the community about recent economicoutcomes.The main reason for the weak income growth over recent times is the large fall in the pricesreceived for our exports. Since the September quarter 2011, export prices have fallen by aroundone-third. This fall, though, does need to be kept in perspective. Export prices remainconsiderably higher than they were in the 1990s and early 2000s, relative to the price of ourimports. And of course, some of the fall in prices is because of increased production fromAustralia. So while we are receiving lower prices for our exports, we are selling more.The recent news on commodity prices has been a bit more positive than it has been for a while.Over the past couple of months, the prices of some of our key exports have risen, partly inresponse to production cutbacks by high-cost producers elsewhere in the world. While it is 2 / 5BIS Central Banker's Speeches
difficult to predict the future, if these increases were to be sustained then we could look forwardto the drag on national income from falling commodity prices coming to an end.A second factor that has weighed on growth in nominal GDP is the slow rate of wage increases.This is a common experience across most industrialised countries at present, even those withstrong employment growth. In Australia, the current rate of wage growth is the slowest in aroundtwo decades. It is part of the adjustment following the resources boom. Importantly, it means thatmany more people have jobs than would otherwise have been the case.The low wage growth and lower commodity prices have meant that CPI inflation has been quitelow over recent times. Inflation has also been held down by increased competition in parts ofretailing and cost reductions in some supply chains. Slow growth in rents has also played a role.The low inflation outcomes have provided scope for monetary policy to provide additional supportto demand. The Reserve Bank Board decided to reduce the cash rate by 25 basis points in Mayand again in August this year. Lending rates have come down as a result. Deposit rates have, ofcourse, also come down. The Board is very conscious that this means lower interest income forsavers. Overall though, our judgement is that this easing in monetary policy is supporting jobsand economic activity in Australia, and thus improving the prospects for sustainable growth andinflation outcomes consistent with the medium-term target.Looking forward, we expect the economy to continue to be supported by low interest rates andthe depreciation of the exchange rate since early 2013. Importantly, the drag from the fall inmining investment will also come to an end. While mining investment still has some way to fall,our estimate is that around three-quarters of the total decline is now behind us.Inflation is expected to remain low for some time, but then to gradually pick up as labour marketconditions strengthen further.One issue that has attracted a lot of attention of late is the housing market. The constructioncycle has a bit more momentum than we expected earlier. This is adding to the supply ofhousing in the country, which partly explains the slow growth in rents. The rate at whichestablished housing prices are increasing has also moderated, although there remain somepockets where prices are increasing briskly. Credit growth and turnover in the housing marketare also lower than they were a year ago. Under APRA’s guidance, lending standards have alsobeen tightened. Overall, then, the situation is somewhat more comfortable than it was a yearago, although we continue to watch things carefully.If I could now turn to the international environment.The overall picture is as it has been for some time. The global economy is continuing to expand,but at a rate a little below average. Growth in global trade and investment is subdued. Inflation isalso generally low and below most central bank targets. And interest rates in many countries arestill very low.One issue that continues to attract a lot of attention is the global monetary environment.As we have talked about on previous occasions, at the global level there has been a very heavyreliance on monetary policy to stimulate growth. Some central banks have taken extraordinaryactions, including large-scale money creation and setting negative policy interest rates. This hashad global ramifications. While these actions have generally not been taken with the directintention of influencing exchange rates, they have, inevitably, affected international capital flowsand exchange rates. We have seen the effects here in Australia. The monetary expansionelsewhere and the low rates on offer overseas have meant that foreign investors have foundAustralian assets, with their relatively higher returns, attractive. In this way, what is happeningelsewhere affects us here in Australia. 3 / 5BIS Central Banker's Speeches
In the past 24 hours, there have been much-anticipated policy meetings by the Bank of Japanand by the Federal Reserve in the United States. These meetings followed a reassessment inmarkets about the potential for further stimulus from some major central banks, which saw bondyields rise from their historically low levels. In the event, the Bank of Japan and the FederalReserve did not make material changes to their policy stances. In both cases, policy remainshighly accommodative. The Federal Reserve’s statement did note, though, that the case for anincrease in the federal funds rate had strengthened.Another area that continues to be watched closely is the unfolding transition in the economy ofour largest trading partner, China.As we have discussed previously, growth in China has slowed as China too makes a difficulteconomic transition: in its case, from growth being driven by large investments in industrialcapacity and property to a more consumption-focused and service-based economy. China isalso dealing with the consequences of a large build-up of debt in the private and state-ownedbusiness sectors. Overall, the latest available data suggest that there has not been a majorinterruption to growth, although this is partly because the economy is being supported by fiscalpolicy, including expenditure on infrastructure. So the Chinese authorities face a difficult trade-off:measures to address industrial overcapacity and high debt levels are necessary over the longerterm, but are not helpful in the short term. We all have a strong interest in them managing thistrade-off smoothly.RBA ProjectsFinally, I would like to say a few words about three of the major public-interest projects that theBank has been working on recently.You will – I hope – have noticed that a new $5 banknote was issued on 1 September. We arevery proud of it. It has innovative security features, including the world’s first clear top-to-bottomwindow. If you have had one in your hands you will have also noticed a tactile feature to assistthe vision impaired. We anticipate releasing a new $10 banknote next year and then the banknotein highest circulation – the $50 – after that.The rationale for introducing new banknotes is that we want to make sure that counterfeitingrates in Australia remain low. Our current banknotes have stood the test of time, but astechnology has improved so have counterfeiting capabilities, and there has been some increasein counterfeiting. Our investment in new, high-tech banknotes will help ensure that Australianscan continue to have confidence in our banknotes. As part of this project, we are also building anew large vault and a technologically sophisticated, more efficient cash processing facility inCraigieburn in Victoria, as our existing arrangements are running up against capacity constraints.A second major project is the New Payments Platform. This project has been under theguidance of the Reserve Bank’s Payments System Board. It is a cooperative effort between theBank and the payments industry to modernise key parts of our electronic payments system.When this work is completed we will all be able to make instantaneous payments to one another,with the money transferring between accounts in a matter of seconds, even if the funds have tomove between banks. Addressing will be simplified; an email address or a mobile phone numberwill be able to be used instead of a payer needing to know an account number and BSB. We willalso be able to send a lot more information with payments. The first payments using this newsystem should be able to be made late next year. As one part of our contribution to this project,the Reserve Bank is building the necessary infrastructure to allow funds to be transferredbetween financial institutions in real time.A third major project is the renovation of our banking infrastructure. The Reserve Bank is themain transactional banker for the Australian Government. Like other financial institutions, we 4 / 5BIS Central Banker's Speeches
need to keep investing in technology so that we can provide a high level of service to ourcustomers. As part of this work, we are developing systems so that the government can use theNew Payments Platform to make, and receive, some of its payments.So it is a busy time at the Reserve Bank.Further details on these and other projects that we are working on will be available in the Bank’sannual report, which will be tabled in parliament and released mid next month.Thank you. My colleagues and I are here to answer your questions. 5 / 5BIS Central Banker's Speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Thomas Jordan: Kenneth S Rogoff – monetary policy research Text of the inaugural Karl Brunner Distinguished Lecture Series by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, Zurich, 22 September 2016. *      *      * For further information on the Karl Brunner Distinguished Lecture Series, see www.snb.ch. Ladies and gentlemen, I am very pleased to welcome you to the inaugural lecture in the Karl Brunner Distinguished Lecture Series. The Swiss National Bank has established this annual lecture series to honour academics whose research is of particular relevance for central banking. Our aim is to give prominent academics a platform to share their monetary policy research with a wider audience. In this way, we contribute to the public debate on monetary policy and central bank mandates. For our monetary policy to be effective, it is important that the general public understands the SNB’s mandate, our thinking and our concrete policy measures. The quality of monetary policy depends crucially on the quality of the underlying analysis. We hope that the presentation of new research findings from leading academics in this lecture series will also have a positive impact on research at central banks. The lecture series is dedicated to the renowned Swiss economist Karl Brunner, who was born in Zurich 100 years ago. Karl Brunner shaped Swiss monetary policy following the collapse of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates, when the Swiss franc was floated. Brunner advocated monetarism, in particular the idea of ensuring price stability by controlling the money supply. The SNB took up this idea and used money growth as an intermediate target, combined with clear communication of its monetary policy strategy. Karl Brunner was not only a keen proponent of incorporating economic theory into central banking practice. He also encouraged central banks to conduct their own research and to build up their capacity regarding economic analysis. We are deeply indebted to Karl Brunner for the positive impact he has had on our understanding of monetary policy issues. The first academic being honoured by the SNB in the Karl Brunner Distinguished Lecture Series is Kenneth S. Rogoff. It falls to him to give the inaugural lecture. Ken Rogoff has made a name for himself through groundbreaking academic publications relevant for central banking. He also has an impressive track record as regards practical application. This he has demonstrated to great effect, for instance, during his time as chief economist at the IMF and in his commentaries on current economic policy questions. The qualities that mark out a good practitioner are not necessarily the same as those that make a good academic. Finding them in combination is very rare. But it is something that Ken Rogoff shares with Karl Brunner – neither of them having lived in an ivory tower. Like Karl Brunner, Ken Rogoff began his career as an economist at a central bank, in his case the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. He then followed an academic path, just as Karl Brunner did. The early experience gained at a central bank is probably one reason why Ken Rogoff’s research is always relevant for economic policy. After leaving the Fed, he held academic tenures at universities such as Wisconsin, Berkeley, Princeton and Harvard. Between 2001 and 2003, he was, as I’ve already mentioned, chief economist at the IMF, before returning to Harvard. Students of economics know Ken Rogoff because of his textbook Foundations of International Macroeconomics, which he wrote together with Maurice Obstfeld. At the heart of the book is a micro-based macro model for open economies. This model lends itself, for instance, to the analysis of international capital markets, exchange rates and the 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  international transmission of monetary policy. Most of the SNB’s economists are well acquainted with this book from their studies. But it is not only through teaching that Ken Rogoff has influenced monetary policy: his research is often also directly relevant for central banks. One of his first papers examined the short-term forecastability of exchange rates. Much time and energy has gone into such forecasts. Ken Rogoff and Richard Meese were the first to show that, in the short term, exchange rates appear to follow random walks: they stagger about like a drunkard. Over the long term, however, fundamentals dictate the level of exchange rates. Today, this is an accepted result in economics. Another important subject of Ken Rogoff’s research is monetary policy credibility and central bank independence. In a seminal paper, he showed that welfare gains are realised if central bankers are more inflation-averse than the rest of society. Central bankers should attach less weight to business cycle conditions than politicians, who, with one eye on the next election, are tempted to push unemployment down below its natural level. One conclusion is that, for the good of society, central banks need to be independent from politics; and indeed, central bank independence is nowadays the norm around the globe. Ken Rogoff has also addressed the topic of sovereign debt on a number of occasions. One question on which he has focused is the influence of political election cycles on a country’s budget deficit. Together with Anne Sibert, he has investigated the incentives that lead politicians to expand government budgets in the run-up to an election. Finally, let me mention Ken Rogoff’s book This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, which he wrote with Carmen Reinhart. The book analyses data from financial crises in 70 countries over an 800-year time span. With perfect timing, it was published in 2009. The authors show that financial crises often follow the same pattern. First, there is a phase of exaggerated faith in the future, followed by macroeconomic disruptions after the onset of the crisis. This book is already now a classic of economic literature. As you can see, the areas Ken Rogoff focuses on are exciting, relevant and topical. This is why the Swiss National Bank has chosen Ken Rogoff to give the inaugural Karl Brunner Distinguished Lecture, and – on behalf of the Governing Board – I would like to congratulate him warmly. The subject of his lecture is “Rethinking central bank design” – a topic that fits perfectly with the basic aim of this event, which is to bring monetary policy to a wider audience. And so, ladies and gentlemen, it only remains for me to wish you an insightful and enjoyable lecture. Please join me in welcoming Ken Rogoff with a round of applause. Ken, the floor is yours. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Barry Whiteside: Recent developments in the Fijian stock market Keynote address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the South Pacific Stock Exchange Listing Forum, Suva, 22 September 2016. *      *      * Salutations Dr Nur Bano Ali, Chair of the Board of Directors of the South Pacific Stock Exchange Latileta Qoro, Chief Executive Officer Distinguished Forum Participants Ladies and Gentlemen Bula vinaka and good morning to you all! It is certainly a pleasure to be with you for the opening of today’s Listing Forum. Introductory remarks It was just a year ago that the Reserve Bank first partnered with the South Pacific Stock Exchange in establishing this Forum, which now complements other awareness programs as part of our overall Capital Markets Development initiatives. Thank you, Lati, and your team, for continuing this program. The need to raise awareness on the benefits of listing is still significant and all businesses in Fiji that require finance should know that the stock market is definitely another avenue of raising further capital towards your growth plans. At the outset, I would like to acknowledge the participants for taking time out to attend this Forum. The theme of today’s forum, “Going Public – Unlocking the Value of Your Company” – is an apt message that will resonate throughout today’s sessions. A key objective of this Forum is to encourage dialogue and familiarity between companies potentially looking to list, the key decision makers, and the regulators. After today, we hope you will be better informed on how to prepare your company to take the final step to what is usually referred to as “going public” or “listing”. Recent developments in the stock market Ladies and gentlemen, the Fijian capital market has made progress in its development over the last two decades, but I have got to say that it has not all been smooth sailing. At times we have struggled to meet the proposed targets, especially to grow the number of listed companies. However, with the introduction of the first Capital Markets Development Authority Act in 1996, the market has continued to evolve. That legislation enabled both the legal and institutional infrastructure of our capital markets to be established. Market players such as investment advisors, the stock exchange and stock brokers began to be formally instituted. The framework on oversight and protection for investors is also now well in place. Looking at a few key indicators, the number of listed companies has grown from 9 to 18, with 19 securities in total, since the mid-1990s. The value of the stock, or market capitalisation, grew over this same period from $140 million to just under $1.27 billion. In addition, on a positive note we see interest and an influx of new investors on the stock market. However, whilst progress has been made in the industry, we are of the view that there is still much more capacity for growth. The market is well below potential and it is very pleasing to see that work is underway to address this. The Capital Markets Development Taskforce, which I chair, was set up to coordinate the development and address challenges in the Fiji 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  capital market. One of the key areas in our 2025 Masterplan is the continued development of the stock market. Ladies and gentlemen, it is my view that the potential impact that stock markets can have on economic development remains largely untapped in Fiji. Today’s Forum is about how we can grow and make our stock market a more active part of our financial system as well as, of course, discussing how it can help raise the capital finance that you need to grow your own companies. Listing is a critical component to that overall goal. This morning we will hear from some of the companies on our Exchange and the reasons behind their motivation to list. This will set the background for an engaging day of fruitful discussions. I urge you to fully participate as this is your chance to get first-hand knowledge and experiences from some of our key market players. Please ask questions when you get the opportunity. You will also learn how brokers and capital market advisors can play key roles in helping provide information and guidance to enable potential listing companies to smoothly transition from a private to a listed company. As regulators, we can also assist by reviewing our own processes and removing unnecessary hindrances or barriers when it comes to listing. Benefits of listing on SPSE Ladies and gentlemen, the benefits of listing on the South Pacific Stock Exchange have been complemented over the years with a number of Government incentives offered to listed companies. We are indeed grateful for the Government’s commitment to help grow and support the overall vision of having a reputable, sound, and vibrant capital market in Fiji. Some incentives currently in place include: a corporate tax rate of just 10 percent; tax exemption on dividends received by shareholders; no capital gains tax; and a 150 percent tax deduction for all listing-related costs. Over the years we have known a number of companies in Fiji, while showing some initial interest in listing, have, in the end, been reluctant to do so. It was thought that possible reasons for this reluctance can be attributed, among other things, to: lack of awareness or incomplete information; too much work involved in meeting the requirements; the fear of loss of control of their company; and necessary disclosure requirements. So the key question is why should a company list? Listing is the building block to key potential advantages, such as elevating the market value of your company or business through increased transparency, strengthened corporate discipline, corporate governance and compliance to the rules and regulations. Experience shows that companies become more efficient through greater public scrutiny and it actually benefits the business in the long term. An obvious advantage is access to Capital and the ability to raise long term finance which ensures more capital to be used for expansion, as opposed to a debt financing situation that a company would normally find itself in. Apart from the preferential tax benefits for listed companies I highlighted earlier, there is also an increasing pool of investors in Fiji who are not just looking to put their money into banks (where, incidentally, deposit rates remain relatively low) but also as Fiji grows its status as a regional hub, this pool will likely include more and more foreign investors. One additional advantage is related to prestige and branding for the listed company. Clearly companies on the stock exchange gain a higher profile and they should capitalise on this. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Coupled with these advantages to listing, there are extensive literature and empirical studies that illustrate a positive correlation between financial intermediation in the stock markets and increased GDP. When there is a liquid stock market, it promotes investments and allows investors to acquire and sell shares with ease and in a cost effective manner. In the long run, and in the process of generating more activity, this leads to increased savings and investments, laying the foundations for economic growth and development. Ladies and gentlemen, at this point I would also like to highlight that there is a systematic process to listing, and acquainting yourselves with that process is critical to ensuring a successful listing. Due diligence is one of the most critical steps in the journey towards listing. Getting that first step right would set the foundation to going public. A decision to list should be taken only after a careful assessment of your company’s future plans and the needs and interests of the shareholders. Leadership plays an integral role in listing a company and taking the company to a whole new level. While all these benefits may appear to be theoretical, let me share with you a local success story that demonstrates how these benefits pan out for a successfully managed listed company. In 2001, when RB Patel Ltd listed on the South Pacific Stock Exchange, it had a market value of $31.5 million. At the close of trading at the end of 2006, this had grown to $51 million. By the end of June 2016, the company’s market value was nearly $93 million. Similarly, the successful listing of the Vision Investments Limited on the 29th February this year is testimony to the benefits of going public. On the date of listing, the founding shareholders of the company divested over 29.3 million shares for a total consideration of $46.3 million. The shares were bought by both institutional and retail investors. In just 7 months the price of Vision’s shares has gone from $1.70 to $2.01. Overall, the value of the company has gone from $176.4 million on the date of listing to $208.6 million today. Family run local companies who wish to leave behind a legacy after years of hard work and sacrifice now find that the stock market can provide this. It enables continuity and succession planning for the company. These are only two examples of successful listings on the South Pacific Stock Exchange that have maximised shareholder value. I am sure you will hear other stories of growth and success during the course of today. Concluding remarks Ladies and gentlemen, the stock exchange is an excellent platform for savers looking for investments and companies who need more finance to further expand. Currently, the ability of the stock market to maximise shareholders’ value is neither truly appreciated nor actively pursued in Fiji. However, with time and more fora like this to raise awareness on the benefits of listing, we expect both potential investors and listed companies to converge on the stock market in search of growth. We will continue the collaborative effort with all stakeholders to reach this full potential. Finally, I thank Dr. Ali and Lati for their kind invitation to address you today and wish you well in your deliberations. Vinaka. 
Mario Draghi: European Systemic Risk Board (welcome address)Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank and Chair of the EuropeanSystemic Risk Board, at the first annual conference of the ESRB, Frankfurt am Main, 22September 2016.*   *   *Ladies and gentlemen,It is my pleasure to welcome you to the first annual conference of the European Systemic RiskBoard (ESRB). We have a rich agenda today and tomorrow – one which reflects the value of theESRB as an institution. The Board brings policymakers together. We have 80 memberinstitutions, each expert in their own field. This diversity of expertise is our strength. The ESRB isuniquely placed to take a holistic view of the European financial system – to see the overarchingrisks and challenges that would be more difficult for our members to perceive individually.Sharing knowledge and expertise also permits effective coordination of policy. The ESRB acts asan information hub for the implementation of macroprudential policies for banks, and as a forumto discuss these policies, including their cross-border impact and the possible need toreciprocate them in other jurisdictions.Given its unique Union-wide, cross-sectoral perspective, the ESRB has focused its research onthe challenges posed by the structure of the European financial system, and the risks andopportunities arising from ongoing changes to that structure. In that context, let me highlight twothemes: the extent of overbanking in Europe and the growth of the non-bank sector.Overbanking in EuropeTwo years ago, the ESRB’s Advisory Scientific Committee (ASC) published a widely cited reportentitled “Is Europe overbanked?”. It pointed out that, over the preceding two decades, thebanking sector had outgrown capital markets. In the late 1990s, the ratio of total bank assets toequity and private bond market capitalisation in Europe was below two. By 2008, this ratio hadrisen to four. By contrast, the comparable ratio in the US remained below one over this period,and that of Japan remained below two.Banks play a vital role in financing small and medium sized enterprises, which are a key part ofthe European economy. This lending must continue to flow to productive projects if Europe is toprosper. But bank lending has a tendency to be procyclical: growing too quickly when theeconomy expands, and shrinking sharply when it contracts. As a result, in the aftermath of afinancial crisis economic growth in countries with bank-based systems lags behind that ofcountries with more balanced financial systems.The clear policy message is that it is better to finance the real economy through severalchannels rather than to rely on just one. Capital markets in particular can act as a useful “sparetyre”. That is why the ESRB fully supports the capital markets union, which aims to removebarriers to the development of capital markets.Removing these barriers will foster changes in the structure of the financial system in Europe. Infact, capital markets and other non-bank sources of external finance have been growing relativeto banks. This growth should improve firms’ access to funding, and ensure that any losses aredispersed more widely.Low bank profitabilityThe overbanking in Europe, highlighted in the ASC’s report, is also a factor in the currently low12345 1 / 4BIS Central Banker's Speeches
level of bank profitability. A number of reasons have been mooted as the causes of this lowprofitability, including low interest rates. Long-term real interest rates have been falling in themajor advanced economies for two decades. Technological change, demographics, incomeinequality and safe asset scarcity are just a few of the factors exerting downward pressure onlong-term real rates. Accommodative monetary policy by the European Central Bank and othermajor central banks, acting in accordance with their price stability mandates, has alsocontributed to low interest rates.Low interest rates tend to squeeze net interest margins owing to downward rigidity in banks’deposit rates. But overbanking is also a factor in the current low level of bank profitability. Over-capacity in some national banking sectors, and the ensuing intensity of competition, exacerbatesthis squeeze on margins. Such over-capacity also means the sector does not operate at theefficient frontier, which is one reason why cost-to-income ratios remain high in some countries.At the same time, banks benefit from revaluations in their fixed income portfolios. Moreover,profitability is boosted by a greater flow of lending and lower loan loss provisions than would haveoccurred in the absence of accommodative monetary policy. Analysis by the ECB suggests thatthese effects tend to outweigh the impact on net interest income over the short term, but thepicture varies depending on banks’ business models. In the broader context of generalised over-capacity and technological innovation, some banks will need to review their business models tobolster profitability.Other financial institutions also face challenges to their business models in this environment. Inparticular, institutions providing longer-term return guarantees – notably guaranteed-return lifeinsurers – face a future of weak profitability unless they adapt their business models to achanging world. Macroprudential policy can help to boost the collective resilience of theseinstitutions and enhance recovery and resolution frameworks.Systemic risks beyond bankingLet me now turn to the ESRB’s focus on systemic risks beyond banking. As financialintermediation continues to shift from banks to non-banks, we need to adapt our policyframework. We need to identify migrating risks and develop tools to mitigate them. With this in mind, the ESRB published its first annual EU Shadow Banking Monitor in July. Thereport identifies a number of areas that require close monitoring, including rising liquiditymismatches, especially among some bond funds. One measure of liquidity mismatch for open-ended funds is the share of non-liquid assets in total assets, which was 38% for bond funds inthe fourth quarter of 2015, compared with 26% six years earlier. In this context, the ESRB isfurther analysing systemic risks posed by liquidity mismatch and leverage in investment funds.Moreover, the report identifies considerable interconnectedness between banks and shadowbanks, particularly money market funds (MMFs). Approximately two-thirds of MMFs’ total assetsare related to banks, mainly in the form of debt securities. This interconnectedness was a keyconsideration underpinning the ESRB’s recommendation that MMFs should have a fluctuatingnet asset value, rather than promising a constant one, and that they should be subject toenhanced disclosure and liquidity requirements.Macroprudential policy beyond bankingMore generally, the ESRB is analysing connections across different sectors and geographies ofthe financial system. This cross-cutting analysis informs the development and calibration ofmacroprudential policy beyond banking. In this way, targeted research enhances the quality ofpolicymaking and thereby improves the resilience of the financial system.6789101112 2 / 4BIS Central Banker's Speeches
The ESRB believes that the smooth functioning and systemic resilience of derivatives marketscan be improved by requiring standardised over-the-counter contracts to be centrally cleared andtraded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms, in line with the commitments made by theG20 in 2009. The EU’s first central clearing obligation came into effect in June this year forcertain interest rate derivatives, and will gradually be extended to other transactions. The ESRBis monitoring the effects of this obligation on collateral demand and network structure, and willpublish its findings in due course.The ESRB is also leading research into new macroprudential instruments beyond banking. Onepolicy under consideration is the macroprudential use of margin and haircutrequirements. Setting margins and haircuts in a conservative or countercyclical manner mayhelp to contain the excessive build-up of leverage. In addition to “leaning against the wind”,margin and haircut requirements can also improve financial stability by mitigating illiquidityspirals. This is particularly important given that an imbalance between the demand for andsupply of liquidity could amplify or transmit shocks through the financial system.ConclusionLet me conclude.Since the ESRB’s foundation, Europe has strengthened its regulatory, supervisory, and crisismanagement frameworks. The ESRB has contributed to building a rich set of macroprudentialpolicy tools for banks, and continues to coordinate the calibration of those policies. TheEuropean financial system has thus become more resilient, with greater loss-absorbingcapacity.The financial system is also adaptive. Its adaptability is a strength, helping it to meet thechallenges of the current environment. But it also means that policymakers must remain vigilant.The need for vigilance is why the ESRB has always warned against policy inaction bias.Macroprudential policy is still in its formative years, and policymakers are understandablycautious about deploying novel instruments. But when we see systemic risks, we should act.Greater risk arises from inaction.So as you listen to the presentations at this conference, think about the implications formacroprudential policy in a changing world. Is the macroprudential policy stance appropriate?Are the tools at our disposal effective? Your thoughts and comments will reflect the unique value-added of the ESRB: to bring policymakers together to exchange expertise and coordinate policyaction, with the common aim of reducing the risk of financial crisis.On that note, I am pleased to open this first annual conference of the European Systemic RiskBoard.Pagano, M., S. Langfield, V. Acharya, A. Boot, M. Brunnermeier, C. Buch, M. Hellwig, A. Sapir, I. van den Burg(2014), “Is Europe overbanked?” ESRB Advisory Scientific Committee Report no.4.Becker, B. and V. Ivashina (2014), “Cyclicality of credit supply: firm level evidence”, Journal of MonetaryEconomics, 62: 76–93.Langfield, S. and M. Pagano (2016), “Bank bias in Europe: Effects on systemic risk and growth”, EconomicPolicy, 31(85): 51–106.Levine, R., C. Lin and W. Xie (2016), “Spare tire? Stock markets, banking crises, and economic recoveries”,Journal of Financial Economics, 120(1): 81–101.European Central Bank (2015), “Report on financial structures”, October.Summers, L., “US economic prospects: Secular stagnation, hysteresis, and the zero lower bound”, Business13141516123456 3 / 4BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Economics, 49(2).For an analysis of the sensitivity of US banks’ pre-provision income over one year to changes in short-terminterest rates, see M. Gomez, A. Landier, D. Sraer and D. Thesmar (2016), “Banks’ exposure to interest rate riskand the transmission of monetary policy”, ESRB Working Paper no.13.Cœuré, B. (2016), “Assessing the implications of negative interest rates”, speech at the Yale Financial CrisisForum, Yale School of Management, July.These challenges are set out in more detail in an ESRB report on the macroprudential issues arising from lowinterest rates and structural change in the EU financial system.European Systemic Risk Board (2016), “Macroprudential policy beyond banking: an ESRB strategy paper”, July.European Systemic Risk Board (2016), “EU Shadow Banking Monitor”, July. The methodological background tothe ESRB’s EU Shadow Banking Monitor is described in: L. Grillet-Aubert, J. Haquin, C. Jackson, N. Killeen andC. Weistroffer (2016), “Assessing shadow banking – non-bank financial intermediation in Europe”, ESRBOccasional Paper no.10.European Systemic Risk Board (2012), “Recommendation on money market funds”, December. Furtheranalysis of money market funds’ systemic importance is provided in J. Ansidei, E. Bengtsson, D. Frison and G.Ward (2012), “Money market funds in Europe and financial stability”, ESRB Occasional Paper no. 1.Abad, J., I. Aldasoro, C. Aymanns, M. D’Errico, L. Fache Rousová, P. Hoffmann, S. Langfield, M. Neychev, and T.Roukny (2016), “Shedding light on dark markets: First insights from the new EU-wide derivatives dataset”, ESRBOccasional Paper no. 11.European Systemic Risk Board (2015), “Report on the efficiency of margining requirements to limit pro-cyclicalityand the need to define additional intervention capacity in this area”, July.Clerc, L., A. Giovannini, S. Langfield, T. Peltonen, R. Portes, and M. Scheicher (2016), “Indirect contagion: thepolicy problem”, ESRB Occasional Paper no. 9.European Systemic Risk Board (2014), “Flagship report on macroprudential policy in the banking sector”, March;and European Systemic Risk Board (2014), “Handbook on operationalising macroprudential policy in thebanking sector”, March.78910111213141516 4 / 4BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Christopher Kent: After the boomSpeech by Mr Christopher Kent, Assistant Governor (Economic) of the Reserve Bank ofAustralia, at the Bloomberg Breakfast, Sydney, 13 September 2016.*   *   *IntroductionToday I want to talk about some important developments shaping the Australian economy,focusing on the sharp fall in commodity prices over the past few years.In 2012, just after taking on my current role, some colleagues and I were looking at how theAustralian economy had been adjusting to the unprecedented boom in commodity prices. Bythe time I presented that work, prices of Australia’s key commodities had begun to turn down andmining investment had just peaked at a record level.Since then, commodity prices have fallen much further and so Australia’s terms of trade (theprice of our exports relative to imports) have fallen significantly. The fall was more than we, andmost others, had expected. More recently, though, commodity prices have risen. And more thanthree-quarters of the anticipated decline in mining investment is now behind us.The adjustment of the economy to the decline in the terms of trade and the large fall in mininginvestment has been a drawn out process, adversely affecting a range of industries and regions.But growth in the economy overall has been close to trend, and while the unemployment raterose, it reached only a little above 6 per cent in 2015. More recently, inflation has declined.Before talking about the period after the boom, I want to set the scene. First, I’ll briefly review theboom years. Second, I’ll describe what we anticipated four years ago would be likely to happenafter the boom.The Boom YearsThe rapid industrialisation and urbanisation of the Chinese economy underpinned the strong risein commodity prices from around the mid 2000s. As global demand for commodities began tooutstrip supply, the prices of Australia’s key commodity exports rose dramatically.Australia’s terms of trade rose by 85 per cent from the average of the early 2000s to the peak inlate 2011 (Graph 1). That implied a significant boost to the real purchasing power of domesticproduction. Some of those gains were retained by foreign owners of mining assets, but a shareof the gains stayed at home in the form of higher wages, tax revenues and profits for Australianowners of mines and of firms supporting mining activity.123 1 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
The rise in Australia’s terms of trade was associated with a large appreciation of the nominalexchange rate (see Table 1 in the Appendix). While this lowered the returns to Australiancommodity exporters (and Australian exporters more broadly), it allowed real income gains toflow to the rest of the economy via the associated decline in the prices of imports.The resource sector here and abroad responded to the commodity price boom by expandingproductive capacity. This occurred gradually, reflecting both the unforeseen magnitude of theboom, its unexpected persistence, and the time required to plan for, approve and then completelarge resource projects. In mid 2012, investment in the Australian resource sector had peaked atjust under 8 per cent of GDP, compared with its average of around 2 per cent prior to the boom.In the lead-up to that investment peak, growth in output, employment and wages in the resourcesector (broadly defined to include those industries servicing it) was relatively strong. The boom inthose industries led to strong economic conditions in the resource-rich states of WesternAustralia and Queensland.The significant appreciation of the exchange rate provided a signal for labour and capital to beredistributed from the ‘other tradable’ sector towards the resource sector. As a result, the growthin investment, output, employment and wages was weak in the ‘other tradable’ sector.The large nominal exchange rate appreciation also helped to contain inflationary pressures in anenvironment of strong growth in domestic demand and a decline in the unemployment rate torelatively low levels. Notwithstanding that assistance, overall inflation picked up to be a little above4 2 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
its inflation-targeting average. Non-tradable inflation was elevated during the boom years andgrowth in nominal unit labour costs was relatively strong for most of this period. In response tothese inflationary pressures, the Reserve Bank raised the cash rate to be above its (inflation-targeting) average.After the Boom – What We Had Thought Might HappenIn our previous analysis, we noted that during the commodity price boom the economy hadbehaved, in many respects, as theory suggested. We also discussed how the economy mightadjust as the terms of trade declined.It was clear that mining investment would fall, but at the same time, resource exports wouldincrease as additional productive capacity came on line. However, overall demand for labour inthe mining sector (and in mining-related activity) would decline because the investment phase inthat sector is relatively more labour intensive than the production phase.With the global supply of commodities catching up to global demand, we thought that commodityprices and, therefore, Australia’s terms of trade would decline (but remain higher than their pre-boom levels). That would normally be associated with a depreciation of the Australian dollar.We anticipated that demand in the non-mining sectors would pick up and that labour and capitalwould be drawn back to that part of the economy. Any depreciation of the nominal exchange ratewould facilitate that transition by improving the competitiveness of the ‘other tradable’ sector. Themovement of labour would also be facilitated by some decline in wage growth, as the labourshed by companies that had undertaken the mining investment looked to move back into the non-mining sectors. In other words, we thought that the requisite real exchange rate depreciationwould occur largely via the nominal exchange rate, but might also be assisted by a decline indomestic cost pressures.These developments were expected, at least in part, to reverse some of the effects on consumerprice inflation seen during the investment phase of the boom. In particular, a gradual depreciationof the exchange rate would put upward pressure on tradable inflation for a time, while a reductionin wage growth and domestic costs more generally would put downward pressure on non-tradable inflation. These opposing effects could potentially result in little net change to overallinflation, but given that inflation had been above average during the boom, it would not besurprising to see inflation below average after the boom.But having made some predictions about the direction of some key variables, we also noted theconsiderable degree of uncertainty, including that related to the global economic outlook.After the Boom – What Actually Happened?Many of our predictions have been borne out. Mining investment declined significantly andresource exports grew strongly. Mining investment has further to fall, although the largest drag onGDP growth from that source is likely to have come and gone over the financial year just passed.The decline in mining investment from 2012 led to lower growth in overall mining activity (mininginvestment plus resource exports; Graph 2). More recently, growth of mining activity has pickedup. Mining activity is set to continue to grow for a time as the drag from mining investment wanesand production of liquefied natural gas continues to ramp up.45 3 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
 As had been anticipated, mining-related employment has contracted and wage growth in thoseindustries has declined to be noticeably below that of other sectors.In the non-mining sector, growth in activity and employment (more recently) have picked up. Thereduction in interest rates over the past few years has been assisting in rebalancing activitytowards the non-mining economy, which is currently growing at around its long-run average rate(Graph 3). The depreciation of the nominal exchange rate since early 2013 has also supportedactivity in the ‘other tradable’ sector. Net service exports have made a noticeable contribution toGDP growth over the past few years, with tourism, education and business service exports allexpanding.6 4 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Overall, inflation has declined, driven by lower inflation of non-tradable items and consistent witha significant decline in the growth of labour costs. At the same time, inflation of tradable itemshas increased following the exchange rate depreciation.In short, the patterns of behaviour of these key macroeconomic variables have been quiteconsistent with what we had initially thought might happen. However, the magnitudes and speedof some of the adjustments have surprised us. In part, this reflects external developments, mostnotably:the larger-than-expected decline in commodity prices and the terms of trade; andthe extent and persistence of low growth and low inflation in much of the world and theassociated easy monetary policies of the major central banks.Despite these challenges, the Australian economy has displayed a degree of flexibility that hashelped the process of adjustment.Commodity Prices and the Terms of TradeAustralia’s terms of trade declined by more than had been expected a few years ago (Graph 4).Around the time of our previous analysis, we were forecasting a further decline in the terms oftrade over the coming years. But then from 2012 to 2015, we repeatedly revised down ourforecasts. 5 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
The larger-than-expected decline in Australia’s terms of trade reflected both demand- andsupply-side factors. Growth in the demand for commodities from Asia, and China in particular,declined noticeably. In large part, this was in response to excess capacity in manufacturing aswell as a decline in real estate investment in China. Among other things, this has seen thegrowth in global steel production stall, and hence lower growth in the demand for iron ore andcoking coal.On the supply side, commodity producers have been able to reduce their costs by more thaninitially thought possible, and some higher-cost suppliers sustained their production levels forlonger than anticipated.The larger-than-expected decline in the terms of trade has weighed on growth in economicactivity, employment, profits, wages and fiscal revenues, as well as on inflation. The effect hasbeen largest in the mining sector and the key mining states, but it has been evident across theeconomy more broadly.The Exchange RateThe depreciation of the Australian dollar over recent years has improved Australia’scompetiveness and thereby supported production in the tradable sector. However, thedepreciation didn’t start in earnest until 18 months after the terms of trade had peaked. And whileit is hard to be precise, our modelling suggests that the exchange rate (the real trade weighted7 6 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
index, or real TWI) has not depreciated by quite as much as might have been expected inresponse to the actual decline in the terms of trade (and the reductions in domestic interestrates) (Graph 5). At least in part, this reflects lower-than-expected global growth and inflation,which has led to a prolonged period of very low interest rates and unconventional monetarypolicies in the major economies.Real GDPAustralia’s real GDP did not increase by quite as much as we had expected back in late 2012.The GDP forecast in the August 2012 Statement on Monetary Policy was a bit over 1 percentagepoint stronger than what came to pass over the year to March 2013 (Graph 6). We subsequentlyrevised down our forecasts. In the intervening years growth was sometimes a little above ourforecasts, sometimes below. GDP growth more recently has been a bit stronger than we’dexpected a year ago.8 7 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Much of the early forecast miss for GDP growth owed to mining investment. In late 2012, we hadforecast that mining investment would be likely to rise a little further and stay elevated for a time(Graph 7). It soon became apparent, however, that mining companies had revised their earlierplans in response to lower-than-expected commodity prices. We revised down our forecastsaccordingly. Since 2013, our liaison efforts have been instrumental in generating quite accurateforecasts for mining investment. The forecasts for resource exports have also been reasonablyaccurate over recent years. 8 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Since 2012, growth in real non-mining activity has picked up gradually and has generally been alittle stronger than was expected, supported by lower interest rates and the depreciation of theexchange rate.Nominal GDPThe weaker than earlier expected outcome for real GDP growth was not particularly large incomparison with the usual range of forecast uncertainty, and as I noted, real GDP growth overthe past year has actually been a bit stronger than earlier anticipated. In contrast, the larger-than-expected decline in the terms of trade over the past few years has meant that nominal outcomeshave been significantly weaker than earlier forecast. From 2013 to 2015, nominal GDP increasedby around 8 per cent, which was half the initial forecast of 17 per cent. That has had important9 9 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
implications for growth in wages, costs and prices.Labour and Labour CostsGiven that real GDP growth was initially a bit weaker than expected, it’s not surprising thatemployment growth was less than forecast and the unemployment rate higher than expected(Graph 8). More recently, however, the unemployment rate has declined by a bit more than hadbeen anticipated.Shortly after the fall in the terms of trade, wage growth declined significantly across everyindustry and all states. It is currently lowest in Western Australia and Queensland, and inindustries exposed to the end of the mining investment boom (Graph 9). Some decline in wagegrowth in response to the decline in mining investment and the terms of trade was to beexpected, but the decline in wage growth has been greater than implied by historical relationshipswith the unemployment rate. That could reflect several factors:Workers who had been engaged in mining-related activities moved to lower paid jobsoutside the resource sector. This compositional effect contributed to lower growth inaverage earnings per hour than in the wage price index (at least until very recently).Compared with earlier periods of high unemployment rates (e.g. in the 1980s and 1990s),increased labour market flexibility may have provided firms with greater scope to adjustwages in response to declines in the growth of their nominal revenues (which, in turn,followed from the fall in the terms of trade).101112 10 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Workers may be less certain of their employment prospects, possibly because of risingcompetitive pressures in a more globalised world, leading them to be more willing to acceptlower wage outcomes in exchange for more job security.The decline in inflation and inflation expectations over recent years may also have influencedwage negotiations.It is important to note that low growth in labour costs has, in many respects, helped the economyadjust to the lower terms of trade. In addition to the nominal exchange rate depreciation, lowgrowth in labour costs is helping to improve Australia’s international competitiveness and hasencouraged more employment growth than would otherwise have occurred. More recently, wagegrowth has shown signs of stabilisation, with growth in the private sector wage price indexunchanged for the past six quarters, while a broader measure of wage pressures, the growth inaverage earnings per hour, has picked up of late.Other Costs and MarginsSpare capacity in a range of product markets also led to downward pressure on other costs andmargins along the supply chain. This sort of pressure is particularly evident in low inflation of finalretail prices for items sold in supermarkets and for many consumer durable goods.13 11 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
InflationLower growth in labour and other costs, as well as lower margins, have contributed to lower-than-expected outcomes for inflation of both non-tradable and tradable items. Compared withearlier forecasts for 2013–2015, inflation in underlying terms has only been a little belowexpectations (7.1 per cent versus 7.8 per cent cumulated over that period). However, inflationhas also been lower than expected more recently; our forecasts for 2016 have been reviseddown from a bit above 2 per cent to about 1½ per cent between February and August of thisyear.Interest RatesThe initial misses on GDP and unemployment, and more recently on wage growth and inflation,owed significantly to the effects of the larger-than-expected decline in the terms of trade on themining sector and the economy more broadly.In response to the evolving outlook, the Reserve Bank Board has reduced the cash rate to lowlevels to improve the prospects for sustainable growth in the economy, with inflation rising to beconsistent with the medium-term target.The low level of interest rates and the depreciation of the exchange rate have underpinned a risein the growth of non-mining activity, which is currently running around its long-run average.Western Australia and Queensland have been most directly affected by the fall in commodityprices and mining investment, and so economic conditions there are still relatively weak(Graph 10). However, New South Wales and Victoria have been less affected by thosepressures and so low interest rates and the lower exchange rate have led to an improvement ineconomic conditions in those states. 12 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
ConclusionThe pattern of adjustment of the Australian economy to the decline in the terms of trade andmining investment is generally consistent with what we had anticipated. However, the decline inthe terms of trade was larger than expected. In response, there has been significant adjustmentin a range of market ‘prices’ – including wages and the nominal exchange rate, although theexchange rate has depreciated a little less than otherwise given global developments. Monetarypolicy has also responded, with interest rates reduced to low levels. So while mining investmentand nominal GDP growth have both been weaker than the forecasts of a few years ago and,more recently, inflation has been a bit weaker than expected, growth in the non-mining economyhas picked up and been a bit better than earlier anticipated. Indeed, of late, real GDP growth hasbeen a bit stronger and the unemployment rate a little lower than earlier forecast.In many respects, the adjustment to the decline in mining investment and the terms of trade hasproceeded relatively smoothly. The Australian economy has performed well compared to otheradvanced economies (Graph 11). Moreover, the drag on growth from declining mininginvestment is now waning and the terms of trade are forecast to remain around their currentlevels. 13 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Of course our forecasts are subject to the usual range of uncertainty. But, given that commodityprices have increased substantially over the course of this year, some stability in the terms oftrade from here on seems more plausible than it has for some time. Developments in China arelikely to continue to have an important influence on commodity prices, given China’s role as botha major producer and consumer of many commodities. For this reason the outlook for theChinese economy is a key source of uncertainty for the Australian economy.If commodity prices were to stabilise around current levels, that would be a marked change fromrecent years. Also, the end of the fall in mining investment is coming into view. The abatement ofthose two substantial headwinds suggests that there is a reasonable prospect of sustaininggrowth in economic activity, which would support a further gradual decline in the unemploymentrate. There is also a good prospect that the growth in wages and the rate of inflation will graduallylift over the period ahead. That’s what’s implied by our central forecasts.Thank you. I’d be happy to take a few questions. 14 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Appendix 15 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
This was published in early 2013. See Plumb M, C Kent and J Bishop (2013), ‘Implications for the AustralianEconomy of Strong Growth in Asia’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2013–03.Speech delivered to the joint IMF/Treasury/RBA conference on ‘Structural Change and the Rise of Asia’,Canberra, 2012. For other work done on this topic by RBA staff, see: Jääskelä J and P Smith (2013), ‘Terms ofTrade Shocks: What Are They and What Do They Do?’, Economic Record 89, pp 145–159; Downes P, KHanslow and P Tulip (2014), ‘The Effect of the Mining Boom on the Australian Economy’, RBA ResearchDiscussion Paper No 2014–08; Kulish M and D Rees (2015), ‘Unprecedented Changes in the Terms of Trade’,RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2015–11; and Manalo, J, D Perera and D Rees (2015), ‘Exchange RateMovements and the Australian Economy’, Economic Modelling (47), pp 53–62.The economic adjustment this time around stands in contrast to previous terms of trade booms in Australia,which – despite being smaller than the recent boom – tended to end in sharp contractions in economic activityand large increases in unemployment. See: Battellino R (2010), ‘Mining Booms and the Australian Economy’,RBA Bulletin, March, pp 63–69; and Atkin T, M Caputo, T Robinson and H Wang (2014), ‘MacroeconomicConsequences of Terms of Trade Episodes, Past and Present’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2014–01.Inflation peaked at 5 per cent in late 2008, but declined as economic conditions moderated during the globalfinancial crisis. Growth in nominal unit labour costs also eased during the financial crisis, but rebounded to apeak of around 7 per cent in year-ended terms in early 2011.Even so, labour demand in the resource sector would still remain somewhat higher than it was prior to theterms of trade boom, given the operational needs associated with producing more output.Nevertheless, as anticipated, employment in the resource sector remains higher than pre-boom levels asproduction of resource commodities has increased.For a discussion of the costs of producing iron ore, see:<www.rba.gov.au/publications/smp/boxes/2015/feb/a.pdf>. The decline in Australian producers’ costs wouldhave supported their profitability, but the decline in the costs of offshore producers would have allowed them tokeep producing more than otherwise, and this extra supply would have weighed on commodity prices and,hence, the profits of Australian resource producers.See Hambur J, L Cockerell, C Potter, P Smith and M Wright (2015), ‘Modelling the Australian Dollar’, RBAResearch Discussion Paper 2015–12.The improved growth in non-mining activity has occurred despite non-mining business investment remainingsubdued. Weakness in non-mining business investment has been most evident in Western Australia and, to alesser extent, Queensland, where the decline in mining investment and commodity prices have contributed toweak conditions in those states more broadly. More recently, non-mining investment appears to have increasedin New South Wales and Victoria, where economic conditions have been improving.There has also been some decline in population growth, most notably in Western Australia.See Jacobs D and A Rush (2015), ‘Why Is Wage Growth So Low?’, RBA Bulletin, June, pp 9–18.For a discussion of the differences between these measures, see:<www.rba.gov.au/publications/smp/2016/aug/price-and-wage-developments.html>.See Ballantyne A and S Langcake (2016), ‘Why Has Retail Inflation Been So Low?’, RBA Bulletin, June, pp 9–17.12345678910111213 16 / 16BIS Central Banker's Speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  David Rule: Managing risk in a soft market Speech by Mr David Rule, Executive Director of Insurance Supervision of the Bank of England, at the General Insurance Research Organisation conference, Dublin, 21 September 2016. *      *      * Good morning. This is my first speech as the Bank’s Executive Director for Insurance Supervision. Since I took on this role in July, I have been trying to meet with as many chief executives and chairmen of UK insurers as possible. I have been struck by the variety of business models and strategies but one theme has dominated discussions of the risks facing insurers: the current low rate environment. For life insurers, this can create direct solvency pressures to the extent that they are not fully matched against the increasing value of their future liabilities as discount rates fall. That can also be an issue for some general insurers with long tail liabilities. More generally, low investment returns mean earnings on the “float” can no longer cushion a poor underwriting performance. The margin for error in the running of general insurance firms has reduced – firms have to underwrite profitably. On the positive side, this emphasises the importance of underwriting discipline. The soft market But of course the current soft market makes profitable underwriting more difficult to achieve. I am going to focus my remarks today on the wholesale London markets. Although I have been told of some tentative signs of premium rates stabilising recently, they have been falling across most wholesale lines for around a decade now. For example, Guy Carpenter’s Global Property Catastrophe Rate-On-Line Index has reduced by more than a third since its peak in 2006. Our market survey earlier this year found further year-on-year declines (Chart 1). Looking at the possible causes of the current soft market, it is surely in part just another manifestation of the wider low return environment. The most obvious evidence is the inflow of capital to the market from institutional investors. Perhaps to a greater extent than historically, insurance is interconnected with wider capital markets and market forces have driven expected returns more into line with other investment opportunities. These wider pressures may explain a squeeze on profits. But insurers should still be pricing to cover their view of risk. At the beginning of 2016 we carried out a survey that captured views on the rate adequacy of new and renewed business. The results suggested that the estimated rate adequacy of new business is, in most cases, higher than renewed business. Whist this may reflect what many insurers tell us – that they only want to grow in segments that they believe are adequately priced; another interpretation is that some insurers are being overly optimistic on risks for which they have no or limited historical claims data and which previous risk carriers have declined as they no longer believe them to be adequately priced. Despite falling premium rates, general insurer profits in the past few years have been sustained by both benign catastrophe experience and levels of prior year reserve releases that are now the highest for thirty years (Chart 2). Natural catastrophes are a major component of many GI firms’ risk profiles. Catastrophe losses returned to more normal levels by historical standards in the first half of this year. But the low incidence of catastrophic events in recent years may have given support to the idea that this component has in some way diminished, whether due to trends in nature or more effective management of risks by policyholders and insurers. I have also heard speculation that some man-made risks may have decreased: for example, if planes and ships are built better than previously, or if companies are better at managing their risks. Mindful of both the impact and the uncertainty involved in considering this, we would expect firms to seek the 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  best available evidence and to take a prudent and comprehensive view to the assessment of risks. Put simply, we would not expect a handful of recent data points to lead to a marked reduction in a firm’s assessment of its best estimate of liabilities nor its “1 in 200” risk. Turning to reserve releases, our obvious concern is that these should reflect genuine reserve redundancy with the decisions taken by risk managers and actuaries using their best professional judgement and not in any way influenced by a desire to sustain reported profits. For long tail lines, such as casualty, a key assumption in setting reserves is the expectation of future claims inflation. In most cases this assumption is derived implicitly using the recent actual data and trending this forward. Given that the recent past has seen falling inflation in many sectors the obvious question is – is it reasonable to assume that these trends will continue? It does seem plausible that claims inflation has often been lower than expected against the background of the current low inflation environment. But our calculations suggest reserve releases have in some cases got to a point where implied future claims inflation looks very low. In an extreme case, we estimated past claims inflation for the class of business to be 5% per annum, whereas to obtain the particular insurer’s booked reserves would imply a future claims inflation assumption of –2%. If the future trend is in fact in line with past inflation, booked reserves would need to be 25% higher than currently assumed. Insurers that have sought to diversify and grow their business into longer-tail liability insurance classes have critical questions to answer about the future direction of claims inflation. Managing risk in a soft market Speaking to firms about their approach to the market, they often talk about prioritising margins over growth, focusing on more profitable lines of business – for example, where they have established strong market positions or a particular niche, and making more active use of reinsurance. These all seem sensible approaches for an individual firm but, in aggregate, the risk must end up with someone. One indicator of the competitive pressure on insurers to source new business in the wholesale markets is that brokerage commissions have been increasing as a share of gross written premiums despite the common desire to lower costs in line with lower premium rates. Looking forward, the key challenge for insurers is how they preserve or even grow their activities while avoiding the “Winner’s Curse” of under-pricing in order to get the business. The PRA is a not a price-regulator. But we are concerned to see that firms are adequately managing their exposures – that they can identify and quantify the risks being covered, manage and control overall exposures, and estimate likely claims costs under different loss scenarios. Against this background, I make no apology for repeating the points made earlier this year by my colleague Chris Moulder, our Director of General Insurance, in a Dear CEO letter and subsequent speech. First, underwriting: we expect Boards to be relentlessly inquisitive in understanding and challenging the effectiveness of underwriting controls, pricing trends, exposure changes and rate adequacy in order to make informed decisions, and provide meaningful challenge, to the business. Fundamentally, the Board should seek evidence that underwriters are maintaining appropriate discipline. Second, reserving: a robust approach to the setting of reserves and appropriate and adequate oversight of the reserving process is vital. We expect Boards to demonstrate independent challenge of key issues, material uncertainties and significant assumptions in the reserves and the rationale for their choice of booked reserves. Third, reinsurance: we expect Boards to ensure that the economic impact of the reinsurance transaction is appropriately reflected in business plans, capital setting and reserving; and to be alive to the wider risks to which reinsurance placements can give rise. This includes 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  ensuring the total risk and uncertainty over the claims run off has been captured in your risk management system and considered within your ORSA. Fourth, capital: we expect Boards to ensure that firms assessment of risk and capital requirements remain valid in this challenging trading environment. The new System of Governance requirements under Solvency II and the Senior Insurance Managers Regime are timely additions to the insurance regulatory regime, ensuring that clear expectations are being set as to the strength of systems and controls, and that there is clarity as to the roles and responsibilities of senior managers in firms. Possible market-turning events Previous soft phases of the insurance cycle have ended, sometime quite dramatically, with a major loss. Examples include Hurricane Andrew in the early 90s, Asbestos, Pollution and Health losses in the mid-90s and “9/11” in 2001. Whilst it is understandable that some in the industry talk of the need to have naïve capital and capacity cleared out of the market, restricting supply and supporting premium above the technical price level, there is a sense that, this time, things may be different. Many believe that further capital is “waiting in the wings” to invest in the sector in the event that prices rise. Nonetheless, it is sensible to plan on the basis that a significant, market-turning event might occur at some point. Taking this as the starting point, we think there is an opportunity for firms to think through what issues might then arise and to consider what steps can be taken now to plan for these events, not least because we know some firms will be very keen to respond to any improvements in market conditions which might arise after a large loss event. We are publishing today a consultation paper setting out our expectations of firms in planning for these types of extreme insurance loss events; focussing on some of the governance, risk management, capital management and reporting capabilities that we think firms need to consider. The guidance also sets out an indicative template containing the type of information we think we will request from firms following a loss, and also expectations of firms with approved internal models. We note that this is an area where the Industry itself is keen to ensure that it is well prepared and we welcome working with it on this topic. None of us will have a crystal ball to plan perfectly for such an event, and as decision makers we will only be able to make final judgements on how to respond at the time, once we have the facts as best as we can gather them. However, we still think there is more that can be done to think through how firms would go about gathering initial loss information, what information their boards are likely to need to see to inform their response, and some of the practical challenges which might arise for firms. Capital and model drift Given the challenging market conditions I have referred to earlier, and the uncertainties I have just discussed, it is all the more important that firms hold adequate and appropriate capital against the risks they face. As you will also be well aware, your and our work in the run up to January this year included significant work on internal models, and it would be unsurprising if there was not some collective sigh of relief within the industry after January given the work involved to get to that point. But we all know that running an internal model is not just a one-off task, and there is a need for firms to continue to refine the models in the light of experience and as new data becomes available. As regulators, we need to be alive to the risk that when firms select the areas where change is required, and as internal models are updated, there is not some inherent bias towards changes which reduce the firm’s capital requirement, at the expense of areas of the model which might be insufficient. We are publishing today our supervisory statement on changes to internal models, setting out our expectations in respect of firms applying for 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  approval for a major change to their approved internal models or an extension of scope to an approved internal model (e.g. to cover new business units or risks). In May 2016, the PRA consulted on its proposed approach to monitoring “model drift” for firms with an internal model, where model drift is defined as the risk that the capital level generated by an internal model moves gradually over time. Even acting in good faith, business pressures may create the risk that model changes generating lower capital requirements are favoured over time, and therefore that solvency standards might deteriorate. The PRA’s proposed approach includes monitoring the internal model SCR against a number of objective measures such as premium levels, technical provisions, MCR and the standard formula SCR. None are perfect but all are independent of the internal model, and therefore can help provide us with a different view on the evolution of risk exposures and a safeguard against model drift. All risk measures have their limitations. So we plan to use a range of measures alongside other supervisory review process initiatives, such as the analysis of internal model outputs. Conclusion In conclusion, given today’s audience, I want to stress the critical professional role of actuaries in current soft market conditions, where there may be a greater tension between on the one hand underwriting discipline and appropriate reserving and on the other hand business growth and current-year profits. Actuaries are responsible for providing assurance on reserves and opinions on both the underwriting and reinsurance strategies of firms, implying strong engagement with the risk function, as well as independence and objectivity in their assessments. Events like today’s, where actuaries come together to share knowledge, with the aim of raising professional standards, are particularly important and welcome. Chart 1  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Chart 2  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Anita Angelovska-Bezoska: Statistical implications of the new financial landscape Remarks by Ms Anita Angelovska-Bezoska, Vice-Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, at a panel discussion at the 8th IFC Conference “Statistical implications of the new financial landscape”, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, 8–9 September 2016. *      *      * Contributors to the note: Ana Mitreska and Maja Andreevska. Since the burst of the crisis, central banking community has been providing unprecedented monetary stimulus with a view of influencing financial conditions and thus reviving the growth. The measures have gone far beyond the pre-crisis mode of operation. If conducting a monetary policy in the pre-crisis period seemed like steering a ship with rudder being enough powerful to protect against the waves, the waves that emerged in 2007–2008 were too strong and reliance only on the traditional instrument posed a risk of sinking. Thus, when the central banks approached/reached zero-lower bound, they were compelled to start experimenting with new policy tools such as balance sheet policies, forward guidance and in more recent period, even more extremely, with negative policy interest rate. Has this monetary accommodation served the purpose of influencing the financial and economic conditions? While there is ample evidence that the measures have succeeded in influencing financing conditions, so far there is not strong empirical evidence on their impact on output and inflation. In fact, despite the ample liquid and ultra-low interest rates, the output growth remains weak and inflation stubbornly low pointing to a weak monetary transmission mechanism. This new puzzling reality has triggered more profound discussion on the monetary policy frameworks with the academia and policy making community. Are the main traditional monetary policy principles -price stability as a main objective, some form of flexible IT as a most adequate strategy, policy rate as a main instrument- still valid? As crisis clearly demonstrated that price stability is not a guarantee for financial stability and that financial instability can have long lasting effects on output and inflation, the discussions focus on the need to take into account financial stability in the monetary policy frameworks. Thus, the question: Is the so called “flexible IT” enough flexible to deal with the current and future challenges or maybe as some observers have suggested, a thought should be given to the other alternative strategies such as targeting price level or nominal GDP. The discussions even touch upon the question of adding explicit financial stability objective. For example, as Borio (2016) claims ”if mandates (of the central banks) are seen as overly constraining the room for maneuver, revisiting them should not be taboo. After all, mandates are a means to an end.” Concerning the instruments, the current debates focus on whether the unconventional tool kit is temporary, as initially considered, or will become conventional tool supplementing the traditional monetary instrument. This is, in particular, in the context of the ultra-low interest rate environment and still anemic recovery. Some of the instruments (balance sheet policies) have even blurred the clear lines between the fiscal and monetary policy, and challenged the notion of central bank independence. Given the importance of the good statistics on monetary policy decision making, what does this new financial landscape imply for statistics? The crises usually tend to provide an impetus for reshaping of our thinking about the statistical concepts/frameworks of proper policymaking. Thus, the Great Depression shifted the focus to development of national accounts, growth of the euro-dollar markets during 1960 s and 1970s to the development of international banking statistics, and Asian financial crisis shifted the focus to strong linkages between the financial and external stability being conducive to development of data standards initiatives (GDDS, SDDS, and ROSCs). The emergence of the latest crises again 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  put the spotlight on the financial sector, revealing the devastating impact of lax regulation of the financial sector in the more advanced economies on the global economy and once again accentuated the need for tighter surveillance of financial stability. The cross-border linkages, internationalization and integration of the financial markets and institutions were underestimated, and so were their global economic consequences. This time it was the international dimension of the financial system that was emphasized and very importantly, the macro-financial linkages. Both of them do have major implications for the production of statistics and for the regular set of required data, needed for making informative decisions in monetary policy and in the micro and macro prudential area. While the crisis was not a result of a lack of proper data and the quality of statistics in the pre-crisis period was deemed satisfactory, still the crisis brought to the surface some areas that were rather poorly covered by the statistics. Highly globalized world marked by high and rising trade and especially financial interconnectedness among economies, as well as strong interlinkages between different sectors within the economies, in particular financial sector (including non-regulated segment) and non-financial corporations due to strong macro-financial linkages ask for enhanced data sets. Broader data sets will help in better understanding the developments in the economic and financial sector, cross-sectoral and cross-border linkages and subsequently, in adopting timely measures to prevent build-up of imbalances, as well as in dealing more effectively with the unfolding effects of the crisis. This time, international efforts in reexamining the statistical frameworks and data gaps are reflected in G20 Data Gaps initiative. It contains 20 recommendations in the four key segments: build-up of risk in the financial sector, cross-border financial linkages, vulnerability of domestic economies to shocks, and improving communication of official statistics. The initiative has been serving as a guideline for most of the progress in the area of statistics, ever since. Filling in the statistical gaps that has been set as a medium to long-term objective is concentrated along a couple of dimensions: availability of data – especially availability of granular data and data related to unconventional instruments, international comparability, further quality improvements and timeliness of the data. At the current juncture, the need for the data granularity is pertinent for all the aspects of the policymaking, including the monetary policymaking, monetary analysis and the research in this area. The recent crisis did not question the need and usefulness of the traditional aggregate economic and financial statistics (GDP and its components, aggregate credit growth, employment, total external and public debt, budget deficit etc.,), but surely revealed that it is not enough. If we want to increase the effectiveness of monetary policy measures, we should accept the more granular and micro data, as a regular analytical underpinning for the monetary policy decisions nowadays. Of course, the idea is not to act selectively with the monetary policy measures. I still believe that monetary policy tackles the aggregates. It is more about having wider understanding of why the aggregates behave in the manner they do, and more importantly, to have better understanding of the heterogeneous behavior of the different economic agents in the economy. The ultimate outcome of this should be a better understanding of how the monetary policy transmission functions, what the main constraints for more effective transmission are and what can be done to overcome the obstacles. Hence, micro and granular data should supplement the aggregate statistics, allowing us for timely detection and better understanding of “financial innovation, regulatory changes or a behavioral reaction to a changing economic environment”. Also, granular data imply higher flexibility for statisticians in responding to urgent and ad-hoc requests of the policy makers. At this point, I would like to pinpoint several examples that clearly demonstrate the value added of data granularity from policy perspective. How can we explain the phenomenon of slow credit growth despite the massive monetary policy accommodation? Obviously we need to dive into individual/ more granular data to understand the causes of the impaired transmission – is it demand or supply side? In our case, scrutinizing the individual balance sheet pointed to different obstacles for different 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  banks – although in some cases it was the liquidity issue, mostly it was capital constraints in the context of deleveraging, new Basel regulation, as well as relatively high level of NPLs. It raised the question of the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission and factors which hinder it. In this respect, the aggregate data was not informative enough, but micro bank-by-bank data were needed to detect constraints in a more proper manner. The scrutinization of the balance sheets of individual banks revealed that the main obstacles varied for different banks. For some of them the limited capital was the main constraining factor for expansion of their activities. Given that at that point in time the space for increasing the capital through profit retention or injection of additional capital was limited, the banks were not in a position to expand more, without jeopardizing their capital adequacy ratios. In other banks, the quality of the current credit portfolio and the large amount of NPLs were obstacle for providing more credit to the economy. For some of the banks, the sources of financing of the credit activity were limited, acting as drag on their credit activity. Hence, the exploration of the individual bank data indicated that there are various reasons why the monetary measures do not yield the expected results and that different solutions are relevant for different banks. Lending survey has been widely recognized as an important source of relevant data on the credit market. In the midstream of the crisis, in particular, not only central banks, but also some international institutions started to conduct lending surveys to tackle the potential structural rigidities, precluding more rapid credit growth. In the case of Macedonia, we are running lending surveys since 2006. Ever since these alternative “soft” data have been an auxiliary, but at the same time a very important information source allowing us to detect the paths of the demand and supply of credits, the main determinants driving the two, but also the banks’ vision on the future developments. Very often, as policymakers, we go beyond the aggregate results and screen the results of the survey either by observing individual banks data, or data by group of banks (large, medium, small), as their behavior might differ significantly and can “be lost under the mask of the average”. This helps in better understanding the monetary policy shocks of different types of financial institutions (small/large, foreign/domestic, across different business models). Credit registry established in 1998 that provides a loan–by-loan data appears to be very useful tool for financial stability and monetary policy purposes. The recent crisis has emphasized that despite the fact that there is a vast data on credit available, still more granular, frequent and flexible credit data is needed. Though this is mainly for the purpose of credit risk assessment and financial stability issues, to which I will refer later, the availability of loan-by-loan data and their characteristics allows for more profound monetary policy research. In particular, the individual loan-by-loan data can be utilized for instance, for exploring the risk-taking monetary policy channel, which has been on the margin of the research. Further, data from the credit registry allowed us to investigate where are the credit flows channeled – to what extent it supports the SME segment, which is a key segment in reviving the growth and boosting employment, to what extent it is channeled to non-tradable sector creating possible bubbles down the road. Of course, the banking system is only one sequence of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. The corporates and households are the other very important part, whose behavior affects the outcome of the undertaken monetary policy measures. As a first line of policymaking, we surely still rely on stylized macro models, where we strive to estimate or calibrate the average behavior of the economy, or the behavior of representative agents. Of course, the reality can be much more different and heterogeneity much more pronounced than envisaged. This is why in the more recent period, as a central bank, we strive to gather as much as possible micro information, for the corporate sector in particular. One of the important steps was the launch of the first Survey on Wage and Price Dynamics, similar to the survey conveyed for the euro area, which provided one of the most comprehensive overviews on the behavior of corporates in terms of wage and price adjustments. The results of the survey, and the subsequent research, gave valuable information. It pertains to information on the nominal and real wage rigidities, and the way the corporate sector adjusts 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  its balance sheet in response to different shocks. All of this supports the understanding of the monetary policy transmission and calibrating economic models that incorporate heterogeneous agents. One of the lessons from the crisis was that not many central banks had enough granular data on the corporate sector. As mentioned, granular data serve as an important analytical tool for assessing the potential vulnerabilities in the economy, and thus as an important input in the monetary and financial analysis of the central bank. We recognized the importance of the corporate sector data quite early, in the context of detected financial stability risks in particular. Aggregate balance sheets of the Macedonian corporate sector have been transmitted from Macedonia’s Central Registry to the central bank since. Yet again, it was recognized that the aggregation loses information, and a more disaggregated approach should be employed. Since 2014, as a central bank, we have an access to the individual balance sheets of all the corporate entities in the economy. The granularity of the data allows for a closer look at the behavior of the firms in different sectors, their performances, their leverage, structure of their sources of financing, the potential vulnerabilities which might cumulate in different sectors, with different implications for the economy in general. All of this is valuable information, not affordable by using the aggregates only. I would still like to emphasize that for small economies, as the Macedonian, the usage of micro data on a regular basis for monetary policy purposes is not an unknown practice. Given that, we are small and open economy, with a strategy of de facto fixed exchange rate, where in depth scrutinization of the external sector data has been a practice with a long tradition. The incoming data on external sector is analyzed on aggregate and sectoral level, but also some of the micro data on individual companies is being monitored on a monthly basis. This pertains mainly to some of the traditional sectors with relatively large weight in the total export, like the metal industry. Given its importance, and at the same time its large exposure to external shocks, regular monitoring of the individual data provides first signals for potential vulnerabilities. Even more, as the economy is undergoing major structural changes, particularly in the export sector, the regular monitoring of the newcomers provides a very clear vision of their impact on the economy in general. Even more, as some of the aggregate official statistical data, where the weight structure of the different sectors is revised at a predefined time interval, cannot capture the impact of the structural reforms, having satellite individual data on new companies is profoundly beneficial for policy analysis and decision-making. The granularity of the data available helps largely to improve the forecasting process in the Bank, which is the core in the anticipative monetary policymaking. Given the heterogeneity, in the external sector in particular, the probability that different segments behave and will behave differently is large. For that reason, as a complement to the model-based forecasting process, we regularly consult “soft” survey data on business plans of the main exporters and importers. Firm-by-firm data analysis is also used as a tool when screening the data on capital flows (FDI, external debt, portfolio investments where data are available on a security-by security basis), as a complementary to the analysis on the aggregate level. When discussing monetary policy and the data requirements, after the crisis, one of the important areas is of course the implementation of unconventional monetary policy measures. Does the unconventional monetary policy ask for unconventional statistics? Unconventional measures have varied across countries depending on many country specific factors including real and financial sector imbalances built-in in the run-up to the crisis and fiscal and monetary policy buffers. Still, given that many of the unconventional instruments were more targeted at specific segments of the markets/economy, in principle the traditional data sets may not be fully fit for the purpose entailing a need for additional information to make a good diagnosis, prescribe a proper medicine and finally evaluate the success of the treatment. This is especially the case if the unconventional measures become conventional or new unconventional tools emerge along the horizon, which is not to be excluded. Thus, again a move from traditional aggregate-based statistics to a granular multi-purpose statistics 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  seems a way forward. Going back to our experience with non-standard measures, given the shallow and underdeveloped financial market, we did not face with the same data challenges as central banks in more advanced economies. Yet, in terms of the unconventionality, efforts were made to affect the distribution of the already solid credit growth, by supporting credit to corporate sector, to net-exporters and energy producers in particular. These were identified as segments that on a longer term can support the external position of the economy. In addition, measures were undertaken, supportive to the financing of the corporate sector through the issuance of longer-term debt securities, as alternative source of financing. In general, innovations in monetary frameworks and instruments go hand in hand with innovations in statistics. The non-standard measures underline a need to devise a specific dataset, produced on a regular basis, for monitoring the effectiveness of the measures undertaken. The financial crisis has underpinned the importance of the financial stability, which forced many central banks to place much higher priority to the financial stability concerns. The focus has shifted from the stability and risks pertaining to individual financial institution to the systemic risk concept. In other words, what matters evenly is the potential instability of the financial system as a whole, and the risk of adverse loops with the real sector. More importantly, the crisis has stressed the time dimension of the systemic risk that is the procyclicality of the financial behavior and the structural dimension, which arises from the interconnectedness among the financial institutions and the possible contagion effects. Hence, the macro prudential analysis and measures are gaining more and more weight, and so are the new datasets requirements for pursuing the macro prudential role. I think that even prior to global crisis, central banks were well equipped with a wide range of macroeconomic, monetary and financial data. What was probably missing was a well-established platform for pursuing strong macro-financial analysis, higher frequency of some of the indicators, and uniformity in the way indicators were calculated. Even more, again the usage of granular, micro data on individual financial institutions was a weak link, precluding the identification of potential interlinkages and contagion effects needed for the macro prudential analysis. The exploration of micro data on the borrowers was also a missing element, which at certain point could be an important tool for assessing the potential risks to financial stability and stability of the economy in general. The G20 Data Gap Initiative is probably one of the most systematic approaches, which could provide a general stocktaking and monitoring of the progress in terms of the “missing data” for financial stability purposes. The build-up of risks in the financial sector was an area, where the crisis pinpointed the need to create or enhance the data coverage. It was acknowledged that more efforts are needed in the area of capturing enough wide spectrum of indicators for location of leverage or excessive-risk taking, in the unregulated part in particular (“the shadow system”), but also liquidity, credit and tail risks within the regulated sector. An attention was also drawn to the need for the countries to produce soft data on lending standards, by running lending surveys, and to factor in, in the analysis, not only the aggregate figure and averages, but also ranges and distribution of the data. Being more specific, a special focus was put on the Financial Soundness Indicators (FSIs), which encompass several dimensions of potential risk for the financial stability. The IMF has managed to set-up a template for core and encouraged indicators, and to dramatically increase the number of countries that report FSIs to the Fund. Probably in some of the countries, this was a push-up mechanism to rethink the quality and the availability of the indicators. As for our own experience, we do compile and publish the entire core and most of the encouraged indicators, apart from those that relate to real estate market, distributional aspects of the loans (geographic) and data pertaining to more complex financial instrument, nonexistent in our economy. A special attention should be put on the real estate market, which proved to be one of the triggers for the crisis in some of the countries and missing aspect in the vulnerability analysis. Though comprehensive official data is not published, still the scrutiny of the real estate market, the deviation of the compiled real estate price indices 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  from the equilibria, the prudential screening of the collateralized loans within the central bank is done on a permanent basis. Yet, a more comprehensive data and statistics in this area, both on housing and commercial property segments, is a challenge for the forthcoming period. One of the important financial stability considerations was the inclusion and monitoring of the system – wide macro prudential risk, meaning inclusion of all the regulated financial institutions, as well as the shadow – unregulated ones. The lessons learned from the financial crisis point to the fact that systemic risk can arise from any part of the financial system. That is why we also need more data to monitor the other financial institutions, supervised and regulated, and unregulated, as well. In this context, Macedonia started collecting detailed data from the other financial institutions (OFIs) since 2012. Later on, the regulators expressed interest in data sharing of these data with the National Bank. Our experience, as worldwide, confirmed that this is where the cooperation between the central bank and other regulatory bodies becomes a necessity, but even more so, good statistics and inter-agency exchange of information and data sharing becomes a priority. Let me point out that Macedonia did not experience significant damage in the crisis period, since the structure of the financial system is very traditional (the MFI subsector holds almost 90% of total assets), as well as conservative in terms of the financial instruments employed (mainly deposits and credits). Nevertheless, the financial stability analysis scrutinizes the risks in all financial institutions, and conveys inter-sectoral contagion analysis to assess possible spillover effects in case of a shock. The central bank cooperates very closely with other regulatory bodies through the Financial Stability Committee, and the cooperation has intensified in the last couple of years, spreading to statistical data collection as well. In 2014, bilateral agreements with all regulatory bodies for OFIs have been amended encompassing securities statistics, arranging data sharing and streamlining the data collection for the needs of the National Bank through the regulators, enabling parallel access to the data, as well as increased quality controls in the process of data collection, and above all overcoming confidentiality issues. The other side of the coin is that enhanced data sets pose some challenges. More frequent granular data increases the reporting burden of the industry, but also the burden of the statisticians. This further underlines the need for “merit and cost” procedure and reinvestigating the potential of data sharing among domestic or international institutions, which brings us to the issue of comparability and possibility of using the similar data sets for different purposes. Better cooperation among regulatory agencies may help in this regard. The switch from “aggregate statistics” to granular multi-purpose statics requires adequate statistical resources including IT infrastructure and tools to process and present data in a meaningful form for the policymakers, as they should be able to see the wood and not be lost among the trees. The extensive production and usage of individual, micro data raises an important question on the data security and data confidentiality issues. So far, we have seen that it can be an important constraint both for statistics, but also for the analytical work. Knowing that the data are available in the system, but restricted for use, is very often a reality in our day-to-day work. I think that a stronger international initiative and joint effort of the statistics community as well of the policy makers in reexamining the concept of confidentiality is warranted, of course without jeopardizing the protection of the confidentiality of individual data by reporters, but stimulating coherence and cooperation. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Rameswurlall Basant Roi: Mauritius’s long history of banking Address by Mr Rameswurlall Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the launching ceremony of the Bank of China (Mauritius) Limited, Balaclava, 27 September 2016. *      *      * Her Excellency, Madam President of the Republic of Mauritius Honourable Minister of Finance and Economic Development Honourable Ministers His Excellency the Ambassador of the People’s Republic of China Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, Bank of China, and Leader of the Chinese Delegation The CEO of the Bank of China (Mauritius) Limited Distinguished Guests Ladies and gentlemen Good morning Years ago, under my watch, five banks were licensed by the Bank of Mauritius: Deutsche Bank (Mauritius) Ltd, Standard Chartered Bank (Mauritius) Ltd, Standard Bank (Mauritius) Ltd, Banque des Mascareignes and Investec Bank (Mauritius) Ltd. Afrasia Bank Ltd and the SBI (Mauritius) Ltd were about to set foot in our jurisdiction before my departure in 2006. On March 18 this year, I handed over a banking license to the Bank of China (Mauritius) Limited – a bank from the second largest economy of the world and the oldest society that is once again writing its own story under a new mandate. It’s indeed a great pleasure to be associated with the Chinese delegation this morning for the launching of the bank. The bank gets its moment under the sun in our jurisdiction as from today. Let me once again extend a very warm welcome to the Bank of China. Established in 1912, the Bank of China successively served as China’s central bank, international exchange bank and specialized international trade bank until 1949. The bank eventually rose to a leading position in the Chinese financial industry and developed a good standing in the international financial community. It’s reckoned as a Global Systemically-Important Bank and ranked 4th worldwide and 3rd in China in terms of Tier 1 capital in 2015. The bank, largely owned by the Government of China, had wished to open a branch as opposed to a subsidiary in Mauritius. But the Bank of Mauritius required the Bank of China to go for a subsidiary and not for a branch as is imperatively demanded by our prudential standards. The bank respectfully complied.  The Bank of China’s stated capital stands at nearly Rs2.0 billion – almost ten times the amount required as per our Banking Act – reflecting its determination to use its presence in Mauritius as a strong and powerful conduit for facilitating and expanding businesses between Africa and Mauritius and between Mauritius and China. The stated capital defines clearly the scope and character of activities that the Bank of China is resolved to undertake in our jurisdiction. Strong banks with strong stated capital give credibility to a jurisdiction. Low levels of stated capital convey the perception that the requirements for obtaining a banking license are very lax, even though there may be stringent conditions that need to be satisfied for opening a bank. Most banks in our jurisdiction have stated capital well above what the Banking Act prescribes. Lately, the Bank of Mauritius has been taxed as being inflexible, and even arrogant, with regard to issues having to do with regulation and supervision of deposit-taking institutions. This is rightly an occasion for me to share some of my concerns. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Under the post-World War II gold standard, there never was a financial crisis that thrusted systemic risk to the world economy. Since 1971, when the Bretton Woods System broke down, the international monetary and financial system experienced 13 major crises: • 1973 oil price shock and international monetary crisis • 1979 oil price shock and the US dollar crisis • 1982 Latin American debt crisis • 1984 banking crisis and effective nationalization of Continental Illinois Bank in the US • 1987 October stock market crash • 1989–91 S&L crisis and bailout in the US • 1990 Japanese bubble collapse and banking crisis • 1992-The European Exchange Rate Mechanism crisis • 1994 Mexican peso crisis • 1997 Asian currency crisis • 2001 dot com crash • 2007–09 Housing market collapse in the US and international financial crisis • 2010–2012 European sovereign debt crisis I am sure none of us feels good about a world ridden with crises. On average, every 4-year period the world economy has suffered from a major currency or financial crisis over the last 45 years, let alone occasional political disturbances and rivalries between countries that wreak mayhem in financial markets. The high frequency of crises and their increasingly lasting character have kept regulators on their toes. Every crisis is known to have given Ministers of Finance and Governors of central banks more and more troublesome times with taxpayers bearing the brunt for regulatory mistakes and regulatory forbearance. From trusted life-savers they turn into potential drowning victims. There are few worse sins in the business of regulating and supervising financial institutions than falling “behind the curve”. The consequences are usually dire for the economy. Insouciance is costly to society. The exigencies of universally accepted rules, laws and by-laws in the business of banking do not allow us to adopt a relaxed and unperturbed attitude towards regulatory and supervisory issues. To use a Shakespearean lexicon, the responsible regulator often has to be “cruel only to be kind” to the financial system, the economy and, by extension, to society as a whole. Under what appears to be the arrogance of central banking, lies the unspoiled humility of the central banker. A Damocles’ sword is hanging, since quite some time, above the necks of banks in a number of jurisdictions, particularly the smaller ones. Banks in smaller jurisdictions are operating in a penalizing environment. Many of them have already been sanctioned by larger correspondent banks overseas. A study conducted by the World Bank reveals that half of the 91 financial regulators surveyed have seen a decline in correspondent banking facilities in the past three years. Correspondent banking is the business that banks do with one another and is an essential link in cross-border payments, cheque clearing and remittance. Many of us must be aware that a barrage of regulation aimed at stemming money laundering and terrorist financing has led to billion-dollar fines for major banks recently. Several large banks domiciled in advanced countries are retreating from some countries deemed high-risk. This process of de-risking is on and it threatens to upend regional financial security. Most of the 170 smaller banks surveyed reported a loss of access to “scale and breadth” of services provided by large banks overseas. The regions hardest hit are East Asia Pacific, Central Asia, the Caribbean, Eastern Europe and small jurisdictions with “significant offshore banking 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  activities and high-risk jurisdictions”. There are indications that some countries in Africa are already losing correspondent banking facilities from larger overseas banks. Newly set up banks unknown in the banking world are having serious problems regarding correspondent banking facilities. Cheque clearing, payments and settlements, cash management and international wire transfers have suffered the most. Foreign trade in the afflicted countries have suffered as a result. This problem is best tackled at the very licensing stage of banks by the regulatory authority. In our domestic market, foreign currencies equivalent to as much as US$11.0 billion are purchased and sold annually against rupees. In the last eighteen months, the Bank has equipped itself with the right technology to pick up unfamiliar smells in financial transactions. As regulator, we have defined our bearings in today’s overbearing and unforgiving environment. Mauritius cannot afford to take the kind of risk that could seriously jeopardize its trade and financial transactions with the rest of the world. Regulatory authorities in jurisdictions like ours have two choices: either to sound like Cassandra or to get laid back on a multiple dose of congenital optimism and take it lightly as another speed bump on the road to an imaginary perfect world. It’s not amusing being Cassandra. But remember, Cassandra ended being right. And the Trojan, having blissfully disregarded her warnings, ended up being very wrong and very dead. With due regard to some business persons seeking a banking license, I must say with all the humility of a central banker that the regulator cannot afford to embrace crude populism as a way of professional life. Effective enforcement of prudential norms requires a strong regulatory and supervisory framework. In the light of many regulatory challenges that the Bank has been facing for several years, various attempts were made to consolidate our legal framework. The attempts were in vain. This year, following the 2016–17 Government Budget, quite a good number of amendments to the Banking Act and the Bank of Mauritius Act were proposed. This is an occasion for me to thank the Honourable Minister of Finance for having taken the amendments to the National Assembly, defended them with conviction and got them through. Regulators need authority; they need discretion to use the authority as evolving situations demand. But the Bank does also recognize that the inherent complexity and unpredictability of markets and, more importantly, of human behaviour necessitate flexibility. The Bank does, however, keep in mind a few basic principles when using this discretion. The authority thus granted to the Bank of Mauritius is used responsibly and not vainly. Mauritius has a very long history of banking. The oldest Mauritian bank is the Mauritius Commercial Bank Ltd, established in 1838. Quite a few banks were operational long before 1838. And Mauritius used to be a regional financial hub since as far back as the 17th century to the early decades of the 20th century. The Pound sterling, the Indian rupee, the US dollar, gold, silver and some Middle Eastern currencies were used as media of exchange. Mauritius had emerged as an important regional platform for payments and settlements between traders from the West, Africa, the Indian sub-Continent and East Asia. The construction of the Suez Canal and the two World Wars arrested the evolution of the financial hub. After several decades, the platform was revived in 1989 with the hosting of our Offshore Banking Centre. Mauritius does have its historical roots in serving international finance. We don’t take this attribute and the aptitude of our jurisdiction lightly. I seize this opportunity to tell the people of China and the Chinese business community in Africa that we have no restriction whatsoever on capital flows since 1994. Business people bring capital in and take capital out of Mauritius freely – as long as anti-money laundering parameters set by the laws of the country are positively observed. This vitally important characteristic of our jurisdiction combined with a robust regulatory and supervisory framework for financial institutions makes of Mauritius a safe and credible financial hub. Mauritius is already a jurisdiction through which vast amounts of capital flow from various parts of the world to China. The mass of trade between Africa and China needs a credible 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  jurisdiction for the usage of the RMB. The renminbi has moved fast from a regulatory-driven currency to a market-driven currency in the past few years. Mauritius does have the potential to grow into a regional “node” for the internationalization of the RMB. To the Chinese business community in Africa, in particular, I wish to reassure that fund management, treasury management of corporate bodies etc are competently conducted in our jurisdiction. The advent of the Bank of China in our jurisdiction is thus a promising development. Last year, I was in Shanghai, at the heart of the Chinese financial centre. During a conversation over dinner with a group of bankers, I was a little surprised at their ignorance of Chinese people having settled down here in Mauritius for around two centuries. They listened to me in disbelief and jaw-dropped silence when I told them that the Spring Festival is celebrated in Mauritius and the day of celebrations is a national holiday. To the people of China, particularly to those Chinese businessmen having enterprises in Africa, I wish to tell them that the Chinese Diaspora’s contribution to the economic development of Mauritius has been enormous. Sino-Mauritian relationship is a great story line which the Chinese immigrants have constructed and woven through thick and thin since they first set foot in Mauritius. The establishment of the Bank of China is a welcome response to the demands for closer co-operation between Mauritius and the People’s Republic of China. The bank is headed by Mr Zhang Xiaoqing, a career banker. I understand the bank is expected to be a game changer in the region under his leadership. On behalf of the Board of Directors and the staff of the Bank of Mauritius, and on my own behalf, I wish the Bank of China the very best. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Malcolm Edey: Card payments and the retail sector Speech by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the Australian Financial Review Retail Summit, Melbourne, 28 September 2016. *      *      * I thank Darren Flood for his extensive assistance in preparing this speech.  Introductory remarks This is a conference about the retail industry, not the payments industry. However, a retail business is not a business if the retailer cannot get paid. And a retailer won’t be at their most competitive if their payment costs are higher than they should be. This is an issue staff at the Reserve Bank think about every day, and one that I hope retailers are taking a close interest in as well.  Today I’ll talk about how the way we pay is changing, and what it means for retail businesses. I’ll also talk about the Reserve Bank’s role as a payments regulator and about some of the things that are just around the corner in payments.  The changing nature of payments A good place to start is an observation that will not be lost on anyone here. That is that the nature of the payments we use is changing, and changing quite rapidly at the moment. Probably the clearest example to most people has been the take-up of contactless, or tap-and-go, card payments. These have taken off extraordinarily quickly in Australia, to the point where Australia is thought of as the leading contactless market in the world. This is a technology that offers a benefit to both consumers and merchants in terms of the time taken to process a payment, and as a result it has been embraced – but many merchants might also notice that their payments costs have risen because of the resulting change in their payments mix. This is a good example of the complex dynamics of competition in the retail payments system.  But the rise of contactless payments is only one of a range of changes that have been occurring to the payments system over time – some of which you might have noticed, some of which you have probably never thought about.  Possibly the most important trend we are seeing is the steady decline in the use of traditionally paper-based payments. Think of when was the last time you wrote or received a cheque. In 2000 the average Australian wrote around 35 cheques per year. In 2015/16 that was down to six. What is more, while cheque use has been declining for two decades, the decline if anything is accelerating; after falling by an average of about 13 per cent per year in the preceding five years, the number of cheques written fell by 17 per cent in 2015/16 (Graph 1).  We have been observing the decline in cheques for many years, but more recently it has been a decline in the use of that other traditionally paper instrument – cash – that has been attracting attention.1 The only real way to adequately measure the use of cash is to survey the users – something the Reserve Bank does via a consumer diary once every three years. We ran the first of these surveys in 2007, when a large majority of consumer payments – 69 per cent – were made with cash. By 2010, that percentage had fallen to 62 per cent and by 2013, 47 per cent, with the decline occurring across all payment values (Graph 2). We will run the survey                                                 1  The replacement of paper by polymer banknotes does not change the essential point here. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  again this year, but it seems a safe bet that there will be a further, probably quite large, decline in cash use.2 This trend is not all about people falling out of love with cash; a significant factor is the rapid rise in online commerce, where of course cash is not an option.  So what has filled the gap left by our paper instruments? In the retail space it is largely cards, which have grown by an average of 11 per cent per year over the past five years (Graph 3).  This reflects cards’ large share in online commerce, as well as their having gained ground at the retail point of sale. Based on the Bank’s consumer survey, card payments made up 43 per cent of all consumer payments in 2013, and 55 per cent of those over 50 dollars. The ubiquity of card payments is one reason we care a lot about how those systems operate, as I will discuss more a bit later. It is also worth noting that in the period measured by our survey, BPAY also gained an increasing share of the market, while the relative newcomer, PayPal showed strong growth from a low base. I will speak a little later about some of the other types of payments that might start to register on the radar in the coming years.  The cost of payments Of equal interest to these broader trends in payments usage is the cost of payments. The retail sector clearly has a strong interest in the cost of payments to merchants, and while the Reserve Bank is also interested in this, its principal focus when evaluating the efficiency of the payments system is the resource cost of payments – that is, how much it costs the economy in total to produce a payment – abstracting from the various fees that determine the cost to any single party or sector. Determining resource costs is a large job, requiring detailed information on financial institutions’ costs and things like the cost of processing time for merchants.  The Reserve Bank last went through this exercise in 2014. The most comforting news from that study was that the resource cost of consumer to business payments had declined as a percentage of GDP since the previous cost study in 2006, from 0.80 per cent to 0.54 per cent, even though the number of transactions had risen. Despite the favourable trend overall, the mix of payments within the total acted in the direction of increasing costs.  Looking across the main non-cash retail systems, we see that, unsurprisingly, the highest per-transaction resource costs were generated by the cheque system, with each cheque written costing the economy about $5.12, if account overheads are ignored (Graph 4). This is not surprising given the cost of shipping and processing physical cheques, although there have been some efficiency improvements in the cheque system since the time of the study.  Perhaps of more current interest to the retail sector is the cost of our card systems. Credit cards are quite costly at around 94 cents for the average sized transaction, while MasterCard and Visa debit are less costly and eftpos uses the fewest resources of any of the card systems, at around 45 cents per transaction.  The broad relativities between the resource costs of these systems is similar to those faced by merchants. Another way to think about that is that it is merchants who, by and large, bear the cost of payments. This is largely achieved by the way fees are used in these systems. I think the most telling illustration of that is to compare the actual costs faced by merchants to the costs faced by consumers once fees and benefits to consumers, like interest-free periods and reward points, are taken into account. What you will see is that, despite being more expensive to produce and more costly to merchants, on average a credit card transaction costs a                                                 2  At the same time, it should be noted that the absolute value and number of banknotes in circulation is still increasing, even though their relative use is declining. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  consumer slightly less than a debit card transaction (Graph 5). These are the incentives that shape payment choices by consumers. Payments as a business The arrangement of incentives I have just shown you is a defining feature of card payment systems, and one that the Reserve Bank has devoted a great deal of attention to over many years.  The principal reason that the relative cost of cards to consumers looks so different to the resource cost of cards is the payment of interchange fees in these systems. An interchange fee is a fee paid from a merchant’s bank to the cardholder’s bank every time a card payment is made. While cardholders and merchants have little visibility of these fees, their effect is nonetheless substantial. They place a floor under the fee that a merchant is charged by its bank to accept cards and they help fund the rewards, interest free periods and other benefits that encourage consumers to use a particular card. In large part, this can occur because many merchants feel that they cannot refuse to accept some types of card payments. This in turn means that competition, both between financial institutions and between card schemes, can be directed towards influencing the card that the consumer takes from their wallet to make a payment.  The effect of interchange fees has been well understood in Australia for many years, with the Reserve Bank first requiring interchange fees to be reduced in 2003 following earlier joint work with the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. A number of other regulators internationally have subsequently followed the Reserve Bank’s lead.  The role of interchange fees in affecting payment choices is so powerful that, even under the interchange fee caps applied in Australia, card schemes have seen benefit in setting very high interchange rates on some categories of cards – to encourage growth in that segment – offset by much lower rates on transactions at some “preferred” merchants. The unfortunate effect of this is that those “preferred” merchants pay very low fees on all transactions, while other merchants pay the much higher rates that support generous rewards programs on super-premium cards. Such a card might cost a large merchant around 0.2 per cent of transaction value, whereas a small merchant that did not have a “preferred” rate, might be paying up to 2 per cent. The Reserve Bank estimates that in 2015, non-preferred merchants on average faced interchange fees more than half a per cent higher than preferred merchants.  This is one of several factors that led the Reserve Bank to conclude in 2015 that a review of card regulation was warranted.  The RBA as a payments regulator Before I get onto the details of that review, I would like to revisit how the Reserve Bank has come to be involved in this area of regulation.  Legislative reforms in 1998 following the Wallis Committee’s Final Report enshrined the long-understood central bank responsibility for the stability of the payments system in the Reserve Bank Act. They also gave the Bank for the first time an explicit mandate to promote competition and efficiency in the payments system and some new powers that would allow it to pursue that mandate. The Wallis Inquiry had also provided some guidance on areas where this new mandate could be applied, including card interchange fees.  These developments set the scene for a period of fact finding, analysis and eventually regulation to cap interchange fees and force the removal of “no-surcharge” rules. Interchange fees on MasterCard and Visa cards were reduced in 2003 from around one per cent of transaction value to 0.5 per cent. Fees on MasterCard and Visa debit cards were reduced in 2006 to 12 cents per transaction.  
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  While at the time there were predictions from some quarters that regulating interchange fees would be catastrophic for card systems, as we have seen, they have thrived. Regulators in a number of other countries have now followed Australia’s lead in this area of regulation and indeed some – notably the European Union – have gone further.  Nonetheless, while we think our cards regulation has been very successful, we have known for some time that there were elements of it that could be improved upon – either because the payments system has evolved since the regulation came into force, or because those affected by regulation have adjusted their behaviour over time. This led us to initiate a review of cards regulation in 2015, which was completed in May this year. Some changes to regulation have already occurred as a result, with the remainder coming into force over the coming year.  There were three key elements of the reform package that the Bank announced in May.  First, the Bank considered whether the current regulated levels of interchange fees remained appropriate, particularly given that, as I mentioned, there were now examples of lower interchange fee caps in other parts of the world. The Bank decided to leave credit card interchange fees unchanged, but to further reduce the level of debit card interchange fees – from 12 cents to 8 cents. This decision reflected the fact that the average size of MasterCard and Visa debit card transactions had fallen by 43 per cent since 2008, meaning that interchange fees had been rising as a percentage of transaction value.  I mentioned earlier that specifying the interchange cap as an average had resulted in some – typically small and medium-sized merchants – bearing much more of the burden of high-cost cards than “preferred” merchants. The Bank has now decided to limit this effect by placing an absolute limit on the level of interchange fees for any card or any transaction in addition to the cap on the average. A limit of 0.8 per cent will apply to credit cards and 15 cents (or 0.2 per cent) to debit cards. The current 2 per cent interchange fees applying to some super-premium cards will no longer be possible from July 2017. This will benefit non-preferred merchants. Some further technical changes to how the caps are applied will reduce average interchange fees by reducing upward drift in the average over time.  The second element of the May reform package is to place what we refer to as American Express companion cards on the same regulatory footing as MasterCard and Visa cards. Traditional American Express cards have been issued by the company itself, with Amex also arranging acceptance of those cards for the merchant. However in the mid 2000s, banks began issuing some American Express cards under license. Under these arrangements, American Express paid fees and incentives to card issuers, which had a similar effect to interchange fees – funding rewards points and influencing payment choices by consumers. But because these payments were unregulated, the rewards tended to be significantly higher than those offered on MasterCard and Visa Cards. This raised questions about whether the regulatory regime was fully competitively neutral.  From July 2017 the Bank will now cap interchange fees and other payments to issuers in an equivalent fashion across American Express companion, MasterCard and Visa cards. Traditional American Express cards, which have no equivalent to interchange fees, will not be subject to fee regulation.  Finally, the May package further strengthens the regulation of card surcharging.  Giving merchants the ability to signal to consumers through a surcharge that some payment methods are more costly to accept than others has been an important element of payments regulation in Australia. The overwhelming majority of merchants that have taken up the option of surcharging have done so at a level that recovers or under-recovers their card acceptance costs. However there has been community concern about a small number of cases where card surcharges exceed card acceptance costs – at least for some transactions. The lightning rod for these concerns has been airlines and their fixed dollar surcharges, which clearly over-recover card acceptance costs for low value airfares. In addition, while the Bank had in place a regulatory framework that could cap card surcharges to merchants’ card acceptance costs, 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  there were concerns about how these caps could be enforced, given the limits of the Reserve Bank’s powers.  The May package of reforms provides a simpler measure of the allowable surcharge, which is already in force for large merchants and will take effect for other merchants from September next year. In order to make it as simple as possible to understand payment costs, banks and other organisations that provide card acceptance services will be required to give each merchant a clear statement of their acceptance cost for each card scheme. A merchant will be able to use this to set its surcharge, or could include some limited other costs if they can be supported with receipts or statements. One implication of the revised framework is that merchants will generally no longer be able to apply fixed dollar surcharges.  The other key change from the previous framework is that the government has passed legislation to ban excessive surcharging. This step will give the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission the power to enforce the ban.  The ban on excessive surcharging for large merchants has now been in place for a few weeks. The airlines have responded. Qantas, for instance, has moved from a $7 fixed fee on domestic flights on credit card payments to 1.3 per cent, with a cap of $11 for higher cost fares. For debit card payments they now surcharge 0.6 per cent. That means a $200 fare would be surcharged $2.60 for a credit card payment, compared with $7 previously. We also know that the large event ticketing agents have removed their card surcharges, which seems appropriate for an industry where alternatives to paying by card in most cases are limited.  This should already have eased the broader community’s concerns about excessive surcharges to an extent. By this time next year we will have a framework in place for all merchants which should give consumers confidence that any surcharges they pay are reasonable, while at the same time providing merchants with a much clearer understanding of their payment costs.  The future I began by talking about the decline of some of last century’s payment systems. I would now like to turn briefly to the future, because there are some important developments just around the corner.  One trend that seems very likely in the near term is the migration of contactless card transactions to mobile phones. Not everyone will see appeal in this, but the latest generation of mobile wallets are secure and convenient and can rely on what is now a very widespread contactless acceptance network in Australia. There is little doubt that the prospect of being able to leave home with only a mobile phone will have appeal in some circles. Mobile wallets bring new players and new processes into the payment flows, and the Bank expects to remain closely engaged with these developments in the period ahead.  It would be unfortunate if there were a perception that the Bank’s only contribution to the efficiency of the payments system was regulation of card systems. We do in fact have higher ambitions. In my view the most significant contribution to the future of the payments system that the Bank has made in recent times – certainly in my time as Assistant Governor in this area – has not been regulation, but playing the role of catalyst for a major industry project to create a new payments system – the New Payments Platform, or NPP.  The creation of the NPP has flowed from the Strategic Review of Innovation in the Payments System that was undertaken by the Bank between 2010 and 2012. In finalising the review, the Bank identified a number of important features that electronic payment systems were not able to provide in Australia and challenged the payments industry to look for a solution. To the industry’s great credit it took up that challenge and has focused a very large industry effort on filling those gaps through the delivery of the NPP in the second half of next year.  
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The NPP will allow individuals and businesses to make account-to-account funds transfers, with the recipient having access to those funds in most cases in a matter of seconds. That will be possible at any hour of the day or night, seven days a week, regardless of the financial institutions that the sender and receiver bank with. The sender will not need to know the BSB and account number of the recipient; they will be able to use a phone number, email address or ABN to address the payment. And importantly, it will be possible to send a much larger amount of information with a payment than the 18 characters permitted through our current system. That will potentially represent an enormous benefit to business users of the system in particular. Finally, with an eye to the rapid pace of innovation, the structure of the NPP will allow new types of third party commercial services to be delivered through the system, once the initial service, to be offered by BPAY, is up and running.  Conclusion This will be my last opportunity to speak in an official capacity on payments system issues. I am proud of the things that the Reserve Bank has been able to achieve in this area, both through world-leading regulation and through playing the catalyst role that I spoke of. Efficiency of the payments system is not always a high-profile topic, but it is a tremendously important one when you consider the 28 million non-cash payments made each and every day in Australia. It is certainly in the interests of the people in this room to take a deep interest in payments, and I would encourage you to continue to do so. I think retailers understand that our reforms have worked to reduce their payment costs, and I thank all those retail organisations that have participated in our policy consultations and supported the direction of reform.     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7    
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 R Gandhi: Challenges in developing the bond market in BRICS Special address by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the seminar on “Challenges in Developing the Bond Market in BRICS”, conducted jointly by CII and MoF, Government of India, Mumbai, 27 September 2016. *      *      * Assistance provided by S/Shri T. Rabishankar, CGM, Manoj Kumar, DGM, Siddhartha Mishra, DGM and Vivek Singh, AGM is gratefully acknowledged. I. Introduction I notice that the Seminar is on developing bond markets in BRICS. Though bond markets include both the government securities market and the corporate bonds market, I would dwell upon only on corporate debt market. The reason is simple. The government securities market in the BRICS countries have attained a definite positions, whereas the corporate bonds market are at nascent stage. 2.For example, India’s Government securities market – by whatever criterion – is as developedas any other emerging market. It compares favourably with many AE markets as well; despite its thin investor base (on which we need to work more), in terms of instruments, transparency, trading and settlement systems and liquidity, the government securities market has grown in a big way. So, I am clear in my mind that at this stage of our development, our focus should be on corporate bond markets. 3.We do not have a well developed corporate bond market, and this fact is widely recognized.Not as well recognized is the fact that even in developed economies, corporate bond markets are not as developed and as liquid as Government bond markets. It is not uncommon in advanced economies that the corporates’ primary source of funds is not corporate bond market, but the credit market. Many European countries including Germany, Japan and China have achieved economic success based largely on a bank financed model. So when we talk of developing corporate bond markets we must be realistic about our goals. More importantly, we must not be blinkered in squeezing bank finance to force-feed the corporate bond market. We would do well and act wisely if we keep our efforts in this perspective. 4.With the caveats out of the way, let us get back to the issue at hand. What is happening inthe global space? In an era of negative interest rates and unconventional monetary policies, with a substantial amount of global debt offering sub-zero yields, the focus is back on emerging markets (including BRICS) as investors are in search of yields. 5.Emerging economies produce 39% of global output, yet they account for only 14% of theglobal corporate bond market value. This suggests that emerging economies may be able to better utilize corporate bonds to finance their private sector and, consequently, their growth. Furthermore, as the landscape for bank-intermediated financing transforms under regulatory reforms and technological advances, the need and opportunities for domestic corporate bond markets development are apparent. 6.An IMF study on increasing corporate leverage indicates that over the period 2004–2014,non-financial corporate debt of emerging markets had grown from $4 tn to over $18 tn. Over this period the share of bonds in corporate debt has grown from 9% to 17%. The shift from bank finance to bond finance is slow but steady. 7.Is this trend likely to sustain? More generally, would this rise in corporate borrowing survivea reversal of the decade-and-a-half long accommodative liquidity in advanced economies? Of the $3 tn of corporate bonds in EMs, about $0.8 tn is foreign currency borrowing. If we take this as an indicator of international capital flows into EM bonds over the last decade, the indicative answer to our question is that EM corporate bond market could still continue to grow, 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  albeit slower. The outflow of international capital from EM bond markets, if AEs tighten policy, would not be trend reversing. 8. Now, to the all important question. What ails the corporate bond market? I will try to answer this in the context of India. Broadly speaking, high Government borrowing crowding out private debt, excessive regulatory restrictions on the investment mandates of financial institutions, corporate preference for bank financing for historically idiosyncratic reasons (e.g. the cash credit system), tepid investor interest for whatever reasons in all but the best rated instruments, the absence of a well-functioning bankruptcy code, etc. are some of the key factors. However, most of these issues are not a deal breaker as far as market development is concerned and are being tackled by the Government and other regulators. 9. Let me now touch upon the current scenario of bond markets in BRICS and India in particular, major challenges and the way forward. II.  Overview of the bond market 10. In terms of Govt debt to GDP ratio, an indicator of maturity of debt market, barring Russia, other BRICS nations have a relatively deep Sovereign debt market. It ranges from 66% in Brazil to 18% in Russia. India has a Govt. debt to GDP ratio of 66%. 11. China’s bond market has seen a rapid growth in recent times making it the third largest bond market of the world after US and Japan. China’s bond market size is about $ 6.2 trillion. India’s bond market is estimated to be about $ 1.1 trillion (Dec 2015: source ADB). Unlike US, where the corporate debt market is bigger than the Govt debt market, India and China have bigger sovereign debt segment with Sovereign debt to corporate debt ratio at 2.7 and 2.1 respectively.     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  12. A snapshot of India’s debt market is given in the Table below:  FPI investment in debt 13. India has taken a calibrated approach to letting in foreign portfolio flows into her debt market. Over time, the FPI debt portfolio has been getting more stable with a steady inflow of long-term investors. Obviously, it would be preferable from the point of view of financial stability that the FPI investor base consists largely of this category of investors rather than speculative capital or arbitrage funds. We would need to work towards that outcome.  III.  Corporate Bond market 14. Indian Corporate Bond market has seen some growth in recent years, both in terms of number of issues and amount. The outstanding issues which were at 12,155 as at end March 2011 increased to 22,374 by end March 2016. During the same period, the amount outstanding increased from ₹ 8,895 billion to ₹ 20,193 billion. While the types issued included fixed rate 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  bonds, floating rate bonds, structured notes and other types, the fixed rate bonds were predominant both in number and value. Another characteristic of the issuances was that almost all issuances were by financial sector entities. Yet another peculiar feature of our Corporate Bond market is that private placements are the norm. The public issuances which were ₹ 94.51 billion in 2010–11 increased to ₹ 338 billion in 2015–16. The private placements which were ₹ 2187.85 billion in 2010–11, were ₹ 4580.73 billion in the year 2015–16. The secondary market trading which was at ₹ 6053 billion in 2010–11, was at ₹ 10224 billion in 2015–16. 15. I will elaborate what I consider the major tendencies of this market, if only to give us an idea of where reform efforts need to be directed. 16. The primary issuance of corporate bonds is dominated by private placements. More than 95% of total issues are privately placed. This is not, per se, a shortcoming as long as there is transparency regarding such issues. As long as information about such issues and their life-cycle performance (particularly default history) is publicly available, investors should be able to take informed decisions. What is required here is a public database that is freely accessible. Effort of authorities has been towards building a trade repository of both primary and secondary activities. 17. Another significant character of India’s corporate debt market is the dominance of financial institutions. Bulk of the issuance is in the so-called BFSI Sector (Banking, Financial Services and Insurance). Banking and financial services account for 74% of all primary issues in FY 2015 (NSE, ISMR 2015). Non-financial corporates account only for 19% of all outstanding issuance. Clearly, access of non-financial corporates is limited and needs to be encouraged. It is in this context that RBI’s recent announcement to push large borrowers to the bond market assumes significance. 18. But this in itself would not be enough. Most of the corporate issuance in India is of top credit quality, with AA– or better accounting for about 80% of all issuance while BBB or worse accounted for only 14% in FY 2016 (CRISIL IDM 2015). What this shows is that the corporate bond market is largely accessible to the top rated borrowers. Efforts in this respect should be focused on facilitating access of low credit (high yield sounds better) borrowers to this market. For this to happen, loosening investment guidelines of insurance and pension funds would not be enough, what is required is to create an investor category to distribute risk widely. Risk taking culture assumes importance if we were to achieve this objective. 19. Thin secondary market activity not only affects transparency of the market, it also makes the process of price discovery suspect. Trading volumes have been increasing, from about ₹ 5 bn (average daily) in FY 2009 to about ₹ 45 bn in FY 2015 (CRISIL IDM 2015). But this is less than a tenth of the volumes in the G-sec market. It is unrealistic to expect that corporate bonds will trade as much as G-secs. Yet we must continue efforts to achieve a reasonable degree of transparency into the market. 20. Several measures have been taken by GoI, RBI and SEBI to aid the growth of corporate debt market in India. The impact of such development measures is evident in the growing primary issuances and also the growth in the secondary market volumes. Measures such as rationalising the listing norms, simplification in issuance procedures and processes, standardisation of market conventions, setting up of reporting platform, implementation of DvP settlement of corporate bond trades, allowing banks to hold corporate bonds from the infrastructure sector on their balance sheet as HTM assets and issuing long term bonds without the requirement for maintaining reserves have had an encouraging impact on the market. 21. Some of the other major bottlenecks can thus be listed as below: i. Indian market has traditionally been a bank dominated system with corporates relying more on loan financing compared to bond financing. Weaning corporates away from banks has proved to be a difficult task. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  ii. Internationally insurance companies are among the largest participants in the corporate bond market. However, in India, institutional investors like Insurance companies, PFs, EPFO who have large assets under their management still have several constraints in the nature of investment mandates resulting in limited participation of such entities. Pension Funds and Insurance companies prefer Government securities as they have to provide safe and guaranteed returns. iii. Unavailability of credit risk transfer mechanism in the corporate bond market also works as a deterrent. Though CDS has been introduced in India, there is no activity in the market. One of the major constraints is restriction on netting of MTM position against the same counterparty for capital adequacy and exposure norms. iv. The absence of robust bankruptcy laws is also reckoned as one of the major reasons for lack of investor interest in corporate bonds. v. Lack of centralised database which enable investors to get complete information about corporate debt market at one place. vi. Lack of functional trading platform with CCP facility. 22. To address these issues, recently Khan Committee has made various recommendations which are being examined and implemented by the regulators and the GoI. Some of the recommendations which have been implemented are: i. Enhancing Credit Supply for Large Borrowers through Market Mechanism – for exposure beyond a threshold. ii. Allowing banks to provide partial credit enhancement (PCE) of 50% of the bond issue size subject to the PCE provided by any single bank not exceeding 20% of the bond issue size. iii. Issuance of rupee denominated bonds overseas (Masala Bonds) by banks as AT1 and T2 capital. iv. Permitting brokers in repo in corporate bonds. v. Allowing FPIs to trade directly in corporate bonds. vi. Initiating the process of accepting corporate bonds under Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) of RBI. vii. Setting up of electronic book platform for issuance of privately placed bonds for size of ₹ 500 cr and above. viii. Setting up of centralized database of corporate bonds. IV.  Challenges and way forward for development of bond market 23. I would not be able to tell you anything new about the way we need to proceed that has not been told by many of the learned committees that have studied this market in depth, most recently the Khan Committee under the aegis of the FSDC. What I would try to do is just highlight what I feel are a few of the more important actions we need to take. a.  Tackling the problem of “Original Sin” hypothesis 24. One of the challenges for improving the depth of the debt market will be the ability to tackle the “original sin” hypothesis – which in its strongest form alludes to inconsequential bond markets in EME due to their inability to raise money in its own currency outside its border. India has started the “masala bonds” which is picking up but the process still has some way to go. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  b.  Managing and transferring risk – Credit Default Swaps 25. Another important challenge that all emerging economies face in the development of a vibrant and robust bond market is the issue of managing risk. Take for example, the Chinese treasury yields which are generally low signifying investor confidence. In corporate debt, the defaults have been low so far. However, as more and more borrowers enter the market, the default rate is going to be higher. While the borrowing cost for highly rated companies has been low, bond market for the risky borrower is becoming expensive. From the investor’s perspective, credit derivative markets like CDS should be available so as to give confidence to investor to fund risky borrowers. Experience with CDS in India has been poor with few deals reported. It is of paramount importance to have an active credit derivative market to accurately price risk to take the bond market to the next stage.  c.  Market infrastructure 26. One of the prerequisite for a prospering bond market in any economy is an efficient and safe market infrastructure in place to make it easy for investors to buy or sell bonds. With DvP already in place, the concern of safety is by and large addressed. Efforts to go for CCP guaranteed settlement needs to weigh its advantages with the likely high cost of such guarantee. Similarly, electronic platforms for trading need to be developed, but one must keep in mind that the large number of bonds, compared to G-secs, would be a hindrance to order matching systems. Would quote-driven systems be preferable? d.  Issuer diversity 27. In India, currently more than 85% of the corporate bond issuance is undertaken by high rated (A and above) issuer. Our attention to credit enhancement mechanisms would go some way in channelling demand from entities like insurance and pension funds who need to protect their credit exposure. But what is also required is to create conditions to attract new investors 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  into the market. Retail investors could absorb the credit risk through wider dissipation. We might also have to look at less risk averse external investors. e.  Municipal bonds 28. Unlike India, some of the BRICS nations especially South Africa has a well developed Municipal bond market.   29. With a stellar rise in urban population, India’s infrastructure has failed to keep pace with urbanization and the situation is ripe for Municipal corporations to look beyond conventional sources of funding (like grants, tax, etc). Munis can be explored as an option for infrastructure financing by addressing the various supply and demand side constraints. 30. To end this talk, I would like to emphasize that for a market to evolve a lot of things need to fall in place – investor interest, issuer preference, developments in the economy, legal conditions, etc. What Government and regulators can do is to create the enabling conditions, so that when issuer and investor enthusiasm coincides they are not discouraged by impeding regulation or poor infrastructure. 31. Thank you for your attention.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Macro-financial linkages – looking back to look ahead Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central bank of the Philippines), at the opening ceremony of the 6th BSP International Research Conference, Manila, 21 September 2016. *      *      * Good morning and welcome to the 6th International Research Conference of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP). The theme of this year’s conference “Revisiting macro-financial linkages: Looking back and looking ahead,” highlights the growing attention placed on the importance of the interactions between financial conditions and the real economy. A look back: The traditional view on transmission Macro-financial linkages as a body of economic work was not that extensive before the turn of the century. To help illustrate, I asked staff to do an advanced search in Google Scholar for articles on macro-financial linkages. The results are quite revealing. If you take the period 1980–1999, the search will yield 82 articles on the subject. But if the search is made for the period 2000–2016, the number of articles increases dramatically to 2,700. The reviews of literature done in formal research work confirm this finding as well. Research and modeling of macroeconomics and the financial sector traditionally proceeded in isolation from one another. Previously, the models of the economic growth process were largely driven by “real” factors — productivity of the workforce, the quality of entrepreneurs, the quantity and quality of the capital stock, the availability of resources, the state of technical knowledge. And, financial markets were assumed to be frictionless. But the work on asymmetric information and principal-agent theory afforded economists new ways of thinking about the role that financial markets play in the real economy. For instance, because of asymmetric information, banks would need to “screen” borrowers either by carefully looking at the firm’s value or requiring collateral. Now, when the value of assets increases, the value of a firm’s balance sheet, including its collateral, also increases. At the same time, the upward valuation of assets raises a bank’s capital, allowing it to increase its lending. In other words, an increase in asset prices leads to an increase in loans and raises economic activity. By contrast, a fall in asset prices results in slower economic activity. Weak macroeconomic conditions, in turn, reduce profits of businesses and incomes of households, which can push up borrowers’ default probabilities that may weaken balance sheets of banks and other financial institutions. This cycle or reversal mechanism can last long and the results may be pervasive – affecting investment decisions, investor confidence, consumption, savings, and risk aversion, among others. In the literature, this vicious feedback loop is what we refer to as financial accelerator . The Feedback loop – there is a real cost The concept of a feedback loop became even more pronounced during and post-2008 Global Financial Crisis (GFC), creating a need to reassess and review the monetary transmission mechanism as we knew it then. The GFC has taught policy makers and academia, that we could no longer deal only with monetary impulses and “assume away” the financial market. A clear lesson from the GFC is that there are frictions in the financial market and that these frictions can increase costs in the economy significantly. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Empirical estimates before the 2008 GFC (that is from 1980–2007) show that output losses after a financial crisis could result in losses of more than 25 percent of GDP. In some cases, financial crisis could have lasting effects by lowering the trend growth of GDP. For the US, estimates by the US Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas show that relative to the 2007 output, about 40 to 90 percent of the output was foregone as result of the financial crisis in 2008. Not only was the crisis associated with a huge loss of economic output and financial wealth, but also with psychological consequences from extended unemployment, homelessness, university drop-outs, deferred or denied retirements, among others. Thus, the real total cost of the crisis likely exceeded the value of one year’s output. Domestic turbulences can spill over But output losses can go beyond the boundaries of a single economy. As we witnessed in the last two decades, the progress in the globalization of financial markets was accompanied by the frequent occurrences of financial crisis. What might, in the past, have been considered to only be a domestic problem, could now quickly “spillover” and become a global problem. Moreover, in considering such spillovers, the IMF warns that there could also be spillbacks. IMF Managing Director Lagarde refers to spillovers and spillbacks as the “two-way street of unintended knock-on effects.” Let me cite fairly recent developments that can magnify spillovers, particularly to EMEs. First, the global presence of asset managers. A 2014 study by the BIS concluded that asset managers in emerging market economies tend to behave in a correlated manner. In particular, the BIS study found that because these global asset managers used common/similar portfolio benchmarks, their strategies/recommendations to institutional clients tended to also be similar, ultimately fanning “herding behavior” in investor flows. Investment flows to asset managers and asset prices then amplified each other’s fluctuations, and reinforced each other’s directional movements. Second, co-movements among non-financial corporates in emerging market economies. Chui, Fender and Shusko (2014) found that non-financial EME corporates have been borrowing more internationally than domestically to take advantage of global low interest rates and strong local currencies. While “cheap” funding could boost economic performance if it supports viable investment projects, it also increases the borrower’s rollover interest and currency risks, especially if revenues are in local currency. Furthermore, some corporations may have used borrowed funds for purely financial (i.e., speculative) purposes. Third, the asynchronous monetary policy in advanced economies, and more recently, the uncertainty regarding the timing and pace of further monetary policy tightening by the US Federal Reserve. These developments have led to heightened interest rate volatility and rising spreads, adding pressures on emerging market currencies. Looking forward: Macrofinancial Stability Clearly, given these interlinkages, policy makers can no longer view macrostability only as “either” monetary/macroeconomics “or” just the financial sector. There have been increasing discussions on the development of a macro-financial stability framework that would embody policies – whether monetary, fiscal or prudential – to systematically incorporate financial stability considerations into traditional macroeconomic analysis – to more effectively address financial booms and busts or the so-called financial cycles. Moreover, work by Borio and Zhu (2012) point to the “risk taking channel” of monetary policy transmission, or how monetary policy affects the way economic agents perceive, tolerate and ultimately price risk. In considering the risk taking channel of policy transmission, it is quite evident that policy makers need to more closely examine market behavior and its phases — the uncharacteristic calm, market herding, reversal and then panic. When one stops to think 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  about it, these phases really led us from the Great Moderation to the Great Global Financial Crisis. Policies and macro-financial linkages This risk-taking behavior by agents necessitates a new set of tools. To address financial stability concerns arising from financial cycles, policymakers in both advanced and developing economies have increasingly used macroprudential policies in all forms. We have seen credit-related measures such as caps on loan-to-value ratio and debt-to-income ratio, caps on foreign currency lending, and ceiling on credit or credit growth; liquidity-related measures such as limits on net open currency positions or currency and maturity mismatch, and reserve requirements; and capital-related measures such as countercyclical capital requirements and dynamic provisioning. While some specific measures have proven to be more effective than others, all these policies intend to change the constraints and incentives faced by financial market participants. In Asia, there is evidence that credit-related and sector-specific macroprudential policy instruments have been effective in addressing imbalances, which have helped contain the severity of economic downturns or prevent the occurrence of a major economic crisis. Even fiscal policies can have significant impacts on financial stability. The structure of taxes and subsidies can influence private sector decisions on leverage. Studies have shown that corporate income tax systems generally encourage the use of debt rather than equity finance. This is because interest payments are allowed as a deduction in calculating taxable profits, but the return to equity is not. The favorable tax treatment on corporate debt can create a debt bias, which, in turn, can lead to more highly leveraged banks. Likewise, underpriced and implicit government guarantees of corporate debt liabilities have often encouraged debt over equity financing. Today’s Conference - Contribution to the discussion Ladies and gentlemen, macro-financial linkages are continuing to evolve. There are just so many moving parts and therefore many possible outcomes. The risk that our analysis of these evolving developments as well as the risk that our policy tools may not be responsive enough to these changes are present. In this two-day conference, we re-examine what we know about macro-financial linkages, with the hope of reducing what we do not know, and possibly reduce the risks of unknown outcomes. We have brought together experts with a wide range of backgrounds, including policymakers, and those working in international research institutions and academia, to exchange ideas on these issues. I thank the authors and discussants, and your respective institutions for your valuable contribution to this research conference. The BSP is also grateful to the session chairs for accepting our invitation to facilitate the discussions. This morning’s session will focus on the international aspect of macro-financial linkages as papers dwell on financial globalization, monetary and financial spillovers, and financial contagion. The afternoon session will focus on the macro-financial linkages within the domestic economy with papers touching on liquidity, sovereign bond markets, credit conditions, and interbank markets. In tomorrow’s morning session, discussions will be on the implications of different policies on financial and business cycles, including the possible use of macroprudential, monetary, and fiscal measures at different stages of the cycle. We shall conclude the conference with a panel discussion comprised of distinguished economists from organizations that cover the globe. The experience and expertise of these gentlemen in research and policy making promises to provide an insightful discussion on 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  macro-financial linkages and the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. Thank you for gracing this year’s BSP International Research Conference. Final Thoughts Ladies and gentlemen, it is very apparent that we have entered an era of intensifying and uncertain macro-financial linkages. The challenges that this era brings demand not just more scrutiny of linkages, but may even require altering our policy perspectives. I am confident that the sessions in this conference will provide a good opportunity to share ideas and to take stock of the different dimensions of macro-financial linkages. I wish you well in this Conference. And I look forward to a productive and interesting exchange. Thank you very much and once again, welcome good morning.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  S S Mundra: Financial stability in a weak global environment Address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 7th SEACEN High Level Seminar for Deputy Governors in–charge of Financial Stability and Supervision, Mumbai, 22 September 2016. *      *      * Assistance provided by Ms. Rekha Salilkumar and Shri Sanjeev Prakash is gratefully acknowledged. At the outset, I extend a very warm welcome to Dr. Hans Genberg, Executive Director, the SEACEN Centre and all the participants of the 7th SEACEN High Level Seminar for Deputy Governors, Financial Stability and Supervision [DG (FSS)] and the delegates of the 7th Annual SEACEN DG Meeting (FSS). It is, indeed, a matter of great honour and privilege for the Reserve Bank of India to host this Seminar and the Annual Meet. The theme of the seminar, “Financial Stability in a Weakening Global Economic Environment”, is very topical and befitting, given the volatile recovery the world economy is experiencing. Even almost eight years since resorting to the extraordinary monetary and fiscal measures to counter the after-effects of the Global Financial Crisis, authorities are still left wondering about relationships between key parameters such as unemployment and inflation, as some of the time-tested tool kits have discernibly failed. The recent speeches by FED Chair and her colleagues are a testimony.1 Against this backdrop, it is important to remain mindful of the uncertainties, stay as vigilant and as prepared with ex-ante institutional framework, policy measures and decisions as one can be, to tide against the possible forces of destabilisation. Global environment 1. To state that the world economy is in a fragile state would be an understatement. Whatever parameters one may look at - growth, inflation, employment, trade, etc., all point to weakness in one geography or the other. What, however, is really confounding is that the growth and inflation in the Advanced Economies continue to remain elusive despite the sustained easy money policy and relentless bond buying programmes pursued by the monetary authorities. The underlying premise of making abundant liquidity available at low interest rates to incentivise investments and consequently, to spur real economic activities and to trigger the virtuous cycle of growth, employment and income generation and subsequent reversal of interest rate cycle, has failed. However, it would be imprudent to be completely dismissive of the accommodative monetary policy stance of the monetary authorities as initially these measures had helped to calm the financial markets and revive confidence. The flattening observed in the Phillips curve makes a case for relooking at the implied relationship between full employment and inflation. For instance, in the US, though the unemployment rates declined, the inflation continued to be below the target level of 2%. 2. The vast hoard of liquidity made available due to continued accommodative policy stance has drummed down the yield to the negative terrain. Markets and investors have appeared to respond to the prospects of the continued low interest rate environment by renewing their search for yield by moving into riskier assets, which has supported elevated valuations. That being the case, there is a strong possibility that any reversal of the rate stance by Fed Reserve                                                 1  The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future – speech by Dr. Janet Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming on August 26, 2016.  The "New Normal" and What It Means for Monetary Policy – speech by Governor Lael Brainard, member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, Illinois on September 12, 2016. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  would reverse flows away from the riskier asset classes, trigger sell-offs and cause market disruptions much as witnessed during the taper tantrum in summer of 2013. In a globally integrated world, these sell-offs would not remain restricted to the advanced economies alone, thus making reversal of policy rate by Federal Reserve as one of the important risk events that the world is looking at anxiously. 3. Similarly, Japan continues to be trapped in the decade long vicious cycle of “low-growth -low inflation -low inflation expectations”. Growing sovereign and corporate debt levels as well as rising valuations in commercial real estate in many jurisdictions raise concerns amid growing signs of a downturn in the credit cycle. The recent runs on several large UK commercial property funds illustrate the risks associated with deteriorating real estate values in few entities with structural vulnerabilities. Further, there are also concerns around asset quality and profitability of large banks in many advanced economies, including in the euro area. The prospect of increasing non-performing corporate and real estate loans has potential to further erode valuations and impede raising of further capital by these banks. The protracted low interest rate environment would also have deleterious consequences for the pension funds and asset managers significantly eroding the capability of defined-benefit funds to meet their future liabilities. Though, the World has survived BREXIT as a risk event, but how it will manifest in the trade relations, investments and business sentiments going forward would be keenly observed. State of emerging economies 4. Emerging economies present a more heterogeneous ecosystem, though growth here also has been relatively weak than the long term average. The interest rates are high due to persistently high inflation, but at the same time the higher yields have helped them attract the much needed capital flows from the advanced economies. Higher capital flows has strengthened their currency with the resultant weakening of exports and has triggered some sort of a race for competitive depreciation among these economies. ‘Beggar thy neighbour’ is the mantra they seem to be following. One, however, needs to be mindful of the risk of quick reversal of capital flows if these economies do not have strong fundamentals and a commitment to structural reforms. China has been trying to retrace its growth path, however, excessive corporate leverage, which has fueled excess capacity, casts doubt on its sustainability. The moderating economic growth and rising corporate debt levels have begun to put pressure on banks’ asset quality and may force Chinese authorities to take appropriate measures to repair the fragile bank balance sheets. Any adverse development in the Chinese economy holds the potential for sending shock waves across other jurisdictions. 5. Brazil and Russia have also seen downturns due to sharp fall in commodity prices, especially oil. The uncertainty with regard to oil prices continue to persist as the demand supply dynamics have become mostly non-existent, leading to supply glut and plummeting prices. Impact on financial stability 6. It is against this uncertain backdrop that we are discussing financial stability. The co-existence of very low interest rates and still lower economic activity in the advanced economies makes a strong case for revisiting the theory around transmission ability of policy rate and the efficacy of the transmission channels. Financial stability is characterised by a condition, in which the financial system functions normally, allocates the resources judiciously and undertakes intermediation between the financial sector and the real sector uninterruptedly. Most importantly, financial stability portends a situation in which the system would be resilient to shocks, if any, through a self –correcting mechanism. As central bankers with a direct/indirect mandate to preserve financial stability, our efforts, therefore, must be aimed at strengthening the financial institutions and markets and their ability to transmit and intermediate effectively through robust capital position, improved profitability and resilient systems and control. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  7. The monetary easing pursued by the authorities worldwide in the aftermath of the crisis was ostensibly with the objective of tackling the freeze in the credit markets, driving growth and for tackling unemployment. Nevertheless, if near- zero/negative policy rates are not helping achieve the desired outcomes and only having a steroid effect on the financial markets, then the reversal of that stance seems inevitable. Under the circumstances, the timing and quantum of reversal must be as non-disruptive as possible. 8. The immediate reaction to the reversal of the rate cycle in the advanced world would be realignment of the capital flows and strengthening of dollar that can impact the already delicate exports and global trade, given the current political penchant towards protectionism. As yields harden, the rising debt burden would have fiscal implications. The resultant high cost of credit and higher cost of intermediation would adversely impact the overall growth and can push the economies back to the disinflationary mode. Indian experience 9. As I said earlier, emerging markets have different dynamics at play and they are rather dispersed across the spectrum than being a homogeneous group. Therefore, it is a bit difficult to discuss them as a class. Let me, however, use this opportunity to talk about India- how we are placed in the current environment and what are the specific issues/challenges that we are faced with. 10. While generally sharing the problem of high corporate leverage with most emerging markets and well as with the developed world, India presents some exceptions. These exceptions are in the form of moderately higher growth, favourable demographics and persistent inflation. The accommodative policy stance and other conventional and unconventional monetary and fiscal measures taken in the immediate aftermath of Global Financial Crisis have been long unwound. We have been fighting a battle against high inflation and have been on a tight monetary policy regime for some time. You may be aware that we have moved to a CPI-based Inflation targeting regime sometime back and our monetary stance and liquidity management is being calibrated accordingly. India also enjoys demographic dividend in form of a young, growing population and hence, the domestic demand is likely to continue growing for the foreseeable future. In fact, we need to grow at a higher pace consistently if the demographic advantages are not to be frittered away. India has been the beneficiary of the capital flows as it is seen as a promising investment destination and the Government and Reserve Bank of India are committed to continue to press the advantage by ushering in necessary reform measures. 11. While the economic fundamentals of the country are on a much sounder footing than three years ago, like the rest of the world we are also wary of the impending market volatility that could emerge from crystallisation of any of the risk events that I alluded to earlier. A significant area of concern for some EMEs, especially for us in India, is slowdown in inward remittances from non-residents. The depressed oil prices have created stress in the oil-exporting countries in the Middle East which has a significant population of migrant Indians. Already a feeble trend of decline in remittance is established and if the oil prices remain depressed for an extended period of time, immigrant population may lose their jobs, face retrenchment and the consequent repatriation may lead to social tensions back home. 12. The key goal that we have set for ourselves is to restore order and normalcy as soon as possible so that the financial system could continue to subserve the needs of the real economy on an on-going basis. The GDP growth of 7.1% (Q1 2016–17), the current level of oil prices and measures to contain gold import has helped us move towards current account surplus , the rupee has been reasonably stable and macros are more or less comforting. 13. In a dynamic environment, being in a relatively safe zone cannot be a reason enough for complacency. As I mentioned earlier, we hold potential for achieving still higher rates of sustainable economic growth. We are mindful of the need for more structural reforms to address issues relating to capital formation, infrastructure creation, low capacity utilisation, 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  fiscal consolidation, subsidy management etc. As a bank dominated financial system, it is important for us that the banks have the ability to undertake intermediation in a productive and efficient manner. Hence, an efficient transmission of cuts in policy rate to end borrowers has also been on our active agenda. But the stress in the bank balance sheet has been a hurdle with provisioning for bad debts taking a toll on the bottom line. This is mainly on account of a RBI drive for balance sheet repair in the banking system resulting generally from corporate balance sheet distress. We firmly believe that once the banks have a healthier balance sheet, they would be ready for dispensing credit and aid growth. 14. Especially for augmentation of the capital in Public sector banks, we have been closely engaging with the government. Several measures have been taken by us to deal with the asset quality issues in the banking system. A centralised repository of large credits has been operationalised which enables to have a correct picture of indebtedness of large corporate houses. Several other tools like JLF/ SDR/ 5:25/ S4A2 etc. were brought in to help the banks for revitalization of stressed assets on their books. A framework for enhancing credit supply for large borrowers through market mechanism has also been unveiled recently with the underlying aim to limit concentration risk of large borrowers while facilitating access of borrowers to funds from the bond market. In order to curtail exposure of banks to large corporates, the single and group exposure norms have been made stricter and made more expensive beyond a limit. These measures are meant to implicitly facilitate better credit flow to micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and retail sector. 15. In sum, there is realisation that the banking sector needs to be declogged and a multitude of options must be made available for better and efficient credit dispensation. Measures have also been taken to enhance resolution mechanisms, strengthen the existing payment and settlement system and to leverage technology to achieve greater financial inclusiveness. A set of differentiated banks have already been licensed for better penetration of financial services and to meet requirements of specific sectors. The framework for non-bank financial companies has been strengthened and work is currently in progress to study the entire gamut of regulatory issues relating to Fin Tech in view of the growing significance of Fin Tech innovations and their interactions with the financial sector as well as the financial sector entities. Talking of fintech, I am also reminded of Cyber Risk which has emerged as a major vulnerability for the financial institutions across the world as the trend has shifted from targeted attacks on individuals to institutions. Cyber-attack on Bangladesh Central Bank is a case in point. Regulation of Peer                                                 2  Framework for Revitalising Distressed Assets envisages a corrective action plan that incentivizes early identification of problem cases, timely restructuring of accounts considered to be viable and taking prompt steps by banks for recovery or sale of unviable accounts. All lenders of a consortium are required to form a Forum named Joint Lenders Forum (JLF) to plan for resolution of a stressed borrower as soon as a defined stress parameters is reported by any lender.  5/25 Scheme To enable banks to offer finance for long-gestation projects in the infrastructure/core industries sector, they have been allowed to extend structured long term project loans with periodic refinancing option. Strategic Debt Restructuring (SDR) The SDR guidelines enable banks to effect change in ownership where the existing promoters are found to be wanting. At the time of restructuring, lenders are required to incorporate an enabling clause to convert their loans into equity if the borrower fails to achieve the viability milestones/critical conditions. Subsequently, the banks may bring in a new promoter to turnaround the borrower company. Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of Stressed Assets (S4A): S4A scheme is meant to strengthen the lender’s ability to deal with stressed assets and converting part of the debt into equity without necessarily changing the control of the company. The existing debt is to be segregated into ‘sustainable’ and ‘unsustainable portions’. Sustainable debt should not be less than 50 percent of current funded liabilities and capable of being serviced with existing cash flows without changing tenor and interest rate on the loan. Unsustainable portion can be converted into equity / convertible preference shares / optionally convertible debentures. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  to peer lending platforms is another item on RBI’s active agenda, which can potentially bring complementarity to banking services. Conclusion 16. Before I conclude, let me raise a couple of issues which can be worthy debating during the course of the seminar. a. While we have been assiduously pursuing implementation of the regulatory reforms set out in the wake of GFC, have we convinced ourselves fully about the unintended consequences for the emerging markets eg. availability and cost of credit for smaller entities, contraction in operations by foreign banks having implications for specialised high end products like derivatives, withdrawal of correspondent banking relationships etc.? b. How far is imposing risk weight on sovereign exposures of banks currently being discussed by standard setting bodies actually justified in jurisdictions where the large part of the banking sector itself is publicly owned and required by statute to hold government securities in their investment portfolio? It is also important to note here that most of the sovereign debt in our jurisdiction is issued in home currency. c. Since the reversal of policy stance in the US has potential to create global market disruptions, it would be appropriate to take that decision keeping the global context in view rather than in the domestic context.  d. Pace and timing of some of the reform measures are apparently disproportionate to the stage of development of the markets in EMEs. The stiff deadlines set out for adoption of reform measures pertaining to OTC derivatives and resolution of CCPs are cases in point.  e. Some jurisdictions are overlaying parallel policy prescriptions on top of the multilaterally agreed reform measures which undermine the effectiveness of collaborative framework.  The above posers lead one to ask a broader question: “whether the reform measures have plugged the vulnerabilities and created a more stable financial system or have they created new vulnerabilities and fragilities for the system?” I think only time can answer that question. 17. To conclude, howsoever confident we might feel of various endeavours made by us to build strong systems and processes, their ultimate test would only happen during the times of turbulence. The base we build by putting in place well-thought out institutional framework and policy measures will provide the bulwark against forces of disruption. More importantly, irrespective of the global environment, we must keep revisiting and reorienting the framework and mechanics at periodic intervals so that the risk events can be managed with minimal damage. I once again welcome you to India and wish you an enjoyable stay in Mumbai and fruitful deliberations during the seminar. Thank you! 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Hiroshi Nakaso: Toward a “Comprehensive Assessment” of the monetary easing Speech by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting hosted by the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan (ACCJ), Tokyo, 8 September 2016. *      *      * Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. Introduction It is my great pleasure to have the opportunity today to speak at a business luncheon hosted by the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan. All eyes seem to be on a comprehensive assessment to be conducted at the Bank of Japan’s September 2016 Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM). This is, of course, the main topic of my speech today. Before addressing that issue, however, I would like to touch on responses taken by central banks after the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the European Union (EU) –the so-called Brexit – and decisions made at the Bank’s MPM held in July 2016. For me, these topics are not appetizers served before the main dishes. I believe that they are important policies on their own. Responses to Brexit On June 23, 2016, contrary to general consensus, a majority of voters in the United Kingdom supported leaving the EU, and this led to global financial markets destabilizing, manifested in such developments as the rapid depreciation of the pound sterling. As Japan’s markets were the first to be exposed to the unfolding results of the referendum, they reacted violently. The yen’s exchange rate appreciated rapidly and the stock prices fell sharply. The authorities around the world, including those in the G7 countries, responded quickly and effectively. The G7 central banks expressed their intention to ensure adequate liquidity and support the functioning of markets. In the Japanese context, we judged it necessary to ensure accessibility of globally operating Japanese firms and financial institutions to funding liquidity in foreign currencies, in particular to U.S. dollar funding liquidity, and to that end, to reinforce the backstop facilities that had been installed during the Global Financial Crisis. Enhancement of monetary easing in July In light of heightened uncertainties surrounding overseas economies, such as those stemming from the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the EU, the Bank decided at the July 2016 MPM to enhance monetary easing. Specifically, measures taken by the Bank are threefold (Chart 1). The first is an increase in the Bank’s purchases of exchange-traded funds (ETFs). Specifically, the amount of purchases will be almost doubled from an annual pace of about 3.3 trillion yen to an annual pace of about 6 trillion yen. This measure aims at preventing the deterioration in business confidence and consumer sentiment and promoting proactive risk-taking. I think that this amount is significantly large given the fact that foreign investors’ cumulative net purchases of stocks amounted to about 16 trillion yen for the first three years of Abenomics (Chart 2). The second is a doubling of the size of the Bank’s lending program in U.S. dollars to support economic growth (the Special Rules for the U.S. Dollar Lending Arrangement to Enhance the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth Conducted through the Loan Support Program). Under this lending program, the Bank will provide back-to-back financing in U.S. dollars to financial institutions by using its own U.S. dollar reserve funds in cases where these financial institutions make foreign currency-
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  denominated investments and loans to firms, which contributes to the strengthening of the foundations for economic growth. The duration of the Bank’s lending can be up to 4 years through rollovers. The loans under the program enable firms to receive stable funding in U.S. dollars over the long term, and the program has been actively used for funding of firms, including local ones through regional banks. The size of the program was doubled and raised to 24 billion U.S. dollars. The third is an expansion in the amount of collateral that can be pledged under the Bank’s U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations. The Bank has been conducting U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations regularly with U.S. dollar funds raised through a network of bilateral swap lines among central banks. With this operation, financial institutions can raise U.S. dollar funds on a full allotment basis. Nevertheless, there is a condition that the amount of funds to be provided is up to that of eligible collateral pledged by each institution because in principle, transactions with the Bank should be backed by collateral. Under the current monetary policy, many financial institutions have sold Japanese government securities (JGSs) to the Bank while holding a substantial amount of current account balances with it. Under these circumstances, the Bank decided to establish a new securities lending facility in which it lends JGSs to counterparties of these operations against their current account balances with the Bank. This enables the financial institutions to raise U.S. dollar funds against JGSs borrowed from the Bank. The new facility is designed to provide for a rainy day by precluding concern about the lack of collateral they hold. In this way, it is expected to further enhance effectiveness of the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations as a backstop. These measures, despite their technical nature, can contribute meaningfully to ensuring access to funding liquidity in foreign currencies and thus to economic stability. I want to reiterate that such a technocratic endeavor is no less important than such big policy moves as the negative interest rate or the massive purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs), which tend to attract more attention. I.  Background of comprehensive assessment I would now like to turn to the broad framework of monetary policy. Against the backdrop of heightened uncertainty over the outlook for prices, with a view to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, the Bank decided to conduct at the next MPM, to be held in late September, a comprehensive assessment of the developments in economic activity and prices, as well as of the policy effects, over the past three years since the introduction of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE). The background is twofold. First, since the introduction of QQE, Japan’s economic activity and prices have improved substantially, and Japan’s economy is no longer in deflation. However, the price stability target of 2 percent has not been achieved yet, despite the unprecedented large-scale monetary easing. The Bank will analyze how monetary policy has functioned during these years and what factors have possibly hampered achievement of the 2 percent target. Second, under “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” which was introduced more than half a year ago, various interest rates, including JGB yields as well as rates for lending and corporate bonds, have declined substantially; thus, the policy already has exerted remarkable effects. At the same time, however, it has had an impact on financial markets’ liquidity and financial institutions’ profits. The Bank will also assess the effects and impact of this policy. II.  Mechanism of QQE Natural rate of interest and real interest rate Regarding the first point, I would like to start with the basics of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. In fact, the main transmission mechanism of monetary policy, be it conventional or unconventional, is the same. That is, real interest rate effects; in other words, driving the real interest rate higher or lower than the “natural rate of interest,” which is the level of the real 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  interest rate neutral to economic activity and prices. The bigger the difference in these rates, the more effective the monetary easing or tightening will be. The potential growth rate and expected growth rate are considered proxies for the “natural rate of interest.” As Japan has continued to struggle with a trend decline in the potential growth rate since the bubble burst, the Bank has lowered its policy rate to ensure the monetary easing effects (Chart 3). In 1999, it introduced the zero interest rate policy. Starting in 2001, the Bank conducted unconventional monetary policy measures such as quantitative easing and Comprehensive Monetary Easing. Nevertheless, the monetary easing provided by those policies proved insufficient to overcome deflation. Mechanism of QQE Based on this experience, in 2013, the Bank set the price stability target of 2 percent, and with a view to achieving the target at the earliest possible time, it launched QQE. The transmission mechanisms of QQE are also expected to operate through real interest rate effects. QQE aims to raise inflation expectations through the Bank’s strong and clear commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent and through large-scale monetary easing that underpins the commitment. At the same time, the Bank exerts downward pressure on nominal interest rates across the entire yield curve through purchases of JGBs. The compound effects through these channels compress real interest rates. This decline in real interest rates boosts firms’ and households’ economic activity, which in turn leads to higher inflation rates, supported by higher inflation expectation. It was assumed that, as people actually experience inflation, inflation expectations correspondingly would rise further (Chart 4). This last point is called an “adaptive formation mechanism” of inflation expectations, and it is a key concept of what I will talk about later. The innovative quality that might stand out in comparison with measures previously taken by the Bank of Japan and other central banks is that QQE focuses on inflation expectations. Specifically, based on the Fisher Equation, which states that the nominal interest rate is equal to the sum of inflation expectations and the real interest rate, QQE aims to lower real interest rates by raising inflation expectations while compressing nominal interest rates. Economic activity and prices under QQE This mechanism has worked and produced intended effects. QQE brought about a decline in the real interest rate by raising inflation expectations and lowering the nominal interest rate. As I mentioned earlier, the “natural rate of interest” has been on a trend decline. Despite that, the level of the real interest rate has been pushed down significantly lower than the “natural rate of interest” and the financial conditions have improved. Specifically, a moderate increase in lending coupled with a decline in interest rates, a rise in stock prices, and depreciation of the yen have been observed, and these have boosted economic activity. As a result, regarding economic activity, corporate profits marked a record high level and the unemployment rate, released last week, has declined to a remarkably low level of 3.0 percent. As for wages, the annual labor-management wage negotiations in 2014 resulted in base pay rises for the first time in two decades; base pay rises have continued for three consecutive years since then. Looking at the economy as a whole, the output gap has improved close to the long-term average of 0 percent. On the inflation front, on a basis excluding fresh food and energy, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, which had been around minus 0.5 percent before the introduction of QQE, turned positive, and thereafter has remained in positive territory for two years and ten months (Chart 5). This is the first time since the late 1990s, when Japan’s economy fell into deflation, that the CPI inflation rate has remained in positive territory over a protracted period. I think Japan’s economy is no longer in deflation, which is commonly defined as a situation where prices decline on a sustained basis. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Reasons for missing 2 percent price stability target However, it is true that the price stability target of 2 percent has not been achieved. This also has to do with developments in inflation expectations, which is a key factor for real interest rate effects to operate. Looking back, the mechanism worked as expected or better than expected over the first year or so from the introduction of QQE. Thereafter, however, exogenous factors emerged such as a decline in crude oil prices and weakness in demand following the consumption tax hike from the beginning of fiscal 2014. This was compounded by the slowdown in emerging economies from summer 2015 that accompanied volatile developments in global financial markets. As a result, the observed inflation rate has declined, and inflation expectations, which are formed in an adaptive manner, stalled. This seems to be the main factor that hampers achieving the price stability target of 2 percent (Chart 6). It is widely accepted that people’s inflation expectations are formed by two factors: a “forward-looking formation mechanism” and an “adaptive formation mechanism.” In Japan, the effects of the “adaptive formation mechanism” seem to have dominated. This seems to be partly because the price stability target has been missed under prolonged deflation. In addition, during wage negotiations in Japan, such as the so-called spring offensive or shunto in Japanese, wages are decided on a basis of the actual price developments in the previous fiscal year. This may have been one of the factors behind the “adaptive formation mechanism.” The Bank, by continuing with QQE, has been trying to enhance the “forward-looking formation mechanism” and thereby to raise people’s inflation expectations and anchor them to the price stability target of 2 percent. As a result, perhaps we have managed to deanchor the deflationary expectation that the prices would never rise. But inflation expectations are still in transition to be reanchored at 2 percent. Looking ahead, as the observed inflation rate is expected to revert to a gradual rising trend, inflation expectations will be pushed up by the “adaptive formation mechanism.” However, given that the observed inflation rate is likely to hover at slightly negative or about 0 percent for the time being, uncertainty persists about this point. For this reason, I think it is all the more important for the Bank to firmly maintain its commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time from the viewpoint of enhancing the “forward-looking formation mechanism.” The comprehensive assessment is conducted with the aim of achieving the 2 percent target at the earliest possible time. To avoid any possible misunderstanding, this was explicitly referred to in the statement released after the MPM in July 2016. At the forthcoming MPM, we will discuss what needs to be done to achieve the 2 percent target at the earliest possible time. Means toward reducing the level of monetary policy accommodation will not be on the agenda. III.  Effects and impact of “QQE with a negative interest rate” Issues of the comprehensive assessment Let me now move on to the topic of the negative interest rate policy. In terms of the transmission mechanism of policy effects, “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” is an extension of the aforementioned policies. Namely, the Bank considers real interest rate effects as the basic mechanism. Against the backdrop of weak inflation expectations that had started to descend further, the Bank decided to keep real interest rates lower by reducing the nominal interest rates beyond the zero bound. By applying the negative interest rate to a portion of financial institutions’ current account balances with the Bank, in combination with its JGB purchases, the Bank intended to further compress interest rates on JGBs across the entire yield curve. This was expected to affect various interest rates, including those for lending, corporate bonds, and CP, spreading the effects of a decline in the real interest rate to economic activity and prices. On the other hand, from the inception of the negative interest rate policy, the single most important issue has been that the policy should avoid having an excessively negative impact on financial institutions’ profits, thus impairing the financial intermediation. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Based on the experience of the past six months, the Bank will also assess the effects and impact of this policy. This will be the second pillar in our comprehensive assessment. What we learned over the last six months In my opinion, there are six points we have learned over the last six months since the introduction of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” Let me elaborate. First, a combination of the negative interest rate policy and JGB purchases proved extremely powerful in exerting downward pressure across the entire yield curve. This seems to have operated through the mechanism in which (a) the negative interest rate applied to financial institutions’ current account balances with the Bank has resulted in a decline in short-term interest rates, and (b) financial institutions have been discouraged to hold current account balances through JGB sales, and this, together with a decline in risk premiums caused by JGB purchases, has lowered long-term interest rates. Moreover, the so-called search for positive yield by investors has boosted the demand for assets with positive yields, substantially lowering yields on super-long-term JGBs. Such mechanism has exerted downward pressure and flattened the yield curve, particularly toward the longer end. This first point has proven the effectiveness of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” as a monetary policy tool (Chart 7). Second, some were concerned that lower risk-free rates, or JGB yields, might not lead to a decline in banks’ lending rates or interest rates on corporate bonds and CP, as room is limited for a decline in rates on deposits, the main source of funding for financial institutions. I also considered that such concern deserves attention, but banks’ lending rates, as well as interest rates for corporate bonds and CP, have fallen significantly thus far, each marking historical lows (Chart 8). Third, new developments relating to corporate finance have emerged recently; for example, the issuance of corporate bonds with a maturity of over ten years and firms’ borrowings through subordinated loans have increased. Super-long-term funding had been observed mainly in infrastructure firms such as those related to electricity and transportation, but now is increasingly shared by a wider range of industries (Chart 9). Fourth, according to the results of surveys such as the Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan (Tankan) and the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices at Large Japanese Banks (often dubbed the Loan Survey), financial institutions’ lending attitudes have remained proactive. Thus far, we have seen little evidence that the profit squeeze caused by the negative interest rate is adversely affecting their intermediary functions (Chart 10). Fifth, however, the flipside of such positive developments is the growing pressure on financial institutions’ profits. This can be seen from the larger fall in lending rates relative to a marginal decline in rates on deposits. For Japan, the impact of the negative interest rate policy on the profits of financial institutions tends to be relatively large. This is due to such factors as the amount outstanding of deposits far exceeding that of lending, and the interest margin already being extremely small following prolonged competition among financial institutions. Given that profitability affects the soundness of financial institutions in a cumulative manner, we are fully aware of the fact that the impact can vary depending on the duration of the policy. The view that the Bank might disregard the intermediary function performed by the financial sector is totally unfounded. In fact, ever since our homegrown financial crisis in the 1990s, we have committed ourselves to maintaining financial system stability, which is a mandate given to us under the Bank of Japan Act. Besides, the banking system is the key transmission channel for monetary policy. Sixth, as long-term and super-long-term rates have declined significantly, the rates of return on investments of insurance and pension products have declined, the sales of some saving-type products are suspended, and the net present value of retirement benefit obligations has increased. Although direct impacts of these developments on the entire economy may not be substantial, we should take account of the possibility that such developments can affect 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  people’s confidence by causing concerns over the sustainability of the financial function in a broad sense, thereby negatively affecting economic activity. Thinking on the monetary policy management “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” must be pursued as the most appropriate macroeconomic policy, by striking the right balance between the powerful policy effects described in the first four points I mentioned and the possible adverse effects on financial intermediation that I listed as the fifth and sixth points. There is usually a trade-off between these two aspects, but the way we balance them must be dynamic. For example, a static and uniform judgment that rules out any further cuts in the negative interest rate in view of financial institutions’ profits would not be the right approach. Depending on the situations for economic activity, prices, and financial conditions, further measures may still be deemed necessary after weighing policy effects against the cost on financial intermediation. Through numerous discussions I have had with the leaders of financial institutions, I think I fully recognize the effects of the large-scale monetary policy on financial institutions and financial markets, and the likely impacts if the policy is to continue. Based on this recognition, we will take measures that we judge necessary for Japan’s economy. It is from this standpoint that I will participate in discussions of the comprehensive assessment at the next MPM. Based on a candid assessment, we will decide whether or not it will be necessary to make adjustments to the current policy framework, and if judged necessary, in what way it should be adjusted. Closing remarks Lastly, let me talk about the relationship between the Bank’s monetary policy and the government’s fiscal management and a growth strategy. The first relationship is that with the government’s fiscal management. Usually, when the government increases fiscal expenditures by issuing government bonds, interest rates on government bonds will rise, which discourages private-sector investment. This effect is called “crowding out.” In this regard, in a “policy mix” where the central bank pursues monetary easing at the same time, the rise in interest rates will be contained, thereby preventing “crowding out” effects. In the current Japanese context, this is exactly what is taking place. Market interest rates in Japan have been in negative territory across a wide range of maturities due to the effects of the Bank’s “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” In this situation, the economic stimulus of the government’s fiscal expenditure, coupled with the monetary expansion, is bound to prove very powerful due to the synergy effects. This type of powerful “policy mix” has been in place in Japan over the last three years and is likely to be reinforced further with the new large-scale fiscal “stimulus package” in combination with “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” The second relationship is that with a growth strategy. As I said earlier, it is important that the Bank lowers the real interest rate while at the same time the government raises the natural rate of interest by promoting a growth strategy. In this regard, there should be an emphasis on “at the same time.” Structural reforms raise potential growth and reduce uncertainty about the future, so that firms and households spend more today in anticipation of higher profits and incomes in the future, thus raising current demand. On the other hand, demand stimulus from monetary easing raises potential output through an increase in the capital stock as well as labor input. Thus, I believe monetary policy to overcome deflation and supply-side reforms to raise the growth potential must be pursued in tandem, or “at the same time,” to bring Japan’s economy back on track toward sustained growth. The Bank should continue with the monetary easing that successfully reshaped Japan’s economy such that it may be described as no longer being in deflation, move further to terminate deflation, and achieve the 2 percent target. Meanwhile, I think that it is worth noting that the government’s recent economic measures focus on “investment for the future.” 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  It has been thirty-eight years since I joined the Bank of Japan. During this period, the economic and financial environment surrounding Japan has changed dramatically and the policy agenda for the central bank shifted accordingly. As a freshman, I could hardly imagine that this central bank traditionally renowned as an inflation fighter was going to be engaged in such a difficult struggle to overcome deflation. Such changes never lose steam. More recently, after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, active discussions have taken place around the world about policy responses to the slower growth trend and the framework of the monetary policy in such a situation, ignited by Larry Summers’ Secular Stagnation Hypothesis. I already expressed my opinion in New York earlier this year, so I will not repeat this today. However, I have an impression that some topics that formerly had been confined to academic circles are today openly discussed as practical policy challenges that need to be addressed from a medium- to long-term perspective. I really feel this when attending international meetings and conferences. The answers vary from country to country, and they are not as straightforward as those provided in textbooks. For policy makers around the world, I sense that this has become a common challenge that underlies contemporary policy discussions and practices. I am reminded that, in order for policy makers at central banks and governments to appropriately keep abreast of the speed and dynamism with which the environment changes, they should not adhere simply to past common sense. Recently, I often think that we central bankers must have the courage to evolve with the times and adapt to the environment while cherishing the central bank’s DNA; that is, “the policy actions based on theory and research.” This last point is somewhat superfluous and clearly outside the scope of the upcoming comprehensive assessment, and I would like to finish my speech by reminding you that this is just my thought. Thank you for your attention.   
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9    
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11    
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches    
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Benoît Cœuré: Reforming financial sector benchmarks Welcome remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the annual meeting of the Money Market Contact Group, Frankfurt am Main, 27 September 2016. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, I am pleased to be with you and very much appreciate having an opportunity to discuss with you issues of importance to the money market. There is a topic that in the last few years has drawn the attention of regulators, of legislators, of market participants but also of the general public, namely financial benchmarks. I hardly need to convince any of you of the relevance of benchmarks such as EURIBOR, LIBOR or EONIA. Indeed, I only need to quote the European Commission, which recently declared EURIBOR to be a “critical” benchmark in the light of the vast number of contracts which use it as a reference – more than €180 trillion of derivatives contracts and more than €1 trillion of retail mortgages. Indeed, benchmarks have over the years become an essential part of the infrastructure of our economy. They are indices that are used to determine the level of payment in a financial contract, whereby neither party to the contract has any control over their setting. Their value and their credibility are derived from the fact that they are considered impartial, representative, and therefore fair. If the impartiality of a benchmark is compromised, confidence in any contractual relationship based on that benchmark will be, as a result, seriously undermined. Therefore, following the scandals involving some of the biggest benchmarks, regulators and legislators, in coordination with private sector, identified market shortcomings and designed a framework that would guarantee the integrity of reference rates. And a lot has been achieved so far: 1. The private sector has played an important role in improving the benchmark-setting process by designing new codes of conduct, by enhancing transparency and visibility, by launching private initiatives reflecting market needs, and by identifying alternative benchmarks. 2. The public sector has contributed to this process as well. Since 2013 the FSB and the International Organization of Securities Commissions have worked to reform benchmarks, supporting and steering the efforts of private market participants to define more robust and reliable benchmarks and related “best practices”. In addition, the public sector has adopted a dedicated regulation. As benchmarks are an important part of the global financial system and an essential tool in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, they matter to the ECB as well. We have been committed to improving the relevant benchmarks for the euro, as have other central banks in respect of their currencies. While the ECB has always stressed that financial benchmarks should be private initiatives tailored to private needs, we have also helped the private sector by shaping some of the benchmark reform initiatives. For example, we have been following closely the reform of EURIBOR from a quote-based to a transaction-based index. Moreover, together with the EURIBOR administrator, we launched a data collection back in 2013 to analyse the feasibility of transaction-based alternatives. And indeed it was this group, the Money Market Contact Group that was asked to participate to at least 100%. And you delivered. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The EURIBOR reform has now reached an important stage. The transition to the transaction-based methodology is foreseen for 2017 and the administrator is planning a pre-live verification exercise to ascertain the feasibility of the proposed methodology under current market conditions. For the pre-live verification – and eventually for the EURIBOR reform – to be a success, broad market representation has to be achieved. Therefore, not only should current panel members participate but also other banks in the euro money market. A lack of participants might seriously threaten the completion of the pre-live verification and ultimately the reference rate itself. Therefore, in view of the tremendous importance of benchmarks such as EURIBOR, the ECB would like to see banks take responsibility for the benchmark in two ways. Firstly, by participating in the pre-live verification and secondly, by eventually joining the panel of contributors to EURIBOR with the launch of the new calculation methodology. Banks are among the biggest users of EURIBOR. As such, they would also incur the biggest costs and losses if it came to an abrupt end. It is therefore up to the banking industry as a whole to support this benchmark. But the burden cannot only be shouldered by the current panel banks, which have indeed shown their sense of responsibility. Despite the related costs and perceived risks, they have remained in the panel and helped to prevent any disorderly dismantling of EURIBOR. But there are other examples. In some cases, banks that are among the largest institutions in their jurisdiction, and therefore rely hugely on the benchmark to price their products, have chosen to leave the panel. This is a worrisome development. Some members left because of the perceived elevated risks related to the usage of expert judgement while contributing to EURIBOR. Since their departure, however, there have been a couple of important changes. Firstly, a new regulation has been adopted in Europe, establishing rules guiding the process of setting a benchmark and therefore contributing to greater regulatory certainty. Secondly, the envisaged reform of EURIBOR, aimed at anchoring the benchmark in transactions, will eventually remove the expert judgement and therefore the subjective element in contributing to EURIBOR. Some banks also saw as an impediment for their participation in the envisaged transaction- based index the costs they will incur for transaction reporting. But the incremental costs for joining the EURIBOR pre-live verification and for contributing to a benchmark with transaction data may actually be limited for those banks, which already report under the ECB Money Market Statistical Reporting Regulation. This is because these banks have already set up systems in order to extract and report transaction data. In conclusion, I hope that banks will indeed take the opportunity to create better, more robust and representative benchmarks, which will better suit the needs of end users. And I also hope that banks will continue to participate in the panel – or decide to join or re-join it – so as to ensure that EURIBOR as well as the other reference rates continue to play their critical role in the European economy. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Peter Praet: Interview in L’Opinion Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in L’Opinion, conducted by Mr Luc de Barochez on 15 September 2016, and published on 20 September 2016. *      *      * Growth is flat, unemployment is high, deficits are large, reforms have stalled... To what extent is France a concern for the European Central Bank?  Unlike many other EU countries, France has come through the financial crisis relatively unscathed. It has also not experienced a sovereign debt crisis. Yet, despite conditions not being too bad, the French economy remains surprisingly subdued and the gloomy mood persists. Successive governments have shown that they are willing to introduce structural reforms. And some reforms have indeed been implemented. But we are seeing significant difficulties in pushing them through. The biggest concern is the job market, in particular youth unemployment. The government has clearly realised that it is harder to do business in France than other countries, such as Germany or Belgium. This is due to labour relations, among other things. Which is why the reforms to the labour law, to facilitate company-wide agreements, are a step in the right direction. What is the most important solution for a country like France? Policies to increase competitiveness or prioritising a reduction in the government deficit? Both are important. Our message is that debt must remain sustainable. But it isn’t just a question of the absolute value of the debt. The quality of public finances is key. Take healthcare spending. A country that spends less in this area can sometimes offer higher-quality care than a country that spends far more. On the other hand, if debt sustainability can be improved by a certain reform, perhaps some small measure of budget flexibility might be given to facilitate the implementation of this reform. This sort of flexibility is accepted by the European Commission. But often budget flexibility is granted and then there’s a problem following up on the reform! The President of the Commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, wants to double the size of his investment plan, to €630 billion. Is this crucial for growth? It’s a good policy direction, but it’s still difficult to assess what the concrete effect of these investment plans will be. For now, investment dynamics in the euro area as a whole, and in each member country, remain too weak.  Speaking for Germany, Wolfgang Schäuble rejected ECB President Mario Draghi’s call for the country to put its surplus at the service of the recovery. Do you feel like you’re preaching in the wilderness? Germany respects the criteria of the Stability and Growth Pact - thanks to budgetary surpluses and despite high levels of immigration, it is optimistic that it will bring its debt below 60% of GDP, the limit set by the Maastricht Treaty, sooner than expected. However, the country’s enormous current account surplus is an anomaly at almost 9% of GDP. Growth is too driven by external demand. Germany has the fiscal space to develop internal demand.  Berlin is accusing the ECB of being responsible for this imbalance, as your monetary policy is weakening the euro and boosting exports. Our monetary policy has been extremely accommodative since spring 2014, in response to inflation figures and outlooks that were too weak for too long. It’s a single monetary policy for the euro area as a whole. It isn’t necessarily optimal for all countries at all times. Every country should, therefore, develop other ways to correct the tensions and imbalances. In the case of Germany, the country has to decide for itself how it wants to develop its internal market, whether by raising wages, increasing investment or reducing taxes. For example, Germany 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  needs structural reforms in certain sectors, like services. The very good environment provides a unique opportunity that won’t necessarily last, as Germany is facing substantial industrial challenges in the years to come, for example in the car industry. The ECB has just gone over the €1 trillion threshold with its securities purchases under its quantitative easing programme, but the impact on inflation and growth seems to be negligible. We can’t say that because where would inflation be without our policy? Let’s not underestimate the critical situation we found ourselves in. Our monetary policy has been essential to avoid a severe recession. At the start of the crisis in 2007-2008, a huge gap opened up between long-term expectations, based on an assumption of high growth rates, and harsh reality. Exaggerated expectations led to excessive indebtedness. We are experiencing the correction of this overborrowing. Thanks to our standard and non-standard monetary policy measures, such as our public debt purchases, the situation is starting to return to normal. This ultra-accommodative policy ends in principle in March 2017. Will you stop at this deadline? Our monetary policy objective is to return inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. We will maintain the very substantial amount of monetary support necessary to fulfil our mandate. Our monthly asset purchases to the tune of €80 billion should continue until the end of March 2017 or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until we see a sustainable adjustment in inflation in line with our objective.  When considering the potential risks to growth, are you including the possible election of Donald Trump in the United States with a protectionist programme? It’s important to distinguish between election speeches and actual policies. Speeches today are tending to be increasingly national and protectionist, and not only in the United States. Currently, people are seeing the negative side of globalisation more than the positive. This erosion of trust in the importance of international trade is worrying and may hinder the spread of ideas and know-how which is essential for growth. For years, the consequences of globalisation for some segments of the population have been underestimated – supporting policies are necessary. Another potential risk for growth – if Matteo Renzi were to lose his referendum this autumn in Italy, should we fear a new euro area crisis? In Italy, like in France or in other countries, the problem is convincing the population that reforms are vital for prosperity, and then implementing these reforms. The Italian government has undertaken some major reforms. Pension reform, for example, has greatly improved the sustainability of pensions. European banks are complaining about your negative deposit rates. Can you reassure them that you won’t go any further into negative territory? We are aware that the interest rate configuration may be difficult for banks. But it is a part of their environment to which they have to adjust. We should also remember that a large part of the problem arises from an unrestrained financial system which has indulged in excess. The favourable financing conditions, supported by our very accommodative monetary policy, have greatly facilitated balance sheet adjustments in various sectors of the economy, including the financial sector.  Bankers must carefully consider their business models. Some banks have adopted a good attitude – they realise they are in a difficult environment and that they have to manage it. How long will this situation last? Some market participants fear that our rate configuration could remain unchanged for a very long time, e.g. for ten years. Personally, I think that we shouldn’t be overly pessimistic.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Don’t you believe in secular stagnation? No. We face serious adjustment difficulties, which stem from the slowdown in productivity, but this slowdown can be managed by structural reforms. Secular stagnation is not inevitable.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jens Weidmann: Welcome remarks – forging ties – profile of Mark Carney Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the XXIIV. Arthur Burns Memorial Lecture, Berlin, 22 September 2016. *      *      * Chairman Friedrich Merz, Governor Mark Carney, Ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted to welcome you to the twenty-fourth Arthur F. Burns memorial lecture. The Bundesbank has a tradition of hosting this lecture. The close collaboration between the Bundesbank and the Atlantik Brücke goes back to one of my predecessors, Karl Klasen, who was chairman of the Atlantik Brücke from 1978 to 1984. This involvement has continued to this day and Bundesbank Executive Board member Andreas Dombret is the current treasurer of the Atlantik Brücke. As for myself, having participated in its German-American Young Leaders Program many years ago, I have remained in touch with the association since that time. The Atlantik Brücke was founded in 1952 with the aim of forging closer links between the United States and Germany. Its purpose was to foster better mutual understanding and keep the transatlantic dialogue alive for future generations. At a time when economic integration and migration are being seen by some people as an economic threat and in view of the often more inward-looking style of politics currently perceptible on both sides of the Atlantic, it is important to set a counterpoint and to put the case for open markets and international co-operation. Institutions such as the Atlantik Brücke can make an important contribution in this regard. Ladies and gentlemen, it gives me great pleasure today to welcome Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial Stability Board. Our speaker today is a perfect role model for North American and European partnership. A Canadian citizen, he was appointed Governor of the Bank of England in 2013, making him the first non-Briton to hold this position in the institution’s 320-year history. Mark’s arrival in London in 2013 attracted the kind of attention in the British media only usually seen when another famous Canadian visits the country: Justin Bieber. And like Justin Bieber, he already had an established fan base when he took over the reins at Threadneedle Street. One of them was the former finance minister George Osborne, who praised Mark in front of Parliament as “the outstanding central banker of his generation”. Indeed, even at his young age, Mark had carved out a reputation in the world of finance and central banking, having filled an impressive range of posts in both the private and public sector. Born in Canada, Mark earned a scholarship to Harvard University at the age of 18. He studied economics and went on to receive his PhD from Oxford University in 1995. Over a period of 10 years, he held various positions at Goldman Sachs in different cities around the world, including Tokyo and London. During this time, he became familiar with how the financial markets work; knowledge that would prove extremely valuable in his later positions. However, rather unusually, Mark’s long-term plan was to eventually work in the public sector. He once said: “Some people feel an obligation to public service, and if they do, then they 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  should pursue it.” In 2003, Mark followed his own advice and joined the Bank of Canada as deputy governor. After a brief secondment to the Federal Department of Finance, he was appointed Governor of the Bank of Canada in February 2008, making him the youngest central bank governor among the G7 countries – at least until he gave me the baton in 2011. Today, Mark and I are the longest serving governors of the G7 countries. In contrast to public perception, the world of central banking can sometimes be fast-paced… Mark had not been in his new position for long when the financial crisis erupted with full force. However, unlike other major economies, Canada avoided a deep recession and handled the crisis rather well. Just one month after his appointment, Mark cut interest rates to record lows and accompanied this measure by clear forward guidance. In short, Mark demonstrated leadership during the financial crisis. And it was precisely this talent for leadership that gained him the Reader’s Digest title of the Most Trusted Canadian in 2011. In the same year, he was appointed Chairman of the FSB, where he is currently serving his second term. On the 1st of July 2013 Mark took the helm at the Bank of England, one of the most respected central banks in the world. In the light of Britain’s decision to leave the European Union, his job has its own specific challenges. Again, this is a situation that requires strong leadership. Dear Mark, during your time at Oxford University, you were a successful hockey player, acting as goal-keeper and co-captain of the Oxford Blues. Wayne Gretzky, a living hockey legend who also played for your favorite team, the Edmonton Oilers, once said: “A good hockey player plays where the puck is. A great hockey player plays where the puck is going to be.” This holds for us central bankers, too. While we certainly shouldn’t take our eye off where the puck is at present, we still need to look far enough ahead to anticipate where it is heading in the long run. And this is exactly what you are doing. It is largely thanks to you that the FSB analyses the long-term economic consequences of climate change. While this issue might not be as imminent as the Brexit vote, the longer-term economic implications are more far-reaching. The FSB has established a private-sector-led task force, developing proposals for voluntary, consistent and comparable corporate disclosure of climate-related financial risks. Furthermore, at the COP21 in Paris last year, the leaders of the G20 considered how to harness the capacity of financial markets to effectively finance the transition to a low-carbon economy. In your widely regarded speech “Breaking the tragedy of the horizons” in October 2015, you reminded politicians and members of the financial and insurance sector of the risks arising from climate change itself and the transition to a greener economy. And so I am delighted that you will address this topic again today. Before we go into overtime, I will hand over to you: Mark, the floor is yours. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Jens Weidmann: Aspiration and reality – the situation in the European monetary union Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Institut Ökonomie der Zukunft, Karlsruhe, 15 September 2016. *      *      * 1. Introduction Professor Weibel Professor Sloterdijk Professor Puppe Ladies and gentlemen Linguists tell us that the name “Europe” comes from the ancient Greek word “erebos” meaning “dark”. Europe therefore denotes the Occident ‒ the place where the sun sets. And the sun indeed does not seem to be shining brightly over Europe at present. According to the investor George Soros, the European Union finds itself in an “existential crisis” following to the UK vote to leave the EU. The political scientist Herfried Münkler, too, declared in the wake of the debate on the refugee crisis that “this time we are dealing with a crisis as understood by Aristotle and the medical profession: the patient either recovers – or will die.” Up to now, said Münkler, it was held that the EU was growing with every crisis and that it was only thanks to such crises that any progress was being made at all. As Münkler sees it, Jean Monnet’s claim that “Europe will be forged in crises,” is no longer valid. In my view, two things can be said about that: talk about the end of the EU somehow reminds me of Mark Twain, who responded to a newspaper report that he had passed away with the words “The report of my death was an exaggeration.” Nevertheless, the mode of operation for European integration does indeed seem to be coming under close scrutiny. Jean Monnet, one of the founding fathers of the European Union, described this mode of operation as a chain reaction. As he envisaged it, the integration of one area of the economy, specifically the coal and steel industry, would entail an ever stronger economic and, subsequently, also political integration. The launch of the euro was based on quite similar ideas. On the occasion of the adoption of the Maastricht Treaty, for example, Helmut Kohl stated that “It cannot be said often enough: political union is the indispensable counterpart of economic and monetary union.” For him, too, the euro was a catalyst for the ongoing process of European unification. The merging of European currencies was ultimately designed to unify the countries of Europe politically. The theory that European integration is a self-reinforcing process in which the integration of individual sub-sectors will necessitate the integration of other areas has become known as the “locomotive theory”. But this theory was being called into question even at the time. The Bundesbank – for example – was a proponent of what was known as the “coronation theory”. The idea was that monetary union should stand at the end of the European integration process because, if the economies have not integrated and converged sufficiently, a single monetary policy would not be suitable for all countries and the monetary union would be prone to crisis. The fact that this fear was not entirely unrealistic has been shown by the euro-area crisis. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Proponents of the locomotive theory see such crises less as a threat than as an opportunity. That is because, according to the locomotive theory, crises, first and foremost, open up the possibility of implementing those steps of integration that have not yet been taken. Accordingly, even now there is no lack of proposals that the appropriate response ‒ not only to the Brexit vote but also the euro-area financial and sovereign crisis ‒ should be even more integration. Given that the design of monetary union in its present state is evidently fragile, and in view of the not inconsiderably diverging ideas about the fundamental policy stance – just think of the almost irreconcilable positions on communitising liability – such a knee-jerk call for integration is making many people anxious. Surveys show that many citizens of the EU doubt whether the existing process of integration is still sustainable. In my following remarks, I do not intend to address the undoubtedly important question of how policymakers might reignite enthusiasm for Europe through projects to create a sense of common identity and interest or other measures. Instead, I shall concentrate on that which is my focus as a central banker, but which is no less important for the general public. Essentially, I will discuss what can be done to make the monetary union, in particular, work better for everyone as well as the role of the single monetary policy in this context. 2. Europe as a promise of prosperity, convergence and integration Looking at the countries of Europe, Jean Monnet concluded as long ago as 1954 that the countries of Europe had “become too small for today’s world.” Given the possibilities of modern technology, he felt that primarily about the economy. But he also believed it was true of foreign policy. In this respect, he was thinking mainly of the major role being played by the United States of America and the Soviet Union, as well as the growing importance of China and India. In this sense, the EU can indeed be seen as a political response to increasing globalisation ‒ as an attempt to establish a strong regional pole in an increasingly multipolar world. In economic terms, the members of the EU were, among other things, “to achieve the strengthening of convergence of their economies” and “advances in economic integration”.1 The EU thereby gave a threefold promise to its citizens: to increase prosperity, achieve convergence in standards of living, and deepen integration. And, in actual fact, numerous studies come to the conclusion that the single European market has led to more prosperity in Europe.2, 3, 4 Looking at the big picture, real economic output in the EU countries has gone up by one-third since 1995 despite the financial and sovereign debt crisis. The fact that the increase in the USA, Canada and Japan has been just as strong as on an average of the EU countries when looking at the per capita growth of the working population does show, however, that other factors have also played a part in economic growth in the EU. In a large single market, differing preferences and skills mean more opportunities for specialisation – for firms and thus, ultimately, also for the employees. In a large market, it is                                                 1 Lisbon Treaty, preamble. 2 H Badinger (2005), Growth Effects of Economic Integration: Evidence from the EU Member States, Review of World Economics 141, 50–78. 3 N F Campos, F Coricelli and L Moretti (2014), Economic Growth and Political Integration: Estimating the Benefits from Membership in the European Union Using the Synthetic Counterfactuals Method, IZA Discussion Paper No 8162. 4 A Boltho and B Eichengreen (2008), The Economic Impact of European Integration, CEPR Discussion Paper No 6820. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  easier to do what one does best. At the same time, the range of goods on offer becomes more diverse. All of that is potentially for the benefit of all. Admittedly, this does not mean that everyone benefits equally from the stronger economic integration in Europe and worldwide. Technological advances, especially in information technology, enable the highly-skilled to make even more effective use of their capabilities and demand higher wages accordingly. And the globalisation of the economy makes competition more intense precisely for the medium and low-skilled. That dampens wage growth in this segment of the labour market. Taking the long view, wage differentiation – in other words, the ratio of very high to very low gross wages – has therefore increased; however, this trend has come to a standstill over the past few years. This flipside of globalisation undoubtedly also played a part in the Brexit vote in the UK. The EU became a target for voters to vent their frustration about the downsides of globalisation and migration. And there are many who now see the monetary union as a drain on their country’s economy rather than as a guarantor of growth. After all, the countries of the euro area can no longer use exchange rates to cushion economic shocks. Given all the disappointment about Europe and its institutions, what is often overlooked is that, in the existing institutional structure of the EU, responsibility for releasing the forces of growth by means of economic reforms still lies primarily with the individual member states. In doing so, they have pursued different approaches in the past few years, which are also reflected in varying rates of economic growth. Along with a sustainable economic policy at the national level, however, it will also be vital to strengthen the forces of growth at the Community level. I am thinking here, for example, of the completion of the single market for services or a single market for digital services. Studies suggest that the digital market alone could raise economic output in the EU by a further 4%.5 Not only would that mean more prosperity, it would also create additional jobs ‒ more than 400,000 in Germany alone. And more jobs are the best antidote to economic anxieties about integration. 3. The liability principle: a cornerstone of the market economy Ladies and gentlemen One area of the domestic market, however, has revealed serious weaknesses until recently: I mean the financial services market, and the banking market in particular. This is because no rules existed, either in Europe or in other economic regions such as the USA, to guarantee that the shareholders and creditors of large, interconnected banks would be on the hook for potential losses. These institutions could count on being bailed out by the taxpayer, since the failure of such a bank would inevitably entail severe economic disruptions. The bank bailout not only cost billions, but also fuelled the perception that the market economy had changed in character, to the benefit of the few at the expense of many: “Privatising the gains while socialising the losses.” However, the liability principle is absolutely central to a market economy, as the prominent ordoliberal Walter Eucken already knew: he described this “market economy constitution” very aptly, saying: “Those who benefit from it must also carry the loss.”                                                 5 Copenhagen Economics (2010), The Economic Impact of a European Digital Single Market, Final Report. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  In order for the market economy to function, but also to preserve trust in the rules of the game and therefore in the EU as a whole, it is essential that shareholders and creditors actually do bear any future losses on bank investments, rather than the taxpayer. This is precisely the aim of the more stringent capital rules which were introduced and are summarised in the Basel III framework, and particularly the European banking union with its Single Supervisory Mechanism and rules on bailing in shareholders and creditors in the event of bank failures. However, we can only attain this goal if the joint rules on recovery or liquidation of banks are consistently applied. Only then will the banks’ shareholders and creditors adjust their future behaviour appropriately to avoid excessive risk-taking. Strict application of the principle of ownership is absolutely essential, not only for reasons of fairness, but also for concrete economic reasons. If economic players do not have to bear the consequences of their actions, flawed incentives are set. They will take excessive risks, which is precisely what led to the last financial crisis – and to similar crises in the past. 4. Enhancing the monetary union Action and liability go hand in hand – this is not only important for the future of the financial sector, but also pivotal in enhancing the entire monetary union. The construction of the European monetary union is unique in the world. A single monetary policy is set against 19 largely autonomous economic and fiscal policies. This construction makes the monetary union potentially vulnerable, since the crisis has shown that, ultimately, the community may have to foot the bill for unhealthy developments in individual member states in order to prevent the stability of the entire structure from being threatened. The prospect of being able to spread the consequences of unsustainable policy over the entire monetary union can weaken the incentive towards sound budgetary policy. This is why institutional precautions were taken before launching the euro: the Stability and Growth Pact, the “no bail-out clause” and the ban on monetary financing of governments. Unfortunately, however, these safety precautions were unable to prevent the crisis. Why did we not, at that point, choose the path taken by other currency areas, such as the USA or Canada, and transfer economic and fiscal policy to the European level? Ultimately, Berlin, Paris, Rome and others opted to go it alone in economic and fiscal policy rather than take these decisions together in Brussels; they were unwilling to consent to such an extensive transfer of sovereignty rights. A common policy is, after all, different from a common market. In a common market, all the participants can produce whatever they do best. The interplay of supply and demand and the equilibrium provided by the price mechanism ensure that every product finds its buyer. A common policy has no price mechanism to bring the different interests into balance. Instead of the invisible hand of the market, a far more complex, political negotiation or coordination process is required to provide this balance. The economist Enrico Spolaore,6 for instance, has pointed this out.                                                 6 E Spolaore (2013), What Is European Integration Really About? A Political Guide for Economists, Journal of Economic Perspectives, American Economic Association, 27(3), 125–144, Summer. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  As a result, therefore, only monetary policy was communitised – in the full knowledge that certain economic adjustment problems might arise despite the existing safety precautions and coordination mechanisms. The monetary union likely puts some people in mind of the quip, attributed to Woody Allen, that “marriage is an attempt to solve problems together which you didn’t even have when you were on your own.” But like marriage, the monetary union is also potentially a wonderful thing: its physical manifestation as a single currency is the most visible symbol of the process of European unification. This unification process has, without doubt, contributed to Europe’s becoming a continent of peace and human rights, for which the EU even won the Nobel Peace Prize in 2012. Going even further, however, the monetary union has concrete economic advantages as a union of stability. EU citizens no longer have to change money when they travel, entrepreneurs no longer have to fear exchange rate fluctuations, and everyone can compare prices better. This increases competition, which is conducive to growth. That is why it is worth solving the existing problems. There are basically two options open to us. We could take the path of other monetary unions and communitise economic and fiscal policy as well as monetary policy. Proponents of the locomotive theory are looking at this option, arguing that incomplete integration makes it necessary to take further steps towards integration. However, we come up against the same roadblock faced by the architects of the monetary union when it was founded: member states are still disinclined to abdicate rights of sovereignty to the European level. This is evident in the ongoing discussions about enhancing the monetary union: for example, the informal meeting of EU finance ministers and central bank governors which took place in Bratislava last weekend, where, among other things, proposals going in the direction of a fiscal union were discussed, with the aim of providing a fiscal instrument to cushion large macroeconomic shocks. The ideas discussed therefore included a joint unemployment insurance and a European investment fund. On the other hand, the suggestions contained little in the way of specific measures which would enable genuine joint control. On paper, strengthening of the fiscal rules is mentioned. However, the past few months and years have shown how much this is worth. Fiscal surveillance has already been “strengthened” before, in return for the establishment of the bailout fund in 2011. However, the rules are still being interpreted very flexibly. The binding force of the budgetary rules is weaker than ever before, as we can also see in the decisions made concerning France, Spain and Portugal. In any case, nobody is suggesting a genuine transfer of sovereignty, for example to an independent fiscal authority which could reject national budgets that do not meet stability requirements. If further political integration is not possible, the only remaining option is the decentralised approach which is already provided for in the monetary union’s existing Maastricht framework. But how do we ensure that unhealthy developments in one part of the monetary union do not jeopardise the stability of the whole? In a nutshell, it must be possible in future for heavily indebted states to default as a final resort without bringing the financial system to its knees and forcing the international community to come to the rescue. This option will hopefully mean that capital markets exercise their disciplinary function for fiscal policy better in future, so that if at all possible, government default never occurs. 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  In the July edition of its Monthly Report, the Bundesbank described what needed to be done to ensure that sovereign debt restructuring does not jeopardise stability. It is crucial, first of all, that banks hold sufficient capital to be able to absorb any losses on government bonds. Regulation currently does not require that of them. Not only that: banks are allowed to purchase an unlimited quantity of government bonds – something they cannot do with other investments. That, too, will have to change. But other action is needed over and above that. At the moment, the purpose of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) is to bridge any funding difficulties that a government may experience. This means that, during the programme, the ESM steps in not only to fund budget deficits but also to provide money to enable the country to redeem maturing bonds in the proper manner. This would prevent a situation in which European taxpayers pay off creditors. For it is they who are ultimately behind the ESM. But if, following an ESM assistance programme, the debts were still too high, the haircut that would then become necessary would be made at the expense not of the original creditors but of European taxpayers. This does not exactly foster willingness on the part of the member states to agree to restructure their debt. Instead of a truly viable solution being reached, when push came to shove, a strategy of muddling through would win the day. That is why the Bundesbank proposes adding a clause to the government bonds of euro-area countries whereby the maturity of the bonds is automatically extended by three years if the member state applies for ESM assistance. This would keep creditors on the hook. Then, if a haircut really does become necessary, the ESM can act as mediator between the government and its creditors. A procedure of this kind would make it possible, as a last resort, to restructure debt in an orderly manner without putting financial stability at risk. This means it would benefit both the ailing member country and the euro area as a whole. But we need to be clear about one thing. It will take more than just the possibility to restructure government debt to curb government debt effectively without jeopardising financial stability. It will also be necessary to tighten fiscal policy rules. This calls, first, for transparent fiscal rules and, second, for their rigorous enforcement. I am convinced that an independent fiscal authority would then be better equipped than the European Commission is today to effectively enforce limits on the ever-increasing government debt in the euro area. This is because, on the one hand, the Commission must act as the guardian of the treaties and ensure that the rules are implemented. On the other hand, it is also a political institution whose task it is to strike a balance between widely varying interests. Measures to rein in government debt effectively are urgently needed. Although the indebted countries’ debt ratios will decrease slightly over the next few years, the gradual improvement in the economic situation and the very favourable funding conditions mask a loosening of the fiscal stance in the euro-area countries. In terms of the guidelines on medium-term budgetary planning, three-quarters of all euro-area countries will still be far removed from a sound fiscal position in 2016. That is not what fiscal consolidation looks like. 5. Monetary policy Ladies and gentlemen I would like to close by turning to the question of monetary policy. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  Monetary stability is good for everyone – let me count the ways. First, price stability means being able to pay one’s way tomorrow on today’s income. Second, it also makes retirement saving easier to plan. Third, it is important from an economic perspective that businesses can reliably calculate what an investment will cost and what return it will deliver. The more money fluctuates in value, the more uncertain investment income becomes and the lower growth will be in the long run. All these reasons convinced the euro-area member states to opt for an independent central bank system committed solely to price stability that was modelled on the Bundesbank. And with inflation averaging just under 2% since this system was created, it has been roughly as successful in maintaining price stability as the Bundesbank. But the inflation outlook in the euro area has been very muted for quite some time now. Inflation has been discernibly below the ECB Governing Council’s inflation rate target of close to but below 2% since mid-2013. In fact, it has been hovering around the zero mark for the better part of two years. Euro-area prices in August were only around 0.2% above the previous year’s level. Price inflation in Germany, incidentally, stood at 0.4%. In particular, it was the sharp drop in oil prices that pushed inflation down during the last two years. This effect on inflation will gradually peter out once the year-on-year decrease in oil prices comes to a halt. This should already become clear by the end of the year. However, the low inflation rates in the euro area are not driven purely by oil price developments. Core inflation, which is to say the price index excluding energy and food prices, is likewise relatively low, hovering at around 1%. The latest ECB staff projections indicate that the economic recovery in the euro area will continue – despite the United Kingdom’s decision to leave the EU. Growth will be dampened to only a comparatively minor extent; however, price pressures will gradually rise. At the end of the projection period, inflation will be largely consistent with the ECB’s definition of price stability. The expansionary monetary policy will undoubtedly play a part in that. But it’s no secret that economic policy measures can produce more than the desired effect: they can also entail side-effects and risks. The monetary policy measures that have been adopted are no exception. And whereas the effects of expansionary fiscal policy decline the longer it lasts, the associated risks and side-effects rise. One side-effect of the highly accommodative monetary policy is that unviable enterprises, too, are benefitting from the very favourable financing conditions and are being kept afloat. One could say, then, that monetary policy plays a part in braking structural change in the corporate sector. This tends to harm the productivity of an economy. A further side-effect is that the banking sector’s profitability suffers the longer monetary policy remains in ultra-easy mode. This is because most banks find it difficult to pass on the negative interest rates to their depositors. And while this is good news for depositors, it has a detrimental effect on banks’ costs. And because, above all, the Eurosystem’s bond purchases depress long-term interest rates, income that banks may generate through their investments decreases. Of course, as a central banker, I am not concerned here with the profits that the banks make. From a monetary policy perspective, however, it is crucial that banks transmit monetary policy stimuli – and this depends partly on their capital base. For only banks with sufficient capital can issue loans to enterprises and households. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  This makes it important for banks to gear their operations towards sustainable profitability even in a persistent low-interest-rate environment. Failing this, they may find it difficult to retain profits with a view to further strengthening their capital base. Particularly the German banks often suffer from structurally weak profitability – all the more reason to continuously review their business models, get their balance sheets in order and harness any available scope for consolidation in order to cut costs. Yet another side-effect of non-conventional measures – one I consider to be especially problematic in light of the experiences during the sovereign debt crisis – is that government bond purchases blur the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy. That is something I’ve be saying over and over again. Central banks are becoming countries’ biggest creditors. And once finance ministers get used to the favourable financing conditions, there is a danger that monetary policy will be harnessed to fiscal policy and will be put under pressure to make high levels of debt sustainable through low interest rates. That would make it increasingly difficult to exit the ultra-easy monetary policy. Monetary policy measures that seek to improve the situation in individual member states in a targeted way are particularly problematic. That would be the case, for instance, if central banks were to buy only bonds issued by the governments of crisis countries, as was the case with the Eurosystem purchases in 2010 to 2012. Such purchases may cause a redistribution of fiscal risks through central bank balance sheets, as, ultimately, taxpayers in the member states are on the hook for potential central bank losses. I have already explained that redistributing fiscal risks is alien concept to the existing regulatory framework of monetary union, which is based on the principle of individual national responsibility, and would probably be counterproductive. If, however, decisions on redistribution are to be taken, then at least they should be taken by those with the legitimacy to do so. Those people sit in governments and parliaments; they do not work at central banks. Otherwise, the independence of the Eurosystem could be called into question; an independence that the Eurosystem was expressly granted as a central prerequisite for price stability in the euro area. Let me be clear about one thing. The current public sector purchase programme does not provide for targeted purchases of bonds issued by the governments of individual crisis countries. All central banks buy only bonds issued by their government in line with the size of their country. We should maintain these basic parameters of the existing programme to avoid getting the Eurosystem into hot water. Ladies and gentlemen, in the public debate about the expansionary monetary policy, it is often asserted that this policy is leading to the expropriation of savers. I believe judging monetary policy solely on the inflation-adjusted returns on particularly safe savings deposits fails to capture the whole picture. There have, in the past, frequently been periods where savings deposits have yielded negative short-term real interest rates; indeed, they have often even been significantly lower than they are today. Granted, the situation is a little different in terms of real long-term interest rates. They are, indeed, exceptionally low at present. However, this is not just down to monetary policy; the muted longer-term growth expectations for the euro-area countries are also to blame. It is up to national governments to conduct an economic policy which is conducive to a lasting 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  increase in growth. While monetary policy can use the instruments at its disposal to smooth the economic cycle, it is unable to bring about sustained growth. And we must not forget that citizens are generally not just savers, they are also employees, shareholders, taxpayers and property owners. And from that perspective, low interest rates are not all bad news. The expansionary monetary policy aims to nudge the rate of inflation towards the definition of price stability by stimulating economic activity. In a situation characterised by slack in the economy, that secures jobs, increases tax revenues and gives enterprises opportunities to expand. And there may even be the odd person here in this room who is happy about the low interest rates for their mortgage loan. In other words, the central bank performs an important stabilisation function when it smooths the business cycle in an attempt to guide price developments. It must not, however, labour under the misapprehension that it is able to steer both perfectly. Equally, central banks must be aware that interventions in individual markets may result in evasive action. However, I get the impression that central bankers are less susceptible to the illusion that they can micro-manage everything than some analysts who would like to see central banks take on even greater responsibility and demand increasingly far-reaching interventions into the markets. For “smoothing” even to be conceivable, the central bank naturally requires room for monetary policy manoeuvre. And that depends, in part, on its long-term inflation rate target. If it is aiming for a slightly positive rate, central bank rates, too, will be somewhat higher. This means that they can be lowered more sharply when the economy slows. That is one reason why the Governing Council of the ECB aims to keep inflation below, but close to, 2 per cent over the medium term. There are, incidentally, further arguments in favour of a slightly positive rate. Potential errors in measuring inflation are one argument that comes to mind. The consumer price index measures the average price of the things people buy. However, there is a delay before statisticians become aware of changes in purchasing behaviour. They therefore tend to overstate inflation. Another reason why an inflation rate of zero isn’t a sensible target is because industries or entire economies that need to claw back a loss of competitiveness would face the daunting prospect of having to push through real wage cuts. That means, wages must rise more slowly than prices. But if prices do not rise at all, nominal wage cuts are necessary. That, however, is pretty much a non-starter. Finally, another argument for a slightly positive inflation rate for the euro area is that an average of close to 2 per cent allows differences in the rates of inflation within the currency area, without prices having to drop in individual countries. Differences in inflation rates will be the norm as long as member countries’ economies don’t move exactly in parallel. If monetary policy sought to hit an average inflation rate of 0%, there would always be some countries in negative territory. There are, therefore, good reasons why all major central banks target an inflation rate of around 2 per cent. There are, moreover, good reasons not to give in to calls to raise the inflation target. If the academic literature on the optimum inflation rate shows anything at all, it is, in my opinion, the large degree of uncertainty associated with such estimates. The ECB Governing Council’s definition of price stability does not, incidentally, demand that the inflation rate target of below, but close to, 2 per cent must be met at all times. It expressly states that it should be met over the medium term. In this context, the medium term does not mean “sometime in the distant future”, nor does it mean “as fast as possible and at all costs”. 
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches  6. Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen, the idea that the name “Europe” comes from the Greek word “erebos”, meaning “dark”, is not linguists’ only theory. According to another interpretation, Europe comes from Greek mythology and means “the far-sighted woman”. A more optimistic interpretation, indeed. The objective of the reforms proposed by the Bundesbank is to remedy deficits in the architecture of monetary union and thereby to make it more stable. In particular, they help redeem the promise politicians gave the public back when the euro was introduced: namely that the euro would be as stable as the D-Mark and that the monetary union would therefore be a stability union. Keeping promises and being reliable and credible is a central precondition for regaining political confidence in Europe. I now look forward to the discussion. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Ong Chong Tee: Corporate governance – a collaborative effort Opening address by Mr Ong Chong Tee, Deputy Managing Director (Financial Supervision) of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the 7th Corporate Governance Week, Singapore, 26 September 2016 *      *      * Mr David Gerald, President and CEO of the Securities Investors Association Singapore (SIAS), Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen Thank you for inviting me to deliver this year’s Opening Address. Subjects relating to corporate governance always attract lively debates and discussions, and I have no doubt that it will be the case over the course of this Conference. The theme of “Change and Innovation in Governance” underscores the dynamic nature of corporate governance (or CG) issues. The direction of change will most certainly be towards greater accountability, transparency and responsibilities of directors. Many will agree that old standards are not enough; or not good enough. Boards’ composition, for instance, will be subject to greater scrutiny with respect to independence, competence and diversity. I believe these are overall positive trends. Allow me to share some thoughts on a few pertinent issues. Role of the Financial Regulator Our regulatory regime comprises four key elements: regulations, supervision, enforcement actions as well as cross-border supervisory co-operation. This four-pronged approach applies to the area of CG as well. Many of you would have heard or read about enforcement actions taken by the MAS against various financial institutions or individuals for market misdemeanours such as spoofing and front running, as well as for regulatory breaches in money laundering rules or operational incident lapses. Whenever there are serious regulatory lapses or control failures, these often reflect shortcomings in the institution’s governance as well. The MAS will carry out enforcement actions to punish those who break our laws and regulations. We will protect the integrity and reputation of our financial sector. But enforcement actions are, by definition, ex-post and the proceedings can be lengthy. I would much prefer that we can rely on ex-ante actions to minimise the risk of wrongdoings. This is where our regulations and supervisory work come in. But given the size and sophistication of our financial sector, it is neither possible nor realistic for the MAS to be able to detect and prevent all bad behaviours or criminal acts. Even assuming manpower and other resources are not constraints, the MAS will have to be so intrusive in our supervisory engagements and carry out long periods of on-site inspections that these would make it hard for boards and management to operate. It is also not ideal nor desirable for MAS to rely on overly prescriptive and conservative one-size-fits-all rules without inadvertently stifling legitimate business growth and innovation. Impetus for Change This is why good governance driven by boards must feature as an important frontline defence against bad policies, poor conduct and deficient risk management practices. A competent management must be complemented by a proactive board that places good corporate governance as a priority area of focus. This will also be an area of increased supervisory engagement by the MAS with our financial institutions. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The Singapore Institute of Directors (SID) has issued a series of CG Guidebooks since August last year and will be releasing its Board Guide in the coming months. This will be a very helpful document that highlights roles and responsibilities of the Board, and provides practical tips for directors to internalise CG best practices and discharge their fiduciary duties. But the impetus for change will continue. One notable trend is that even as boards continue to engage shareholders actively for understandable reasons, the interests of other stakeholders increasingly matter as well. Customers, regulators and government entities, environmentalists, analysts, academia, financial journalists, the general public, and even employees and associates – all these stakeholders can and will matter. The repercussions when things go terribly wrong or even the negative publicity itself can easily destroy hard-won reputation and franchise values that ultimately erode shareholder returns. Now, most if not all will readily agree with the concept of good corporate governance. But the conception of what is needed to be done is usually less obvious. To do that well requires the ”DNA” of a board to be capable of living to the mandate. In short, the composition of a board will matter to its effective functioning. This is why our CG framework operates on a tiered approach. The Companies Act sets out fundamental requirements for directors to act honestly at all times and use reasonable diligence in discharging their duties. The Code of Corporate Governance (or CG Code) for listed companies and MAS’ requirements on board directorship in local financial institutions, prescribe requirements relating to independent directors, composition of board committees and so on. One area that will need to be considered is in the area of board diversity. A more diverse board is required not only out of political correctness but from good business sense. A board that has a good mix of experiences, background and technical competencies will result in more robust and thorough discussions and in decision-making by minimising blind spots or information gaps. This will also reduce the risk of “management capture”. These observations quite understandably can trigger questions on whether it is time to review our CG Code. It may indeed be timely to do so since the last review was back in 2012. Any review will need to carefully weigh the differing perspectives of different stakeholders. What is needed is a balanced and progressive Code that not only serves to enhance Singapore’s CG standards, but is also pragmatic and workable in practice. Corporate Disclosures Good CG is also gaining priority in the minds of investors and other stakeholders. Companies increasingly have to be more transparent and accountable to their stakeholders. In the past year, the MAS has worked with market participants, including industry associations, to improve the level of corporate disclosures in Singapore. But high quality corporate disclosures continue to be a recurring concern for investors as seen in some recent allegations of accounting irregularities against a few commodity-related or energy resources firms. The bugbear is that investors looking to analyse financial information put out by companies may feel hampered in doing so. In a study1 commissioned by the Accounting and Corporate Regulatory Authority (ACRA) and the Institute of Singapore Chartered Accountants (ISCA), most investors found that the usefulness of a company’s financial statements is often limited by over-aggregation of information, insufficient disclosures and disclosures that are difficult to understand.  These findings suggest that companies can do more in providing simple and succinct financial disclosures. In this regard, audit committees and directors also have a role in ensuring that financial disclosures of their companies are sufficient, timely and meaningful. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  The CG Code sets out the principles along four areas on: (1) board matters; (2) remuneration matters; (3) accountability and audit; and (4) shareholder rights and responsibilities; where companies should provide meaningful disclosures, and not merely adopt a box-ticking mentality. Two months ago, SGX issued a report that examined the presence and quality of disclosures in relation to the CG Code. The findings indicate that disclosures, while generally adequate, have room for improvement. One area, in my view, is for companies to provide better disclosures on remuneration, as well as the link between remuneration and performance. Another area is on more clarity with regard to diversity policies and the company’s plans on them. The SGX has also announced that all listed companies will have to publish a sustainability report from the financial year ending on or after 31 Dec 2017. Companies should disclose material environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors, their policies, practices, performance and targets. Overall, this marks progress from the voluntary reporting that has been in place since 2011, in keeping with growing international interest in sustainability information. Market Discipline: A Collaborative Effort by All Stakeholders Next, let me touch on market discipline and its important place in good CG practices. There is a trend towards greater involvement and engagement by different stakeholders – internationally and in Singapore. Take for example the recent debates on whether to allow dual-class shares for SGX-listed companies. Stakeholders are understandably divided over the implications of such a move and the potential impact on market discipline – and some have advocated for the MAS to weigh in on the matter. That in my view, will prevent a thorough debate and may prematurely stifle the broader collective wisdom of different stakeholders. The SGX is still considering the possible safeguards so as to satisfy itself that it can meet any regulatory concerns; and should it proceed, will issue a public consultation document on the details. For market discipline to work, directors should embrace a culture of quality disclosure and to be forthcoming in engaging investors in a timely fashion. Responsible investors, on the other hand, should also practise active stewardship – to question and to provide feedback. Active involvement by all relevant stakeholders can contribute towards the vibrancy and confidence in Singapore’s capital markets. But market discipline also requires a discipline in the market. Whenever we see allegations and counter-allegations against companies in the marketplace, we should distinguish the ones that reflect different stakeholder opinions to shape better or desirable outcomes from the ones out to create mischief and corporate havoc without basis. The former should be embraced as a positive manifestation of market discipline at work while the latter should see the culprits taken to task via enforcement or supervisory actions. Exercising Market Discipline through Investor Stewardship This brings me to the related area of good stewardship which I briefly mentioned earlier. Internationally, there is growing recognition that shareholders, particularly institutional investors, should exercise a stewardship role, by engaging their investee company’s board and management towards long-term sustainability goals. On this note, MAS is pleased to support an ongoing effort by the investment community to collaborate on developing a set of best practices to promote active stewardship by institutional investors. The MAS has also been supporting other stakeholders such as SIAS. One example is SIAS’ recent initiative to issue reports relating to company annual reports and to publish issues notes to guide retail investors in their participation at company AGMs. SIAS has issued 25 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  such reports thus far and I note that some companies have taken efforts to provide written responses to the questions raised. Another worthwhile recent initiative by SIAS is the garnering of companies’ affirmation through the Statement of Support on their commitment to uphold and advance excellence in CG standards to enhance shareholder value. I am told that already, 112 companies have participated in support of the initiative – a very positive start. Conclusion In conclusion, the CG landscape is an evolving one but its fundamental tenet remains unchanged – which is the accountability of the board of directors to their shareholders specifically and also to other stakeholders at large. Board of directors should set the tone from the top, and to walk the talk so that there is resonance from the tone in the middle and tone at the front business units. Good governance must be guided by both doing “right” and doing “good” – and thereby doing well for the companies over the long term. The MAS being a financial regulator, and as one part of the CG eco-system, will continue to support a collaborative effort in shaping our corporate governance landscape. May I wish all of you fruitful discussions in the week ahead. 1 “Into the Minds of Investors: Investors’ Views of Financial Reporting, Audit and Corporate Governance” by ACRA, ISCA and National University of Singapore Business School. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Haruhiko Kuroda: “Comprehensive Assessment” of the monetary easing and “QQE with Yield Curve Control” Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Osaka, 26 September 2016. *      *      * Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of Japan’s website. Introduction It is my great pleasure to have the opportunity today to exchange views with a distinguished gathering of business leaders in the Kansai region. I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the Bank of Japan’s branches in Osaka, Kobe, and Kyoto. At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held last week, the Bank conducted a comprehensive assessment of the developments in economic activity and prices as well as policy effects since the introduction of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE). In light of the findings of the assessment, with a view to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, it decided to introduce “QQE with Yield Curve Control” as a means of strengthening the existing framework for monetary easing. Today, I would like to talk about the main points of and thinking behind these initiatives and how the Bank aims to achieve the price stability target under this new framework. I. Comprehensive assessment and directions for new policy framework In the “Comprehensive Assessment,” the Bank examined the developments in economic activity and prices, as well as the policy effects, over the past three years since the introduction of QQE in an objective manner, based on facts and theories. This is detailed in a nearly 60-page report, including the main text, appendixes, and charts, but its essence can be summarized broadly by the following four main points. The first point is that, during the three years since the introduction of QQE, Japan’s economic activity and prices, as well as financial conditions, have improved substantially, and Japan’s economy is no longer in deflation. Corporate profits, measured by the ratio of current profits to sales, have been at a record-high level (Chart 1). Excessive appreciation of the yen has been corrected and stock prices have surged. The employment situation has significantly improved and the unemployment rate has declined to 3 percent. Base pay rises, seen for the first time in two decades, have continued for three consecutive years. On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food and energy had been negative before the introduction of QQE, but it turned positive in autumn 2013 and has remained in positive territory for two years and ten months (Chart 2). This is the first time since the late 1990s, when Japan’s economy fell into deflation, that the annual change in the CPI has been in positive territory for such a long period. Japan’s economy is no longer in deflation, which is commonly defined as a sustained decline in prices. QQE has brought about a positive turnaround in economic activity and prices, and lowered real interest rates are considered to be the main transmission mechanism in exerting its policy effects. This mechanism can be explained as follows: (1) people’s inflation expectations – that is, their outlook for prices – would be raised through the Bank’s strong commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent and its large-scale monetary easing; (2) nominal interest rates across the entire yield curve would be pushed down through the large-scale purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs); and (3) together, real interest rates would be lowered, which would stimulate the economy and push up prices. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  In the “Comprehensive Assessment,” the Bank ran counterfactual simulations in which actual developments in Japan’s economy were compared with simulated developments obtained assuming QQE had not been introduced (Chart 3). The simulations using the Bank’s macroeconomic model are conducted under several different assumptions regarding (i) when QQE started having an impact and (ii) to what extent changes in stock prices and exchange rates are regarded as part of the effects of QQE. In many cases, the simulations suggest that Japan still would have been in deflation if QQE had not been introduced. The results of various analyses, including these simulations, clearly show that QQE has had the intended effects through the mechanism associated with lowered real interest rates. The second point is that, despite such a positive turnaround, the price stability target of 2 percent has not been achieved. The key reason lies in developments in inflation expectations. In Japan, the view that prices will not increase – the so-called deflationary mindset – has been entrenched among people under prolonged deflation. In this situation, it has been rational for individual economic entities to maintain the status quo by hoarding cash rather than taking risks. As a result, Japan’s economy lost its vibrancy. In order to break out of such a situation, it is necessary to dramatically change people’s outlook for prices. Specifically, it is essential that people will share the view that annual inflation will be around 2 percent, and that price-setting of a variety of goods and services and labor-management wage negotiations should be based on such view on prices. For that purpose, the Bank set the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the CPI inflation and launched QQE with a view to achieving the target at the earliest possible time. Initially, QQE exerted its intended effects or even more effects than anticipated (Chart 4). The annual CPI growth rose to 1.5 percent in April 2014 and inflation expectations also improved clearly. Thereafter, however, against the background of the substantial decline in crude oil prices since summer 2014 and weak demand after the consumption tax hike, the observed inflation rate decreased. Inflation expectations also started to stall, following the course of the observed inflation rate. In order to maintain the momentum of converting the deflationary mindset, the Bank expanded QQE in October 2014. Thanks in part to this response, inflation expectations managed to stay around the same level despite the strong headwinds. But global financial markets became volatile amid the slowdown in emerging economies, particularly in China, since summer 2015, and, since the turn of this year, stock prices declined globally and the yen appreciated. Under this environment, inflation expectations have weakened. These experiences suggest that the mechanism of formation of inflation expectations in Japan tends to be heavily influenced by the course of the past inflation rate. It is phrased as an adaptive mechanism weighing in the formation of inflation expectations. The adaptive mechanism plays a considerably larger role in Japan than in other countries (Chart 5). This is considered to be attributable to the fact that the price stability target has been missed in the prolonged deflation, as well as to the practice of wage negotiations, including the annual labor-management wage negotiations in spring (shunto), with the previous fiscal year’s inflation rate serving as a reference. Against this background, inflation expectations in Japan started to weaken as the observed inflation rate declined. This is the main factor that hampers achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. In order to achieve the price stability target, the view should be firmly entrenched among people that the observed inflation will, in due course, converge to the price stability target set by the central bank, which is 2 percent, even if it fluctuates due to a variety of factors. This is referred to as the “forward-looking mechanism” in the formation of inflation expectations, in contrast to the “adaptive mechanism” explained earlier. Taking into account that the forces to push up inflation expectations through the “adaptive mechanism” have weakened, it is imperative to further strengthen the “forward-looking mechanism,” in order to push up inflation expectations. This is one of the main points taken into account in designing the new policy framework. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  The third point is that the Bank was able to push down the entire yield curve in combination with large-scale purchases of JGBs under QQE and the negative interest rate policy introduced in January 2016. Nominal interest rates have been declining since the introduction of QQE, and the pace of decline accelerated after adopting the negative interest rate policy, particularly for those with longer maturities (Chart 6). In light of these developments, the Bank has come to the conclusion that it can facilitate the formation of a yield curve, which is deemed most appropriate for achieving the price stability target of 2 percent, through the appropriate combination of a negative interest rate and JGB purchases. With these factors in mind, the Bank has placed “yield curve control” as the core element of the new policy framework. The fourth point is the impact of monetary easing on the functioning of financial intermediation. In the “Comprehensive Assessment,” the Bank examined how “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” has translated into lending rates and has affected the profits of financial institutions. When the negative interest rate was introduced, some raised concerns that, as interest rates were already extremely low, lower JGB yields would not lead to a decline in banks’ lending rates as well as interest rates on corporate bonds and CP, but to date, the extent of the pass-through of the decline in JGB yields to these funding rates has been roughly similar to changes in previous episodes of interest rate cuts. At the same time, deposit rates also declined, but to a smaller extent compared to the decline in lending rates. This means that the fall in lending rates has been achieved at the expense of financial institutions’ profits. Thus, looking ahead, the policy effects of the decline in interest rates will depend on the impact on the profits of financial institutions and their lending attitudes reflecting such impact. In fact, lending rates have been on a declining trend in a severely competitive environment, and the pace of decline has accelerated since the introduction of the negative interest rate policy (Chart 7). The excessive decline in long-term and super-long-term rates lowers the rate of return on insurance and pension products and leads to the increase in firms’ pension benefit obligations. Although the direct impact of these developments on economic activity as a whole is unlikely to be substantial, it is possible that such developments can cause uncertainty regarding the sustainability of the financial functioning in a broad sense, in that they could have a negative impact on economic activity through a deterioration in people’s confidence. In facilitating the formation of an appropriate yield curve, the Bank should take account of these points. II. Main points of “QQE with yield curve control” Based on these findings of the “Comprehensive Assessment,” the Bank decided to introduce “QQE with Yield Curve Control,” which is a new framework for monetary easing, by strengthening the two previous policy frameworks: “QQE” and “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” The new policy framework consists of two major components. The first is “yield curve control” in which the Bank sets short-term and long-term interest rates as an operating target, and the second is an “inflation-overshooting commitment” in which the Bank commits itself to maintaining an increase in the monetary base until the annual rate of increase in the observed CPI exceeds the price stability target of 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable manner. Now, I will explain each of these components. Yield curve control As mentioned earlier, the experience so far with the negative interest rate policy shows that a combination of the negative interest rate and JGB purchases is effective in exerting an influence on the entire yield curve. Against this background, the Bank has introduced “yield curve control.” To facilitate the new framework, new market tools have been introduced. Under the new framework, the Bank sets two key interest rates – the short-term policy rates and an operating target for the long-term interest rate – as a guideline for market operations. Specifically, for the short-term policy rate, the Bank uses the interest rate applied to the Policy-Rate Balances in current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank, which is 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  minus 0.1 percent, unchanged this time (Chart 8). For the long-term interest rate, the Bank sets a level of 10-year JGB yields as an operating target. The Bank conducts purchases of JGBs to achieve the target level. This time, the operating target for 10-year JGBs is set at “more or less at the current level (around zero percent)”. For other maturities, yields are expected to be formed in the markets consistent with the guideline for market operations. In other words, the shape and the locations of the yield curve will broadly remain as they are at present. In addition, in order to control the yield curve smoothly, the Bank decided to introduce new market operations such as fixed-rate JGB purchase operations; that is, the Bank purchases JGBs at a price it designates. The fixed-rate purchase operations are intended to serve to cap long-term rates when necessary. Let me elaborate on the difference from the existing policy framework. The guideline for purchases of JGBs has been specified so far by the amount of increase in the amount outstanding of JGBs held by the Bank. This approach has been widely adopted not only by the Bank but other central banks in advanced economies, including the Federal Reserve in the United States, the European Central Bank, and the Bank of England, in part because it is clear how the purchases are conducted. Under this approach, however, the impact of a unit amount of JGBs purchases on long-term yields varies depending on developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial market conditions. Therefore, the purchases could push down yields either insufficiently or excessively, in comparison with an appropriate yield curve. Under “yield curve control,” purchases of JGBs are conducted to achieve the target level of interest rates specified by the guideline for market operations at the time. As the latest guideline specifies the target interest rates broadly corresponding to the current level, the Bank will conduct purchases more or less in line with the current pace – an annual pace of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings at about 80 trillion yen – but it is anticipated that the pace may fluctuate to some extent, either upward or downward, in order to achieve yield curve control. Therefore, a possible change in the amount of purchases has no policy implication. As I have explained, under “yield curve control,” the Bank will be able to conduct purchases of JGBs in a more flexible and effective manner than before. Thus, it will be better prepared to address various changes in circumstances, and the sustainability of its policy will also be enhanced. Inflation-overshooting commitment Next, I will explain the inflation-overshooting commitment. Since the introduction of QQE, the Bank has committed itself to continue with monetary easing, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. This time, in addition to this existing commitment, the Bank decided to commit itself to expanding the monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI (all items less fresh food) exceeds the price stability target of 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable manner. To be clear, this is not meant to raise the price stability target of 2 percent. It has been actively debated within academia and in central banking circles whether the price stability target should be higher than 2 percent in order to address the downtrend in growth potential, sometimes referred to as secular stagnation. At present, this topic is being discussed as a medium- to long-term issue, rather than an immediate policy response. I am fully aware of this discussion. That said, let me make it clear that our inflation-overshooting commitment is designed based on the price stability target of 2 percent. So, one might ask why the observed CPI needs to “exceed 2 percent.” Achieving the price stability target of 2 percent means attaining a situation in which the observed CPI is around 2 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  percent on average over the business cycle. Thus, it naturally is assumed from the outset that there would be phases when the observed CPI stays above 2 percent. Even so, this is an extremely strong commitment, in that it is linked to the observed CPI rather than the outlook for CPI. It is widely accepted that monetary policy should be conducted in a forward-looking manner as it takes some time for monetary policy to have an impact on economic activity and prices. In light of this, a backward-looking commitment based on the observed CPI is truly exceptional for the central bank. In fact, the Bank was the first in the world to adopt this backward-looking commitment based on the observed CPI under quantitative easing (QE) that had lasted five years since 2001. Back then, however, the commitment was that the Bank would continue with QE “until the CPI (all items less fresh food) registers stably a zero percent or an increase year on year.” By comparing the new commitment with our previous one, you can understand how powerful the new commitment will be, in that it needs to “exceed 2 percent.” As explained earlier, an adaptive mechanism in the formation of inflation expectations still plays a large role in Japan, as the legacy of prolonged deflation prevails. In order to raise inflation expectations under such circumstances, the Bank judged it necessary to dare to make a strong commitment based on the observed CPI and to demonstrate the Bank’s unwavering determination to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent. The commitment is to expand the monetary base. Its amount outstanding is currently about 400 trillion yen, which is already around 80 percent of nominal GDP (Chart 9). Corresponding ratios are about 20 percent in both the United States and the euro area. Looking ahead, the ratio is calculated to exceed 100 percent in slightly over one year, assuming that the Bank will continue with the current pace of increase in the monetary base. You might be concerned about the risk that such a “bold” commitment would create a tightening of monetary policy behind the curve, leading to an acceleration in inflation. Let me point out a couple of things. First, it is hardly effective just to make a commitment that everyone considers as “modest.” QQE led to the conversion of people’s mindset and a positive turnaround of economic activity and prices, because everyone thought it was “unprecedentedly bold.” Second, based on our latest current outlook, the annual rate of increase in the CPI is likely to accelerate gradually toward 2 percent. In this scenario, even if monetary easing with expansion of the monetary base and low interest rates across the yield curve continues, it is very unlikely that the inflation rate will significantly deviate from 2 percent and never revert to that level. Third, and lastly, even if inflation were to rapidly accelerate for some reason, the Bank can achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in a stable manner by influencing short-term and long-term interest rates; that is, yield curve control. Of course, this represents a just-in-case scenario, and you can reasonably assume that large-scale monetary easing will be in place until the observed CPI stays above 2 percent in a stable manner. Formation of yield curve and options for additional easing These are the main points of the new framework for monetary policy: “QQE with Yield Curve Control.” The Bank will pursue monetary easing in a more forceful manner under the new framework to achieve the price stability target at the earliest possible time. Specifically, in placing yield curve control as the core element of the framework, the Bank will facilitate the formation of the yield curve that is deemed most appropriate with a view to maintaining the momentum toward achieving the price stability target of 2 percent, responding to developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions. As explained earlier, factors such as the impact on the functioning of financial intermediation are also taken into consideration. At the same time, however, let me emphasize that policy judgment should be based on its impact on Japan’s economy as a whole. The impact on the functioning of financial intermediation should be considered to the extent that it would affect the entire economy through changes in financial conditions. To put it another way, the Bank 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  will make policy adjustments, without hesitation, if judged necessary for Japan’s economy as a whole. With regard to possible options for additional easing, the main policy tool will be further cuts in the negative short-term policy interest rate and lowering the target level of the long-term interest rate. Expanding asset purchases – the “quality” dimension – also continues to be an option. Moreover, if the situation warrants it, acceleration in the expansion of the monetary base – the “quantity” dimension – could be an option. In that case, interest rates are likely to decline significantly, regardless of yield curve control. There can be cases where such powerful monetary easing is needed, depending on developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial market conditions. The Bank stands ready to use every possible policy tool, if it judges necessary to achieve its objectives. Conclusion I have explained the findings of “Comprehensive Assessment” and the new framework for monetary policy based on the assessment. I must say that it took more time than expected to overcome deflation. Now, I am even more strongly convinced that we should make sure that Japan’s economy will never return to deflation. For these three years since the introduction of QQE, the economy has made substantial progress toward overcoming deflation that had lasted more than fifteen years. There is no better opportunity than now to completely get out of deflation. Talking about a limit to monetary policy does not help at all. What is important is to confront the issue and continue to pursue the best possible solutions. Two major items in our new framework, “yield curve control” and the “inflation-overshooting commitment,” have been discussed within academia and in other fora. The Bank is the first in the world to introduce them as actual policy tools. As I have mentioned on various occasions, there is no limit to monetary policy. “The costs of monetary policy should be minimized and the benefits be maximized.” “In designing the monetary policy, the Bank will relentlessly pursue innovations and never hesitate to challenge.” With these in mind, the Bank will continue to make its utmost efforts to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7     
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9     
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches     
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11   
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1 Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before the Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 26 September 2016. *      *      * Mr Chairman, Honourable Members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, Ladies and gentlemen, I am grateful to be back speaking to your committee less than a week away from an important anniversary for the European Parliament: 40 years ago the act that made direct European elections possible was signed, and I am happy to be speaking to you – the direct representatives of the people of Europe. Europeans are calling on our institutions to bring tangible benefits to their everyday lives. We need to respond to this appeal with action within our respective competences. This is why I am here today: not only to demonstrate once again the importance that the ECB places on being accountable to EU citizens, but also to discuss with you how the ECB is acting to fulfil the mandate that was democratically conferred upon us. Therefore, in my remarks today I will first review the state of the euro area recovery and the impact of our monetary policy measures. Then, at the request of this committee, I will discuss financial market conditions in the euro area and, in particular, the evolution of financial market integration. The economic outlook and the ECB’s monetary policy The recovery in the euro area is expected to continue at a moderate and steady pace, but with slightly less momentum than envisaged in June. On the positive side, incoming information continues to point to the euro area economy being resilient to global and political uncertainty, notably following the UK referendum outcome. The initial impact of the vote has been contained and the strong financial market reactions, such as equity price falls, have largely reversed. At the same time, the substantial weakening of the foreign demand outlook since June is expected to dampen export growth. Along with other factors, it will continue to pose downside risks to the euro area’s growth prospects. According to the September ECB staff macroeconomic projections, annual real GDP growth is expected to increase by 1.7% this year, and by 1.6% in each of the next two years. Inflation continues to remain at low levels, reflecting past declines in oil prices and weak wage growth. Annual inflation is expected to be 0.2% this year and to increase to 1.2% in 2017 as the impact of past oil price falls unwinds. The continued economic recovery and a decline in the level of slack are expected to gradually push inflation further up to 1.6% in 2018. Against this background, our comprehensive policy measures continue to filter through to the real economy. Borrowing conditions for households and firms have eased considerably and credit creation has strengthened, thus supporting aggregate spending across the euro area. Let me now focus on the description of the credit easing components of our policy measures. They act as critical transmission channels for the monetary stimulus by facilitating meaningful reductions in funding costs for the real economy. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches In June of this year and last week we conducted the first two operations of our new series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-II), which attracted significant demand. Two additional operations will take place in December and March. These operations allow banks to secure long-term funding at very attractive conditions that they can pass on to their customers. Likewise, the credit easing components of our expanded asset purchase programme (APP), namely the asset-backed securities (ABSPP), covered bond (CBPP3) and corporate sector (CSPP) purchase programmes, further boost the pass-through of our monetary policy by directly lowering the financing costs for crucial actors in our economy. While the ABSPP and CBPP3 empower the monetary pass-through by containing banks’ funding costs, the CSPP directly lowers the cost and improves the availability of market-based funding for non-financial corporations. Let me stress, in that respect, that the CSPP is benefiting not only the large companies, which can directly access the bond market, but also smaller companies. Buoyant bond market conditions for large companies incentivise them to obtain more funding from bond markets, thus leaving more space on banks’ balance sheets for providing loans to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Overall, our projections indicate that the accommodative monetary policy stance will continue to provide effective support to the cyclical recovery and the upward path in inflation. But financing conditions must remain supportive for our baseline scenario to materialise. Therefore, the Governing Council will continue to monitor economic and financial market developments very closely. We will preserve the very substantial amount of monetary support that is embedded in our staff projections and that is necessary to secure a return of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. If warranted, we will act by using all the instruments available within our mandate. Financial market conditions in the euro area I am grateful that today you decided to discuss the state of financial market fragmentation in the euro area. I remember that almost four years ago, in this same building, in my statement to you I commented that “the impact on financial and monetary conditions of past reductions in key ECB interest rates differed considerably within the euro area”. Compared with the financial market situation in the autumn of 2012, the situation has largely improved. Financial market fragmentation has declined substantially and the financing conditions of firms and households have improved markedly across the euro area. In particular, the reductions in the key ECB interest rates have been passed through in vulnerable euro area countries to a larger extent, and the fragmentation in funding costs and loan conditions across different countries has receded. To give an example, from October 2012 to July 2016 the composite cost-of-borrowing indicator for new loans to non-financial corporations declined by almost 287 basis points in Portugal and 200 basis points in Italy, compared with 117 basis points for the euro area as a whole. A similar phenomenon has been observed for SMEs, which have benefited substantially from improved financing conditions and reduced fragmentation. As a result, the spread between lending rates for small loans and large loans was similar in July 2016 in vulnerable and non-vulnerable euro area countries (at 135 and about 120 basis points, respectively), a situation not seen since spring 2011. Addressing new challenges While the challenges of financial fragmentation have been largely overcome, there are new ones we have to face. The low interest rate environment you selected for today’s discussion is indeed one of them. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3 Low rates are a symptom of the underlying economic situation. They reflect weak long-term growth trends and the protracted macroeconomic slump that has resulted from the crisis. The ECB’s monetary policy has provided significant accommodation to limit the negative effects of the global and euro area-specific shocks on the economy, thereby mitigating their disinflationary impact. Nevertheless, monetary policy cannot determine the sustainable level of real interest rates in the long run, as they in turn depend on long-term growth prospects. This means that other policy actors need to do their part, pursuing fiscal and structural policies which will contribute to a self-sustaining recovery and increase the economic growth potential of the euro area, as I discussed with you in June. In the meantime, the low interest rate environment has a range of implications for economic actors that need to be carefully monitored. I am sure that this was part of your exchange today with the Chairs of the European Supervisory Authorities, and I am of course happy to continue this discussion in answering your questions. Another, more recent, challenge is the outcome of the UK referendum on EU membership and its economic implications for the euro area. The extent to which the economic outlook will be affected depends on the timing, development and final outcome of the upcoming negotiations. So far, the euro area economy has been resilient, but due to this uncertainty our baseline scenario remains subject to downside risks. Regardless of the type of relationship that emerges between the European Union and the United Kingdom, it is of utmost importance that the integrity of the single market is respected. Any outcome should ensure that all participants are subject to the same rules. But more generally, it is important to ensure that the European Union meets the expectations of its people. This requires three lines of action. First, new common European projects should focus on the immediate concerns and needs of its people. For those challenges that unequivocally go beyond national borders, effective solutions require joint European action. From that perspective, today’s priorities notably include the fields of migration, security and defence. Second, for further European integration to be feasible and acceptable, trust among its nations and people is essential. To bolster such trust, it is important that agreed rules are respected. In our Economic and Monetary Union, in particular, the economic governance framework is essential to avoid imbalances that would eventually risk destabilising the euro area. And for the euro area to thrive, actions by national governments are needed to unleash growth, reduce unemployment and empower individuals, while offering essential protections for the most vulnerable. Finally, our Economic and Monetary Union remains vulnerable as long as we do not complete the integration projects we have started. We need, in particular, to complete the banking union and develop an ambitious capital markets union (CMU) to ensure the resilience of financial integration in the euro area and support cross-border investment. The European Parliament played a key part in setting up the banking union and has an important role to play to ensure swift progress on the legislative dossiers which are now under discussion as part of the banking union and CMU agendas. Making determined progress in these fields would significantly strengthen our Economic and Monetary Union, and thus constitute an important step forward in line with the roadmap proposed in the Five Presidents’ Report. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches Conclusion In concluding these remarks, I want to recall the words of my late friend and colleague Carlo Azeglio Ciampi when he addressed the European Parliament in 2005: “The euro is the greatest demonstration of the united will of the European people, and a driving force of political integration”. And, indeed, the political commitment underpinning our single currency has been strongly reaffirmed during the crisis. Important efforts have been made. But widespread feelings of insecurity, including economic insecurity, remain a major concern. We cannot simply wait for better times: we need to renew our efforts to ensure that Economic and Monetary Union offers protection and prosperity. The ECB will do its part. Thank you for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Sharon Donnery: Macroprudential policy – action in the face of uncertainty Address by Ms Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Dublin Economic Workshop Annual Economic Policy Conference, Dublin, 23 September 2016. *      *      * I would like to thank Niamh Hallissey, Yvonne McCarthy and Mícheál O’Keeffe for their contributions to this speech. Introduction Good evening. I am delighted to address the Dublin Economic Workshop. This annual conference has always been a key policy forum and the subject of this year’s conference – “Policymaking for an Uncertain Future” is timely.  The recent vote by the UK to leave the European Union has led to heightened risks and uncertainties for the euro area and the Union more generally.  Ireland is the most exposed European economy to the potential effects of Brexit. This is because the UK accounts for a large percentage of Irish imports and exports.i Labour flows and cross-border investment linkages are considerable. In addition, certain domestic Irish banks have large exposures to the UK.  There is considerable uncertainty regarding the specific political and institutional construct which may emerge once the UK decides to trigger Article 50 of the Treaty. This makes it challenging to estimate the impact on the Irish economy. This impact will be determined by a wide range of factors including: the conditions of the UK’s exit – in particular its degree of access to the Single Market; the resulting effect on the UK and the extent to which this is transmitted to Irish firms and institutions and the wide range of potential regulatory outcomes resulting from the UK’s new arrangements.  Sentiment and hard data releases point to a mixed picture so far but the short and medium term impact on Ireland is likely to be negative. In this context, the Bank recently published forecasts that revised down projected Irish GDP growth by 0.2 per cent in 2016 and 0.6 per cent in 2017.ii However, quantifying the potential impact of such a protracted period of uncertainty and risk aversion with much precision is difficult. Small open economies like Ireland are especially vulnerable to such shocks, particularly in the context of the legacies of the crisis. As highlighted in the recent Macro-Financial Review, household debt remains high, standing at 150 billion euro. This is equivalent to 160 per cent of disposable income. Such high levels of debt leave households vulnerable, particularly to adverse movements in income or interest rates. iii The SME sector also remains highly indebted. This can act as a drag on economic activity, given it can restrict the ability of firms to borrow and invest. It also leaves the sector vulnerable to changes in financing conditions.  In the financial sector, despite returning to profitability, levels of provisions and non-performing loans in domestic banks remain elevated.iv Uncertainty is a challenge faced not only by policy makers, but it is the backdrop against which many decisions are made. Frank Knight in his seminal 1921 book formalised a distinction between the concept of risk and uncertainty which has found common use in mainstream economics. Risk, he suggested, refers to situations where the distribution of future outcomes is known, and hence measurable. Uncertainty, by contrast and by definition, is “not susceptible to measurement” and hence cannot be predicted.v  
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  This distinction captures many of the challenges we policymakers face today. For some risks, we can measure with some degree of confidence, their likelihood of occurrence and design policies accordingly. Some outcomes however are unknown. Policymaking under such uncertainty is more challenging.  The Central Bank of Ireland has an explicit mandate to protect financial stability and, as the designated macroprudential authority, has a range of tools to target emerging risks in the domestic financial system.vi In this context, this evening, I would like to take this opportunity to speak about the Bank’s framework for macroprudential policymaking for this uncertain future. The Bank’s policy framework follows four key steps in the policy cycle. vii First, I will discuss the assessment and identification of systemic risk. Second, I will elaborate on how we select and calibrate our instruments. Third, I will discuss policy implementation and issues surrounding inaction bias, decision-making under uncertainty, and communication. The fourth and final critical step in the cycle is policy evaluation. I will conclude by giving you some insights into our ongoing review of the mortgage measures – one of our key macroprudential instruments.  *** Identifying and assessing systemic risk Macroprudential action is just one component of a wider set of macroeconomic and financial sector policies. The underlying rationale for macroprudential policy lies in the divergence between financial and business cycles. Financial cycles have been shown to have different frequencies and amplifications to business cycles. Financial cycles can be self-reinforcing and can magnify fluctuations in the economy. They can lead to financial distress and severe economic dislocations, as we have seen.viii  The ultimate objective of macroprudential policy is to prevent and mitigate systemic risk. Major disturbances to the financial system can disrupt the provision of financial services. This can have serious negative consequences for the real economy.  There are several externalities which can give rise to systemic risk. A commonly used classification groups these into three distinct types.ix  First, externalities relating to so-called “strategic complementarities”. These cause a build-up of vulnerabilities during the upswing phase of a financial cycle. Sometimes, because of competitive dynamics in the market, banks for example adopt similar strategies in asset choice or liquidity risk (i.e. they have common exposures).x This can lead to self-reinforcing effects, because returns increase, in the short term, as more banks follow suit. These dynamics can affect credit standards, loss recognition, and portfolio quality. It can also lead to additional asset price volatility.  Such “herding behaviour” of both the domestic and international banks is well documented in the Nyberg Report into the Irish banking crisis.xi Herding behaviour by households can also contribute to systemic risk through greater risk taking, for example in mortgage markets. Therefore, even if systemic risks were not emerging in the financial sector, borrower-based measures may still be necessary. The second set of externalities relates to sell-offs during the downswing phase of a financial cycle. Fire sales, for example, can amplify financial distress due to loss spirals resulting from pro-cyclical asset price effects, margin or haircut spirals.xii This occurs because a decline in the price of an asset leads to an erosion of capital. Self-reinforcing feedback effects on leverage can force banks to further shed assets to repay debt and restore equity. Credit crunches can have a similar effect causing a deterioration in balance sheets and a drying up of financing.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  Finally, externalities related to interconnectedness can result in the propagation of shocks throughout the financial system. Interconnectedness can arise through the many complex transactions and bilateral relationships between institutions. It can also result from feedback from the real economy.  These externalities were clearly evident in Ireland before and during the crisis. Examination of Ireland’s experience since the crisis provides ample justification for the introduction of macroprudential measures.xiii  However, in order for macroprudential policy to limit such systemic risks, policymakers must first be able to identify and assess them. To do this we must be able measure these risks, both in the cross-sectional dimension (measuring the distribution of risk at a point in time) and the temporal dimension (measuring the evolution of aggregate risk). This is a challenging pursuit for a number of reasons, not least because systemic events are, by their very nature, rare tail events.  Furthermore, regardless of all the indicators we have to identify, measure and assess systemic risk, in the future, risks may arise from very different sources that are not fully captured by existing indicators.  The constant evolution and innovation of the financial system, which has changed fundamentally over recent decades, further complicates the task of measuring systemic risk. Thus, macroprudential policymakers face Knightian uncertainty under which it is impossible to predict what some outcomes will be.xiv  Against this backdrop, it is vital that research on systemic risk indicators continues and evolves with financial sector developments. Enhancements are continually being made to systemic risk assessments. For example, on-going developments in measuring the key properties of financial cycles, such as their length and persistence, will enhance the ability of policymakers to implement counter-cyclical macroprudential policy.xv  Much progress has already been made and the Bank makes full use of the data and models available to measure systemic risk emerging from various sectors of the financial system, also drawing on developments at a European level. The European Systemic Risk Board, for example, publishes quarterly risk assessments on European developments and the ECB monitors systemic risk and communicates on this via its Financial Stability Review.xvi  To enhance the Bank’s assessment and identification of systemic risks, last week we announced a new stand-alone directorate for financial stability. In line with our mandate and Strategic Plan, this will ensure enhanced analysis and coverage of insurance, shadow banking, funds and credit union sector from a financial stability perspective. This will complement our already comprehensive body of work in relation to the banking sector. *** Instrument selection and calibration Following identification and assessment of the risks, the second step in our macroprudential policy framework is to select and calibrate the appropriate instruments.xvii  The Bank’s toolkit has been under constant development since the crisis and includes inter alia a range of capital buffers as well as borrower-based measures. These can be used to mitigate both structural risks – emerging from segments of the financial system, and cyclical risks – emanating from the financial cycle. These can be combined with other microprudential instruments which target bank specific exposures or maturity mismatches, for example.xviii The most appropriate combination of instruments will depend on our assessment of the emerging risks. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The macroprudential assessment is multifaceted. Financial stability does not have an explicit target like is often the case in monetary policy. Therefore the different instruments at our disposal have different objectives and different transmission channels.  For example, the Other Systemically Important Institutions (O-SII) buffer is a capital buffer. Its aim is to reduce the potential impact of the failure of a systemically important financial institution on the domestic economy.  Last year, two Irish banks were identified as domestically systemically important due to their particular role in the Irish financial sector, domestic economy and to the payments system. In this context, the Bank decided that a capital surcharge rate of 1.5 per cent of their (CET1) capital be applied to these institutions.xix  The Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB) is a different type of buffer and one of a range of instruments we can use to mitigate and prevent excessive credit growth. Via the CCyB we can require banks to set aside additional capital during periods of strong credit growth and growing systemic risk. This buffer can then be released during economic downturns to prevent undue restrictions in the supply of credit to the private sector. The buffer therefore aims to promote banking sector resilience by protecting it against potential losses and ensuring a stable provision of credit over the economic cycle.xx In view of current conditions in the credit market, the Bank decided last year to set this buffer to zero. These buffers can be combined with other capital instruments which can target sectoral exposures should we deem them excessive.  The macroprudential toolkit is broad and not solely focussed on capital. A leverage ratio will also come into force in 2018 and will be further developed as a macroprudential tool. This will prevent against excessive leverage building up in the banking sector during the upswing phase of a financial cycle. It will also stop destabilising deleveraging during a downturn. Liquidity charges can also be designed to target the resilience of funding bases to outflows in stressed periods.  Whilst the intermediate impacts of the instruments may differ, they all aim to enhance the resilience of banks, and hence protect the system as a whole.  In addition to targeting the resilience of banks, the Central Bank also has powers available, such as those that affect the conditions under which mortgage lending occurs. The aim of these is to protect borrowers and banks against adverse movements in credit and property prices, and other economic shocks. I will return to the mortgage regulations later. Finally, under so-called Pillar 2, other micro-prudential instruments can also be used to ensure a holistic approach to mitigating systemic risk. Therefore close collaboration is needed between those assessing systemic risk, and those supervising individual institutions. *** Implementation and communication Despite the rich set of indicators, instruments and sophisticated methods to calibrate them, the third step of our macroprudential policy framework – implementation – is particularly challenging for the Bank. This is because although the costs of the measures can be immediately felt and quantifiable to the banks or borrowers to which they apply, the benefits are often unobservable.  For example, the benefit of the reduced probability of a crisis or increased stability in the financial system is difficult to measure, although some analytical frameworks have been developed to help assess policy trade-offs.xxi This is also because uncertainty surrounds the indicators which are used to identify the risks.  Take the countercyclical capital buffer I mentioned. If credit supply increases excessively, our capital charges will pose a direct cost on the banks. However, this ensures the bank holds 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  extra CET1 capital in upswing of the financial cycle, and provides a cushion when the cycle turns.  Similarly, the mortgage regulations impact individuals’ ability to access credit and purchase houses. As one of the public submissions to the review of the mortgage regulations stated – “I don’t want a larger mortgage, I want a cheaper house”.  This is a perfectly reasonable wish. However prices are determined by a complex interaction of supply and demand side factors and the instruments at our disposal can only do so much. We don’t aim to target house prices, although an impact on prices can be a by-product of the measures.  Others argue for caution in using macroprudential instruments, given the associated uncertainty about their impact and the changing macro-financial environment. However, there is a danger that such thinking can also lead to inaction bias on the part of policymakers. In theory, a rules-based approach, which would automatically trigger action if a set of indicators is breached, would mitigate the risk of inaction bias.xxii However, some degree of judgement from policymakers is needed to calibrate them efficiently, and once they are implemented, to respond quickly to evolving risks.xxiii Thus, in practice, it is recognised that some judgment is needed given individual indicators and thresholds cannot fully capture the emerging risks.  Our policy framework is therefore designed so we operate under a system of “guided discretion”. For example, Member States in the European Union are required to use a standardised benchmark to calculate the countercyclical capital buffer rate. This acts as a common guide to designated authorities across jurisdictions. Similarly, the O-SII buffer has a cap of 2% of Risk Weighted Assets, to guide our decisions.  Recent work by staff at the Bank of England considers whether a cautious stance to macroprudential policy is justified when faced with Knightian uncertainty. It finds that this is not the case. A macroprudential policy targeting resilience of the financial system favours actions that avoid large losses across scenarios, regardless of how likely these scenarios are. Rather, their analysis suggests this should lead to more active policy in the face of uncertainty.xxiv Experience of the recent crisis has illustrated starkly the cost of inaction and policymakers around the world have thus embraced the need for macroprudential instruments. In the European Union, sixteen Member States now have some form of loan-to-value and / or debt-service-to-income or loan-to-income measures in place. Learning from the recent past, the Bank has also been proactive in using these tools. Communication is also a central element of implementation. We are committed to transparency around all the measures we implement. Bank staff actively publish insights from our analysis of the risks in our biannual Macro-Financial Review, Research Technical Papers and other publications. With regard to the mortgage regulations, the Bank published an Economic Letter in July that presented insights on new mortgage lending in 2015, following the introduction of the regulations.xxv  Furthermore, the Bank will publish the submissions to its public call for evidence on the impact of the measures at the time of the publication of the review in November. This will be accompanied by a feedback statement covering the key issues raised. Such moves should help to improve dialogue on the impact of the rules including the distinction between the operation of the rules and wider issues, for example relating to the supply of housing. In a further bid to foster greater understanding of our decisions, we also intend to publish in October the first account of the meeting of the internal Macroprudential Measures Committee, where these issues are discussed.  *** 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Macroprudential policy evaluation  Evidence-based policymaking is a central principle of the Bank’s work. Given the uncertainty about the future evolution of the financial system and of the precise impact of macroprudential instruments, it is important that all the measures be reviewed on a regular basis. The final step in our macroprudential policy framework – namely evaluation – is therefore critical. The countercyclical capital buffer is reviewed on a quarterly basis, while the O-SII buffer and mortgage regulations are reviewed annually. However these reviews should not be seen as an indication that the Bank intends to make a change to the measures.  The first review of the mortgage regulations will be published in November. This will examine the effectiveness of the measures against their stated objectives and discuss potential side effects.  Let me briefly reiterate that the objective of the measures is to enhance the resilience of both borrowers and the banking sector. As I have stated previously, the mortgage regulations are designed to be a permanent feature of the Irish system. The evidence threshold to justify a material loosening or tightening of the rules is significant for two reasons. First, stable rules are valuable for both households and mortgage lenders in eliminating avoidable uncertainty about the regulatory regime. Second, the noisy and volatile nature of macro-financial data means that it would be unwise to seek to adjust the rules in response to minor and temporary fluctuations in the state of the financial cycle: such a fine-tuning approach could actually aggravate financial instability if revisions proved to be unwarranted or badly timed.  There has been much public focus of late on the ongoing review, so I would like to take a few moments now to focus specifically on this.  A body of empirical work is underway to inform this and future reviews. This includes analysis covering household resilience and borrower types, banking resilience and bank lending practices, and house price and credit dynamics. In addition we are examining the impact on the rental market, housing supply and unsecured lending. The review is also informed by recent international evidence and by public submissions on the impact of the regulations.  The call for public submissions closed on 31 August. The Bank received fifty submissions in total. These came from a wide range of individuals, industry experts, and other interested parties and are currently being analysed. A number of submissions highlighted the need to improve awareness on the calibration of the measures and on the availability of allowances under the proportionate cap system.  Early insights which were published in the July Economic Letter capture a period when banks and borrowers were transitioning to the new regulatory environment. xxvi However, a number of key points emerged over this period. As mentioned, an impact on prices can be a by-product of the measures. In this context we have seen a moderation in Dublin house price increases since end-2014, although house price growth remains strong in commuter counties and some other cities.  The latest data on house purchase prices for first-time buyers nationally suggests the median house price was €210,000 in 2015.xxvii Under our rules, assuming use was not made of the available exemptions, this would imply a minimum deposit requirement of 10 per cent of the purchase price.  For first-time buyers in Dublin, the median purchase price over the period was €270,000; the deposit requirement in this case is 11.9 per cent.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  These requirements are broadly in line with those observed in the market for first time buyers in the period preceding the introduction of the regulations, as financial institutions had already adjusted their lending standards to more prudent levels after the financial crisis.  Second, price expectations have also moderated following the introduction of the measures  – although survey participants continue to expect house prices to rise over the short to medium term. Median price expectations have moderated, for both the national and Dublin markets. The mortgage regulations are also reported as influencing these expectations. Through our review, we also noted a number of differences in the characteristics of borrowers in the data. Under the regulations, a proportion of lending is allowed to take place in excess of the loan-to-value and loan-to-income limits.xxviii  Among first-time buyers, borrowers with an allowance for the loan-to-value ratio had, on average, a higher income relative to borrowers without an allowance. Couples and borrowers in Dublin also had a higher share of this allowance.  With regard to the loan-to-income ratio, borrowers with an allowance on average had a lower income and were slightly younger. There was also a higher share of single borrowers with a loan-to-income allowance. These aspects give us a greater understanding of the effect of the regulations and of how, and to what extent the allowances have been used. This also suggests initial fears regarding the use of the allowances may be unfounded. As new data and insights on lending developments and the use of allowances to exceed the parameters of the rules become available, these will be released on a periodic basis. For example, another Economic Letter on lending in the first half of 2016 will be published in a matter of weeks. Similarly, the forthcoming Quarterly Bulletin will include an article entitled “Rental markets, savings and the accumulation of mortgage down-payments” which will give further insights into these dynamics.  *** Conclusion In the years ahead, Knightian uncertainty will remain a central feature of the backdrop against which policy makers must make difficult decisions. With regard to macroprudential policy, we must be prepared to take action in the face of such uncertainty. Learning from the crisis, the Bank has taken clear and decisive action through the introduction of the mortgage measures and other macroprudential instruments. These were implemented in the interests of safeguarding financial stability and protecting the system as a whole. We are still early in the life of the mortgage measures which have a medium term focus. It would be unwise to seek to adjust the rules in response to minor and temporary fluctuations in the state of the financial cycle. Therefore, the evidence threshold to justify a material loosening or tightening of the rules is significant.  It is important that we strive to continue to enhance our knowledge on economic and financial developments, on their potential impact under various scenarios and on our frameworks for assessing, calibrating, and implementing macroprudential policies. I hope that the work of the Central Bank of Ireland can contribute to developments in this field.  Thank you.                                                 i This amounts to 14% of Irish goods and 20% of Irish services exports, and about a quarter of Irish goods and around 10% of services imports.  ii See the Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin Q3, July 2016, available here iii As of end-year 2015, publicly available data shows the total balance of PDH loans in negative equity, for AIB, Bank of Ireland and Permanent TSB, represents 23.5 per cent of lending. For BTLs, the share of total loan balances in negative equity was 41.0 per cent at end of year 2015. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches                                                                                                                                                     iv See the Central Bank of Ireland, “Macro-Financial Review 2016:1”, available here. Also see the recent International Monetary Fund, “Financial System Stability Assessment – Ireland”, IMF Country Report 26/258, July 2016, available here. v Knight, Frank (1921, 1964 p232), “Risk, Uncertainty and Profit”, New York: Sentry Press. vi See “A Macroprudential Policy Framework for Ireland”, Central Bank of Ireland, 2014, available here. vii This follows the standard European framework for macroprudential policy – see European Systemic Risk Board (2014), “Flagship Report on Macro-Prudential Policy in the Banking Sector “March 2014. viii See Borio, Claudio (2012), “The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt?”, BIS Working Papers No 395, December 2012. ix See De Nicolò, Gianni, Favara, Giovanni, and Lev, Ratnovski (2012), “Externalities and macroprudential policy”, IMF Staff Discussion Note, June 7, 2012 (SDN/12/05), International Monetary Fund, for a full discussion. An overview is also discussed in Claessens, Stijn (2014), “An Overview of Macroprudential Policy Tools”, IMF Working Paper, WP/14/24. x See Silva, André, (2016), “Strategic complementarity in banks’ funding liquidity choices and financial stability”, European Systemic Risk Board Working Paper Series, No 19/ July 2016. xi See “Misjudging Risk: Causes of the Systemic Banking Crisis in Ireland”, Report of the Commission of Investigation into the banking sector in Ireland, March 2011. xii See Brunnermeier, Markus, Crockett, Andrew, Goodhart, Charles, Persaud, Avinash D., and Shin, Hyun Song, (2009), “The Fundamental principles of Financial Regulation”, Genera Reports on the World Economy 11, June 2009 International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies. xiii See The Irish Banking Crisis Regulatory and Financial Stability Policy 2003–2008, A Report to the Minister for Finance by the Governor of the Central Bank, and Regling, Klaus and Watson, Max (2010), A Preliminary Report on The Sources of Ireland’s Banking Crisis for a full description of the origins of the Irish crisis. xiv Agur, Itai and Sharma, Sunil (2013), “Rules, Discretion, and Macro-Prudential Policy”, IMF WP/13/65. xv See for example, Rünstler, Gerhard and Vlekke, Marente (2016), “Business, housing and credit cycles”, Working Paper Series, No 1915, ECB, June. xvi The European Systemic Risk Board is responsible for oversight of the European financial system and for preventing and mitigating systemic risk. Constâncio, Vitor (2016) “Principles of Macroprudential Policy” provides a useful recent discussion of the indicators available at the ECB to measure systemic risk. The European Commission has also launched a review of the EU macroprudential framework. Details are available here xvii These instruments are derived from both European and national legislation. xviii See European Systemic Risk Board (2014), “The ESRB Handbook on operationalizing macroprudential policy in the banking sector”, 3 March (ESRB/2014). xix This requirement will be phased in over the period 1 July 2019 to 1 July 2021. A decision on the scope for this year’s O-SII buffer will be taken later this year. xx See “A Macroprudential Policy Framework for Ireland”, Central Bank of Ireland, 2014, available here for a full list of instruments and their intermediate objectives. A full description of the countercyclical capital buffer is explained in Creedon, Con and O’Brien, Eoin, “Indicators For Setting the Countercyclical Capital Buffer” Economic Letter, Vol. 2016 No. 2 available here. Also see Central Bank of Ireland Countercyclical capital buffer rate announcement of 1 July 2016, available here xxi Arregui, Nicolas, Benes, Jaromír, Krznar, Ivo, Mitra, Srobona, and Andre Oliveira Santos (2013),“Evaluating the Net Benefits of Macroprudential Policy: A Cookbook”, IMF/13/167. xxii Ibid. xxiii See IMF (2013), “Key Aspects of Macroprudential Policy”, International Monetary Fund, June 2013.  xxiv Saleem Bahaj and Foulis, Angus, (2016), “Macroprudential policy under uncertainty”, Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 584. xxv Keenan, Enda, Kinghan, Christina, McCarthy, Yvonne and Conor O’Toole,(2016). “Macroprudential Measures and Irish Mortgage Lending: A Review of Recent Data”, Economic Letter Series, Vol. 2016, No.3. xxvi Ibid. xxvii Figures are from a loan-level dataset held at the Central Bank of Ireland. xxviii See footnote xxvii. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Chris Salmon: Rebuilding trust through the “FX Global Code” – reasons for optimism Speech by Mr Chris Salmon, Executive Director for Markets of the Bank of England, at the ACI UK Square Mile Debate, London, 21 September 2016. *   *   * I am grateful to David Edmunds, Grigoria Christodoulou, Laurie Roberts, Tim Taylor, Rebecca Jackson, Geoff Coppins and Jon Pyzer for their assistance in preparing this speech. Good evening, I am delighted to be here at the ACI UK’s Square Mile Debate. Tonight, my focus is the work underway to develop a single, global code of conduct for foreign exchange (FX). But before doing so I cannot not help but advertise the Bank’s latest product: the Churchill £5 note that we launched a week ago. It is a technological first for us, made out of polymer, and “cleaner, safer and stronger” than its paper predecessor. But our unquestioned discretion to replace one version of a £5 note with another relies on a much older concept: trust, trust in our “promise to pay the bearer…”. And trust, or more specifically, rebuilding trust, is what is at the core of my main subject tonight, the FX global code of conduct (the “Code”). It is no secret that all has not been well in FX or FICC markets more generally. The nature and scope of misconduct that has come to light in recent years has significantly eroded trust in these markets – not only public trust, but also trust between market participants. The Fair and Effective Markets Review (2015)1 extensively documented the root causes of this misconduct. But in short, structural weaknesses, ranging from poorly designed infrastructure through to guidelines about what constituted acceptable market practice that were sometimes poorly understood, presented opportunities for misconduct to occur. And “ethical drift”, whereby a poor culture that prioritised short-term financial gain above all else was perpetuated and normalised, meant that individuals were willing to exploit these opportunities. All of these features were present in the various episodes of FX misconduct which have come to light. Poor infrastructure was clearly an issue in foreign exchange markets; in particular the manipulation of the 4.00pm fix was facilitated by weaknesses in its design2. But, as demonstrated, for example by the misconduct associated with the handling of client stop-loss orders, the breakdown in market practice norms was clearly very important in the FX markets. The wholesale FX market is one of the most complex markets in the world: it operates 24 hours a day across multiple centres. Participants are diverse: ranging from corporates looking to hedge their trade flows, through to principal trading firms seeking to capitalise on the most transitory of pricing anomalies and, from time to time, central banks seeking to affect the price of their currency. Some of these users access the market directly; others indirectly, for example through the sponsorship of their prime broker. Banks, acting as the key intermediaries, accept market risk when transacting as a principal with some clients while providing agency services for others. Orders are often complex, requiring banks to exercise discretion when executing them. There is no single price – the concept of ‘best execution’ does not sit as neatly as it does in other markets. Nor is there a single trading venue, or even single method of trading, with banks and platforms competing for business.                                                 1 http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/femrjun15.pdf.  2 http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/r_140930.pdf – Final Report on Foreign Exchange Benchmarks, Financial Stability Board, 30 September 2014. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  This combination of factors means that the information asymmetries and potential conflicts of interest inherent in all FICC markets are also acute in FX markets. This in turn creates a particular premium on establishing commonly understood and accepted market standards to guide behaviour. The Global Code initiative launched in May 2015 by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) Governors, is designed to achieve this. The initiative will establish a single, global code of conduct for the wholesale FX market and has been tasked with developing mechanisms to promote greater adherence3. This initiative is now well advanced, with the Phase 1 material published in May 20164. The complete Code will be launched in London in May 2017. A sceptic might question the prospects for the success of this initiative. After all, this is not the first FX Code – it will supersede a number of existing regional FX Codes, some of which ended up gathering dust in market participants’ drawers. So, why will this Code work where others have failed? In a market where information asymmetries have been exploited for selfish motives – what good can a voluntary code of conduct really achieve? This is a good challenge, and in the end only time will tell if the Code initiative will succeed in minimising future incidents of misconduct. But I want to set out four reasons to be optimistic before discussing the steps that I think market participants will need to take individually and collectively to support future adherence, which is fundamental to the Code’s ultimate success, and why I believe it is in their interests to take these steps. The first reason for optimism – and perhaps the most important – is the substance of the Code itself. It will directly address the complexity of the FX market I summarised earlier and, informed by the misconduct of the past, provide guidance where it is necessary. For example, the interim publication established the important principle that “where the acceptance of an order grants the Principal executing the order some discretion, it should exercise this discretion reasonably, fairly and in such a way that is not designed or intended to disadvantage the Client”. And while acknowledging that pre-hedging may be a legitimate risk management tool it is clear that it should only be undertaken “in a manner that is not meant to disadvantage the client or disrupt the market”. During Phase 2 of our work programme we will deal with other areas, such as the provision and use of “last look” and time-stamping that were highlighted by the Fair and Effective Markets Review as areas where market practices in the FX market could be improved. And in doing so it strikes the right balance between setting out such high-level principles and providing concrete guidance. Let me illustrate this point summarising how Phase 1 dealt with the vexed issue of information sharing. The May 2016 text sets out, upfront, a broad, overarching principle – “Market Participants should communicate Market Colour appropriately and without compromising Confidential Information”. And it then sets out in detail, how this principle should be applied to different types of information: for example, “Client groups, locations and strategies, should be referred to at a level of granularity that does not allow Market Participants to derive the underlying Confidential Information”. This will be augmented in the final Code with stylised examples to demonstrate how this guidance can be applied to practical situations – examples of both effective and ineffective aggregation of information. Second, we are alive to the importance of keeping the Code up to date. From start to finish the Code will have been completed in just two years. A benefit of this compressed timeline is that the Code should be relevant for today’s market when published. And importantly we are committed to developing an appropriate review mechanism so that the Code stays up to date                                                 3 http://www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm  – Guy Debelle of the Reserve Bank of Australia is chairing this work, with Simon Potter of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York leading the work on developing the Code with myself leading the adherence work. 4 https://www.bis.org/mktc/fxwg/gc_may16.pdf. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  and evolves as the market evolves. Further details will be announced next year, but the new Code will not be allowed to stagnate. Third, the process for developing the Code is inclusive and, to my knowledge, unprecedented. Its development is very much a partnership between public and private sectors, with broad-based, senior engagement from all types of key market participants. This should help get buy-in for the final product. The Code is for everyone in the FX market – it covers the buy-side, sell-side, non-bank participants, trading platforms and other market infrastructure – and therefore our engagement has necessarily been as diverse. During Phase 2 we are further broadening our engagement to ensure that the voices of all different market participants are heard and taken account of. The contributions made by the more than 40 members of the dedicated Market Participants Group (MPG) – chaired by David Puth from CLS – and on which current ACI President Marshall Bailey also sits – alongside the contributions of the regional FXC members have been invaluable, and involves hundreds of individuals devoting thousands of hours to the cause. Fourth, the Code is one of a suite of important initiatives which have launched in recent years to improve conduct in FICC markets. Initiatives such as the UK Senior Managers and Certification Regime, soon to be extended beyond banks to all FCA authorised firms, will aim to raise standards of market conduct by strengthening the accountabilities of senior management. This is particularly pertinent for FX given that London accounts for over a third of global FX market turnover. Reforms to remuneration structures will aim to reduce the incentives to cheat for short-term profit. And in the UK the FICC Market Standards Board, created as a direct consequence of the Fair and Effective Markets Review, has been established to champion good conduct across the whole range of FICC markets. These initiatives, combined with a greater focus on conduct, create a supportive environment for the objectives of the Code5. These four factors create reasons to be optimistic about the prospects for the Code. But, they are not enough to ensure success. That will require consistent widespread adherence by market participants. The Code will only rebuild trust if it is actively used by market participants to drive a market-wide shift in culture and attitudes – one that embeds behavioural norms that are consistent with both the letter and spirit of the Code. This type of cultural shift is not something that can be mandated. The official and private sectors will work together to achieve this, but there can be little doubt that change, fundamentally, must come from firms themselves. In my view at least, it is in market participants’ individual and collective interest to make that change. Individually, firms that assimilate the Code fully are likely to benefit, over time, from greater trust in the marketplace, a stronger reputation, and a higher long term franchise value. In a world where competition for market share remains fierce, winning the trust of your clients matters financially. Collectively, if standards of behaviour throughout the market are higher, it is easier for any one firm to maintain its own high standards and avoid getting embroiled in a “race to the bottom”; all firms can then benefit from a reduction in future regulatory and legal risk. Moreover, enduring adherence to the Code’s higher standards of behaviour will likely lead to improved functioning of the market as a whole: if widely followed, the Code should facilitate more effective and consistently appropriate information sharing than has been the case. An                                                 5 There are a number of other important Codes that are being developed in the UK, specifically such as the Securities Lending, Repo and Money Markets Code which is currently being written by a market participant-led joint sub-committee of the Bank’s Money Market Liaison Committee (MMLC) and Securities Lending and Repo Committee (SLRC); and the Precious Metals Code being produced by the LBMA.  These parallel initiatives will both benefit from and contribute to this supportive environment. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  efficient and effective market can make a positive impact on everyone’s bottom line – leading to better volumes, fewer disputes and better outcomes for all market participants. So the question for market participants is – how can you, collectively and individually, make use of the Code to realise these benefits? There are three key elements that need to be in place: First, the Code needs to be embedded in firms’ practices: training and education will be important here. Second, firms should have the right policies and procedures in place to ensure that they are able to monitor how successfully they have embedded the Code. The text of the Code itself provides some practical suggestions but ultimately firms will need to consider what the appropriate framework is for their business and level of activity in the FX market. Third, firms should be able to demonstrate publicly that their behaviour and practices in the FX market are in line with the Code’s principles. The widespread use of a common public attestation could be a powerful tool in this respect. It would provide a strong signal of a firm’s commitment to following good practices and help focus the mind of the firm’s senior management who would be asked to sign the attestation. Embedding, monitoring and demonstrating adherence requires concrete action. The central banks are leading the way, both by demonstrating their own commitment to the Code and by setting incentives for others to follow. BIS central banks have announced their intention to embed the finalised Code within their own practices – with the expectation that their FX counterparties will do likewise. We are also working towards establishing a link between a firm’s formal commitment to adhere to the Code and membership of regional FXCs (the London FXJSC in our case). In this context, we have been developing an attestation form, which could be adopted more widely, and could be viewed as a public good. Given the breadth of FXC membership – there are over 200 FXC members within the 8 major regional FXCs, representing the buy-side, sell-side, infrastructure, associations and others – the potential importance of this link should not be underestimated. Our actions as central banks, however, can only be a part of the broader picture. The market itself needs to consider how to engage with the Code both collectively and individually. The process has already started at a collective level. David Puth’s MPG has recently created a dedicated sub-group to consider market-based methods to support the Code. I am sure the MPG group will reach out to industry associations, like the ACI, about the potential to develop common education modules, provide training and seminars or facilitating workshops to deepen knowledge of the Code. We will share thinking about the use of attestations with the MPG team, and I am confident that they will identify a number of market-based initiatives to support adherence. One idea the group is exploring, which is not without challenges but could be developed through time, is the creation of an industry kite-mark, which firms would be awarded if their public attestation to the Code was buttressed by a threshold amount of independent assurance work. Individually, firms, and particularly senior management, should start considering the steps they will take to support the Code. Over and above questions about policies and procedures and training modules the key question senior management should be asking is how can they set a strong positive tone and ensure that their firm’s incentives and promotion policies are aligned with responsible engagement in the market and the long-term reputation of the firm? Part of this conversation will involve a discussion on how firms can monitor their adherence to the Code, reward good behaviour and penalise bad behaviour. In the UK, senior managers may find it helpful to consider this work in conjunction with their responsibilities under the Senior Managers and Certification Regime. When the final Code is released in May 2017 it will no doubt be subject to much scrutiny. Sceptics will look for clear commitments from firms to adhere to the Code. Central banks are playing their part in catalysing those commitments, but what will really count is the response of market participants. Words alone will not be enough and I encourage you all to ensure you respond positively and quickly. The Code should not be seen as, and indeed it is not created to be, a tick-box exercise. The Code is not written primarily for compliance departments but 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  for all the FX market – including front, middle and back office and senior management who should want to adhere. It is a tool for rebuilding trust and standards. If the new Churchill £5 is “cleaner, safer and stronger” than its predecessor, then I hope the global Code initiative will lead to an FX market that is “cleaner” and “safer” for its users because it has a “stronger” impact on behaviours than its forefathers. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Mark Carney: Resolving the climate paradox Text of the Arthur Burns Memorial Lecture by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial Stability Board, Berlin, 22 September 2016. *      *      * I am grateful to Alice Carr, Carsten Jung, Ben Nelson and Iain de Weymarn for their assistance in preparing these remarks. I. Introduction It is an honour to give the Arthur Burns Memorial Lecture. In Arthur Burns’ day, financial diplomacy was limited to weighty issues of monetary policy coordination, particularly the search for a new international monetary system following the collapse of Bretton Woods. Your invitation to discuss climate change is a sign of the broadening of the responsibilities of central banks to include financial as well as monetary stability. It also demonstrates the changing nature of international financial diplomacy. The quest for a renewal of the Bretton Woods treaty, with associated protocols and enforcement mechanisms, has been replaced with the more flexible governance of the G20 and the FSB. These groups gather principals who work together to forge consensus and implement global solutions to common problems. When I spoke at Lloyd’s of London a year ago about the financial stability risks arising from climate change, I, in effect, highlighted two paradoxes.1 First, the future will be past. That is, climate change is a tragedy of the horizon which imposes a cost on future generations that the current one has no direct incentive to fix. The catastrophic impacts of climate change will be felt beyond the traditional horizons of most actors including businesses and central banks. Once climate change becomes a clear and present danger to financial stability it may already be too late to stabilise the atmosphere at two degrees. The second paradox is that success is failure. That is, too rapid a movement towards a low-carbon economy could materially damage financial stability. A wholesale reassessment of prospects, as climate-related risks are re-evaluated, could destabilise markets, spark a pro-cyclical crystallisation of losses and lead to a persistent tightening of financial conditions: a climate Minsky moment. Resolving these conundrums requires first distinguishing the three channels through which climate change affects financial stability. The first concerns the physical risks that arise from the increased frequency and severity of climate- and weather-related events that damage property and disrupt trade. At present, general insurers are on the front line.2 Thus far, a combination of sophisticated forecasting, a forward-looking European insurance capital regime and business models built around short-term coverage has left insurers relatively well-placed to manage physical risks.3                                                 1 See Carney (2016), “Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon – climate change and financial stability”, speech given at Lloyd’s of London, September 2015.  2 While the attribution of increases in claims to specific factors is complex, work done at Lloyd’s of London estimated that the 20cm rise in sea-level at the tip of Manhattan since the 1950s, when all other factors are held constant, increased insured losses from Superstorm Sandy by 30% in New York alone. See Lloyd’s of London (2014), “Catastrophe Modelling and Climate Change”.  3 As described in Prudential Regulation Authority, (2015), “The impact of climate change on the UK insurance sector”. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Which is why Warren Buffett can observe that climate change is not a threat to Berkshire Hathaway’s insurance business.4 Insurers have to update their models constantly and adjust coverage prudently. And in time, growing swathes of our economies could become uninsurable absent public backstops – hardly the prescription for a growing business.5 Moreover, if coverage is not maintained, the broader financial system would become increasingly exposed to large and variable physical risks. With their motives as global citizens sharpened by commercial concerns, insurers have some of the greatest incentives to understand and tackle climate change in the short term. For example, Lloyd’s of London underwriters are required to consider climate change explicitly in their business plans and underwriting models. Their genius has been to recognise that past is not prologue and that the catastrophic norms of the future are in the tail risks of today. With such insights, it is perhaps not surprising that the insurance sector has been particularly active in organising itself to address these existential issues.6 The second channel concerns liability risks. These stem from parties who have suffered loss from the effects of climate change seeking compensation from those they hold responsible. Such claims could arise well into the future, as the science and evidence of climate change hardens, though some are already taking action against companies on the grounds of failure to disclose the risks posed to their business models by climate change.7 The final and most important channel involves transition risks, which could result from the adjustment towards a lower-carbon economy. Changes in policy, technology and physical risks could prompt a reassessment of the value of a large range of assets as costs and opportunities become apparent. The speed at which such re-pricing occurs is uncertain but could be decisive for financial stability. There have already been a few high profile examples of jump-to-distress pricing because of shifts in environmental policy or performance. Tonight, I would like to discuss how building new markets – in climate transition and green finance – can help resolve the tragedy of the horizon. Over the past year, the focus of G20 Leaders and the aegis of the FSB have spurred important progress. The upcoming German presidency of the G20 now has a historic chance to mainstream climate finance and turn risk into opportunity. To add impetus, there is also a growing macroeconomic case for action. Let me begin with that imperative.                                                 4 Buffet noted “insurance policies are customarily written for one year and repriced annually to reflect changing exposures. Increased possibilities of loss translate promptly into increased premiums”. See: http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/letters.html. 5 The report ‘Risky Business – the economic risks of climate change in the United States’ (2014) suggests that in the USA $238–507 billion worth of coastal property could be below sea level by 2100.  6 The Insurance Development Forum was formed in 2015 as a public-private partnership between the United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and the insurance sector to use the industry’s expertise to insure people in developing countries who are unprotected but vulnerable to climate change risk. This protection gap currently represents 90% of the economic costs of natural disasters that are uninsured. 7 In late 2015, the New York Attorney General launched an investigation into allegedly insufficient disclosure of climate change risk by a large energy company; Attorneys General in numerous US states have since joined this investigation or launched their own. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  II. The macroeconomic imperative Throughout this decade, global growth has serially disappointed as the combination of huge debt overhangs, profound demographic changes and enormous uncertainties have weighed on activity (Chart 1).8 Nominal growth in the euro area, the UK and globally, is running at half of its pre-crisis rate. Chart 1  Consistent downward revisions to GDP growth forecasts  Source: IMF World Economic Outlook. Each line shows how forecasts for a particular calendar year have evolved over time. The diamond shows the eventual outturn. Growth has been weak despite significant progress repairing the financial system, recent moves to somewhat expansionary fiscal policies in a number of countries, and of course, years of unprecedented monetary policies.                                                 8 See Carney (2016), “Uncertainty, the economy and policy”, speech given at the Court Room, Bank of England, June 2016. 0.02.04.06.08.02010201120122013201420152016Actual GDP growth2011201220132014201520162016PercentDotted lines = Emerging economiesSolid lines = Advanced economies
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Chart 2 Three eras of uncertainty: geopolitical, economic and policy  Source: Bank calculations and Caldara and Iacoviello (2016), Baker et al (2015), and Haddow et al (2013). Economic policy and geopolitical uncertainty indices are de-meaned and shown relative to their respective standard deviations. Chart shows two-year centred moving average for each measure. See Caldara, D and Iacoviello, M (2016), “Measuring geopolitical risk”, Federal Reserve Board, mimeo; Baker, S, Bloom, N and Davis, S (2015), “Measuring economic policy uncertainty”, NBER Working Paper No. 21633, October; Haddow, A, Hare, C, Hooley, J and Shakir, T (2013) “Macroeconomic uncertainty: what is it, how can we measure it and why does it matter?”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Q2. Further restraining growth is a deep risk aversion amongst businesses and investors stemming from a combination of elevated geopolitical, economic and policy uncertainties (Chart 2). This has particularly affected business investment. Across advanced economies, investment has fallen by more than 2½ percentage points of GDP (Chart 3), creating substantial investment shortfalls, relative to pre-crisis trends, of around 20% in Germany and 25% in the UK and US (Chart 4). In financial markets, despite a recovery in equities in recent years, equity risk premia are unusually high and government bond yields are consistent with very low growth for a very long time (Chart 5).9 In short, both business and investors appear to be hedging future disaster risk.                                                  9 In the UK and Germany, real interest rates are negative as far as the eye can see. Even in the US, real 30-year rates are well below 1%. Low bond yields suggest that market is discounting low future growth, accounting for some of the wedge between those yields and equity dividend yields. Indeed, year in, year out, earnings forecasts have proven wildly optimistic. However, risk premia are also likely playing a role. Put simply, investors are not only less optimistic about future growth, but are also less certain about that subdued outlook. They are demanding a discount on risky assets to compensate, and seeking risk-free assets instead. -1.5-1-0.500.511.522.53198619881990199219941996199820002002200420062008201020122014Standard deviations from meanGeopolitical risk indexUK Economic uncertaintyUK Policy uncertaintyGulfwar9/11Iraq InvasionNorthern Rock & Global financial CrisisLehman Brothers FailureScottish Independence Referendum
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  Chart 3 Advanced economy investment has  fallen relative to GDP and remains  lower than past episodes Chart 4 Whole economy real investment substantially weaker than  pre-crisis forecasts      Source: IMF World Economic Outlook and Bank calculations. Source: IMF World Economic Outlook and Bank calculations. Chart 5 UK equity risk premium up since 2000, and together with lower growth  expectations, explains bulk of the spread between earnings yield  on equities and bond yields currently  Source: IMF, Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations. The equity-bond yield spread is the difference between the reciprocal of the FTSE All-Share price-earnings ratio and the UK 10-year government bond yield. The growth contribution is calibrated from the IMF 5-year-ahead world growth and inflation forecasts. The ERP contribution is calibrated using the VAR model described in Chin and Polk (2015), ‘A forecast evaluation of expected equity return measures’, Bank of England Working Paper, No. 520.    -4.5-4.0-3.5-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.5-1.0-0.50.00.51.0TT+1T+2T+3T+4T+5T+6T+7T+81980198920012007pp fall in investmentshare of GDPYears-60-50-40-30-20-10010SpainItalyDenmarkFranceUSCanadaUKGermanySwitzerlandSwedenResidualEquipmentNon-residentialResidentialTotalPercent -20246810122000200520102015Unexplained componentERP contributionGrowth contributionEquity-bond yield spreadPercentage points
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  The Bank of England has long stressed that central bank policies are not the cause of low rates but responses to them.10 We are actors in a play written by others.11 That is because the level at which interest rates must ultimately settle to ensure demand consistent with supply and so inflation at target – the “equilibrium” interest rate, or “r*” – is determined, not by central banks, but by the real, fundamental factors driving desired savings and investment in the global economy. These include technology growth, demographics, the ease of financial intermediation, and inequality. Colleagues at the Bank have estimated that such factors have conspired to lower real interest rates by around 450 basis points since the early 1980s.12 Long-run prosperity was never in the gift of monetary policy makers. As the 10th anniversary of the start of the crisis approaches, a consensus is growing that escaping this low-growth low-inflation trap will require a rebalancing between monetary, fiscal and structural policies. The last are the most important. In addition to their merits in raising potential growth directly, structural reforms could improve the savings and investment balance, thereby increasing equilibrium interest rates (r*) and giving monetary policy more traction. Bank staff estimate that shortfalls in public investment represent only a modest portion of the 450 basis points fall in global interest rates since the early 1980s. Clear policy frameworks that encourage sustained private investment are thus essential, including those that mobilise private investment to finance the transition to the low-carbon economy. As I will discuss, the magnitudes required are significant, the horizons long, and the distribution Pareto improving. Theory suggests capital should flow from advanced to emerging economies – where the returns are highest. For long spells, however, the opposite has happened, confounding the textbooks and further driving down advanced economy bond yields. And on the occasions when capital has flowed to emerging markets, it has been too volatile, amplified cycles, distorted asset prices and fed credit imbalances in recipient countries. In this context, green finance is a major opportunity. By ensuring that capital flows finance long-term projects in countries where growth is most carbon intensive, financial stability can be promoted. By absorbing excess global saving, equilibrium interest rates can be raised and macroeconomic stability enhanced. And by allocating capital to green technologies, the prospects for an environmentally sustainable recovery in global growth will increase. Seizing this opportunity requires a comprehensive climate policy framework. III. Paris brings forward the horizon With the Paris Agreement, governments have stepped up. In a display of international coordination of which Arthur Burns would have been proud, world leaders committed to curb carbon emissions and limit the rise in global average temperatures                                                 10 See Carney (2013), “The spirit of the season”, speech to the Economic Club of New York; Broadbent (2014), “Monetary policy, asset prices and distribution”, speech at the Society of Business Economists Annual Conference; Bank of England Inflation Report, February 2014, page 40. 11 See Broadbent (ibid.). 12 See Rachel, L and Smith, T (2015), “Secular drivers of the global real interest rate”, Bank of England Working Paper No. 571.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 7  relative to those in the pre-industrial world to 2°C, and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C.13 Underpinning the Paris Agreement is recognition that the stock of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere should not exceed the remaining carbon budget, which according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) amounts to 1000 gigatonnes of CO2 from 2011 onwards.14 Countries have set their ambitions by submitting their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs).15 At present, these commitments are of varying degrees of specificity, and most still need to be fleshed out to be consistent with the aggregate carbon budget. The Paris Agreement requires that NDCs be updated regularly and that each should be a progression on the last. Crucially, the Paris Agreement provided an objective assessment that, even if all of the policies implied by the Agreement were implemented, global temperatures would rise by at least 2.7 degrees by 2100.16 In other words, the world has committed to do something, but not yet enough to meet its stated goals. Therefore, Paris clarifies actual and stretch objectives. It provides detailed climate policies and creates the prospect of a future ratcheting up of efforts. In doing so, it greatly increases transition risks as well as opportunities. By bringing forward the horizon, it puts a premium on the ability of private markets to adjust. IV. Building a market in transition to a low-carbon economy Smooth adjustment is crucial because transition risks are how success could turn into failure. Specifically, sudden changes in policy, technology and physical risks could prompt a reassessment of asset values as costs and opportunities become apparent. In other words, an abrupt resolution of the tragedy of horizons is in itself a financial stability risk. We have already seen cases where there have been sharp changes in valuations. The combined market capitalisation of the top four US coal producers has fallen by over 99% since the end of 2010, and three have recently filed for bankruptcy (Chart 6).17 There has been similar, albeit less acute, drama for the more diversified German utilities (Chart 7).                                                  13 See United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, “Paris Agreement”, 2015, available at: http://unfccc.int/files/essential_background/convention/application/pdf/english_paris_agreement.pdf.  14 IPCC Synthesis Report (2014) and Bank calculations, in Batten, S, Sowerbutts, R, and Tanaka, M, “Let’s talk about the weather: the impact of climate change on central banks”, Bank of England Staff Working Paper (2016). 15 For example, the US will seek to reduce emissions against 2005 levels by 26–28% by 2025; China will seek to reduce against 2005 levels by 40–45% also by 2025 and the European Union will seek to reduce by more than 40% against 1990 levels by 2030.  16 See United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, (2015). 17 Those filing for bankruptcy were Peabody Energy, Arch Coal and Alpha Natural. 
   8 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Chart 6 US coal sector index and S&P 500 against regulatory  announcements and other demand factors  Source: Thomson Reuters DataStream, Bank calculations. (a) The Chinese government announced emissions reductions targets in March 2011, which may have contributed to slowing of coal consumption, including a marked slowdown in coal imports from the US. (b) Mercury and Air Toxic Standards (MATS) required installation control technology which a large share of coal plants did not have. (c) New Source Performance Standards: raised efficiency requirements for new coal units. (d) The Coal Combustion Residuals (CCR) Rule introduced a set of requirements for the safe disposal of CCRs, commonly known as coal ash, from coal-fired power plants. (e) Proposed to reduce CO2 emissions by about 30% by 3030. Chart 7 Share prices of German utilities and DAX 30 index,  against key energy sector regulatory announcement  Source: Thomson Reuters DataStream, Bank calculations. Markets bring the future forward, with financial impacts often occurring immediately, even if the real impact is several years into the future. For example, in today’s low rate environment, 0204060801001201400501001502002010201120122013201420152016End-2010 = 100US$/MMBTUUS Clean Power Plan announced(e)China'semissions reduction plan (a)Natural gas price (RHS)US CCR(d)US MATS(b)implementedUSNSPC (c)S&P 500 (LHS)Dow Jones US Coal Index (LHS)050100150200250300350199920012003200520072009201120132015E ONRWEENBWDAX 30End-2000= 100Renewableenergy law passsedEarlier phase out of nuclear plants decidedAmbitious renewablestargets passedEnergy transitionplan passed
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 9  around 90% of the value of the average German utility bond derives from cash flows beyond five years (Chart 8). Chart 8 Net present value of a typical German utility bond with 30 year maturity   Source: Bank calculations. A 30-year maturity is representative of bonds recently by German private utilities in 2015 and 2016.  The point is that the more we invest with foresight; the less we will regret in hindsight. Financial stability risks will be minimised if the transition begins early and follows a predictable path, thereby helping the market anticipate the transition to a two-degree world. And that requires the right information. On this front, there has also been considerable progress in a short period of time. V. The task force on climate-related financial disclosures (TCFD) and the need for better information An obstacle to a smooth adjustment has been the absence of information to help market participants make a market in climate-related financial risk. Companies do not know what to report or how to report it. Investors – even well-informed ones – cannot access the information they need to assess the risks in their portfolios. In late 2015, at the request of G20 Leaders18, the FSB established an industry-led Task Force, under the leadership of Michael Bloomberg. It is developing recommendations for voluntary, consistent, comparable, reliable and clear disclosures around climate-related financial risks for companies to provide information to lenders, insurers, investors and other stakeholders. Since a private sector solution is needed to get this right, the Task Force consists of a careful balance of issuers, investors, creditors, rating agencies, accounting firms and climate risk                                                 18 The G20 had previously asked, in its April 2015 Communique, that the FSB “convene public- and private-sector participants to review how the financial sector can take account of climate-related issues”.  0102030405060708090100€A yield curve5%10%Discount rate> 5 years< 5 years% of total NPV 
   10 BIS central bankers’ speeches  experts. Members are drawn from advanced and emerging economies, including from the German energy and auto sectors.19 In April, the Task Force published for consultation its Phase I Report, which took stock of the existing landscape of disclosure initiatives and set out the scope and objectives of its work.20 Initial findings confirmed that existing schemes vary in their status (from laws to voluntary guidelines) and in their ambition (breadth and depth of disclosures). Disclosure is currently incomplete and fragmented, with, for example, only around a third of the top 1000 US companies producing broadly comparable information on the financial risks posed by climate change.21 Let me offer an outside observer’s perspective on three of the core issues which the Task Force touched on in its Phase I Report and must address in its Final Report to be submitted to the G20 early in the German Presidency. First, static disclosures of current carbon footprints are not sufficient to reveal a company’s climate-related financial risks. Investors and creditors need to know the strategic as well as the static. A mix of forward-looking, and sufficiently granular, qualitative and quantitative information is needed to offer real insight into how climate-related risks and opportunities may impact a firm’s existing and future business lines. This could include information on governance and management of such risks, and on a firm’s mitigation strategy and its financial planning, including capital expenditures and R&D. Second, the robustness of a firm’s strategy and targets could be further illuminated through scenario analysis. For investors to price financial risks and opportunities correctly, they need to weigh firms’ strategies against plausible public policy developments, technological advances, and evolving physical risks. A full exploration of transition risks may require consideration of financial risks and opportunities under several scenarios. An important question is what form these scenarios should take. One option for a global firm operating across multiple markets could be to apply a transition scenario that takes into account the NDCs of the countries in which its businesses are located. This could support analysis of whether a company is under- or over-performing relative to articulated policy frameworks. Another very relevant scenario is, of course, the ultimate two-degree goal agreed in Paris. Firms may develop their own transition scenarios or build on commonly available models. The latter may prove useful to assess against the commitments made in Paris. Either way, the assumptions and methodologies will need to be sufficiently transparent to allow for comparisons and external challenge. Third, there may be merit in considering a proportionate approach that scales the granularity of disclosures to the risks faced by firms. As a proxy, Calpers estimates that out of the 10,000 firms in their equity portfolio, 314 are responsible for 75% of the emissions.22 In determining a proportionate approach, I would caution, however, against losing sight of one of the potential benefits of improved disclosures, namely that of helping to make a                                                 19 A full list of Task Force members can be found at: https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/about/#. 20 See “Phase I Report of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures”, (March 2016), available at: https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/Phase_I_Report_v15.pdf. 21 As described in Ceres (2014), “Gaining Ground – Corporate Progress on the Ceres Roadmap for Sustainability”. 22 Forthcoming at: https://www.calpers.ca.gov. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 11  market. This requires that investors have the information they need to seek out prospective risks and rewards across all sectors, from agriculture to car manufacturing to consumer goods. I am pleased to report that the Task Force is getting to grips with these thorny issues and is on track to report to the FSB later this year and to submit its Final Report to the German G20 Presidency in early 2017. VI. Mainstreaming green finance Financing the de-carbonisation of our economies implies a sweeping reallocation of resources and a technological revolution. The International Energy Agency estimates that globally as much as €45 trillion of investment in total could be needed in power supply and end-use efficiency to meet the two-degree target agreed in Paris.23 China alone is likely to require around €500 billion a year from 2016 to 2020 to finance its national environmental goals.24 A substantial proportion of this is likely to be raised off shore, absorbing excess global savings, helping to push up global equilibrium interest rates, and ultimately increasing global growth. With investment in long-term infrastructure assets needing to quadruple, green investment represents a major opportunity for both long-term investors and macroeconomic policymakers seeking to jump-start growth. For this to happen, however, green finance cannot conceivably remain a niche interest over the medium term. That’s why, at the request of G20 Leaders, authorities are exploring ways to mobilise private capital for green investments. During 2016, under China’s G20 Presidency, a Green Finance Study Group (GFSG)25, undertook a stocktake of institutional and market barriers to green finance and identified ways to mobilise private capital for green investment. One proposal is international collaboration to facilitate cross-border investment in green bonds. The development of this new global asset class is an opportunity to advance a low carbon future while raising global investment and spurring growth. For investors, green bond markets offer a stable, rated and liquid investment with long duration. For issuers, green bonds are a way to tap the huge US$100 trillion pool of patient private capital managed by global institutional fixed-income investors. The shift to the capital markets from banks will also free up limited bank balance sheet capacity for early-stage project financing and other important infrastructure lending. The green bond market is gradually gathering speed. Annual issuance rose from just US$3 billion in 2012 to US$42 billion in 2015.26 It could double this year with issuers ranging from US regional authorities raising funds domestically to invest in water projects, to Chinese and Indian corporates, issuing in a range of currencies, in major financial centres, including London, to finance renewable energy projects.27                                                 23 This figure consists of (i) investment that will be needed to stay in line with current policy commitments and (ii) additional investment needed to achieve a least-cost two degree outcome. See: International Energy Agency, World Energy Outlook 2015. 24 See “Green Finance – A Growing Imperative”, Paulson Institute, SIFMA, Green Finance Committee, UNEP Inquiry, 2016.  25 The GFSG was jointly chaired by the Bank of England and People’s Bank of China, with the United Nations Environment Programme providing the secretariat.  26 See Climate Bonds Initiative, “2015 Green Bond Market Round-up”.   27 For a list of green bonds issued see: https://www.climatebonds.net/cbi/pub/data/bonds.  
   12 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Despite this progress, total issuance still accounts for less than 1% of holdings by global institutional investors. To reach escape velocity, market participants and public authorities will need to coordinate to deliver common green bond frameworks and definitions, and other necessary supporting infrastructure, to build local and cross-border markets. Specific measures could include: • Developing a “term sheet” of internationally recognised standardised terms and conditions for a green bond. • Creating voluntary definitional frameworks, certification and validation to give certainty to issuers and investors that the project being financed is “green”. • Integrating environmental risk and green certification into credit ratings. • Developing green bond indices to unlock the potential investment power of passively managed investments. • Assessing the scope for standardisation and harmonisation of principles for green bond listings to promote efficient trading and adequate liquidity. Authorities are now working with the private sector to develop a green bond term sheet with standardised terms and conditions.28 This should significantly improve the ease and efficiency of green bond issuance and simplify investor access to green bond markets in multiple currencies, thereby moving them into the mainstream of finance. VI. Conclusion: markets that value the future Financial policymakers will not drive the transition to a low-carbon economy. Governments will establish the frameworks, and the private sector will make the investments. Nonetheless, financial policymakers do have a clear interest in ensuring the financial system is resilient to any transition hastened by those decisions. Our role is to help develop the frameworks for markets to adjust efficiently. Given the uncertainties around climate, not everyone will agree on the timing or scale of adjustment required. The right information allows sceptics and evangelists alike to back their convictions with their capital. A market in the transition to a two-degree world can be built. It will reveal how the valuations of companies that produce and use fossil fuels might change over time. It will expose the likely future cost of doing business, paying for emissions, changing processes to avoid those charges, and tighter regulation. It will help smooth price adjustments as opinions change, rather than concentrating them at a single climate “Minsky moment”. And it would allow feedback between the market and policymaking, making climate policy a bit more like monetary policy, with policymakers learning from markets’ reactions, and markets internalising policymakers’ objectives, strategies and instruments. When rates are low, the present value of future returns and risks are greater.                                                 28 Specific issues being addressed include: (i) ensuring use of proceeds is clearly delineated for a green project or activity; (ii) issuers having a clearly defined process to validate proceeds are being used for intended, and stated purpose; (iii) a clear, transparent and regular mechanism for reporting the use of proceeds, often involving second or third-party verification; and (iv) finally an appropriate dispute mechanism for when these other conditions are not met.  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 13  That is why a vocal minority are already calling on businesses to invest for the future, including by supporting the transition to a low carbon economy, and for investors to internalise the risks and opportunities of climate change.29 With better information as a foundation, we can build a virtuous circle of better understanding of tomorrow’s risks, better pricing for investors, better decisions by policymakers, and a smoother transition to a lower-carbon economy. By managing what gets measured, and building a mainstream green bond market, we can help resolve the Tragedy of the Horizon. The G20 – whose members account for around 85% of global emissions – has a unique responsibility. The German Presidency could be decisive.                                                 29 For example, Blackrock, the world’s largest asset manager, has called on businesses to lengthen their horizons, and for all investors to take the risks and opportunities of climate change into account. Larry Fink, Chief Executive at Blackrock, sent a letter to chief executives at S&P 500 and large European corporations in February 2016.  See also Blackrock, “Adapting portfolios to climate change”, (September 2016).   
Yves Mersch: The next steps in the evolution of the Eurosystem’smarket infrastructureOpening remarks by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European CentralBank, at the Eurosystem community session at Sibos, Geneva, 26 September 2016.*   *   *IntroductionOne year ago, the Eurosystem shared some initial reflections on the strategy for the futuredevelopment of its market infrastructure. The rationale behind these strategic reflections was theneed to keep pace with technological developments in line with the mandate of our Treaty topromote the smooth operation of payment systems.Digitalisation of financial servicesThe digitalisation of financial services could result in new business models or products withdisruptive potential in the financial sector. In particular, distributed ledger technology (DLT) hasthe potential to fundamentally change securities and payments business. However, thistechnology is still in its infancy. There are substantial functional, operational, governance andlegal aspects which need to be carefully looked at before thinking about possible mass adoption.Hence, the Eurosystem cannot, at this stage, consider using DLT in the market infrastructure.Nevertheless, we are exploring whether its possible future use could bring benefits.A multitude of different DLT approaches and models could jeopardise financial market integrationby increasing fragmentation. Undue periods of market consolidation and standardization couldhamper the smooth functioning of a Single Payments Area. We could be in a situation similar tothe one that lead to the establishment of T2S.The next steps in the evolution of the Eurosystem’s market infrastructureThe Eurosystem’s strategic reflections on the future development of its market infrastructurecentre around three components:1. the consolidation of TARGET2 and TARGET2-Securities (T2S);2. settlement services to support instant payments;3. a Eurosystem collateral management system.Now, these strategic reflections have entered into the next phase. Last week, the Eurosystemdecided to launch the investigation phase into these three components. The aim isto ascertain whether there is a business case for each, to agree with the users on the scopeof services and to prepare a cost-benefit analysis.Let me say a few words now on each of the three components.1. Consolidation of TARGET2 and T2STARGET2 and T2S are the cornerstones of the Eurosystem’s market infrastructure forpayments and securities settlement. But as they were developed at different points in time, theyoperate on separate platforms and use different technical solutions and environments. Hence, itis logical to seek to draw on the synergies between both systems. Modernising TARGET2,leveraging the possibilities which are already available in T2S and consolidating the technical andfunctional components of TARGET2 and T2S services are the primary objectives. The GoverningCouncil strongly supports these objectives. 1 / 3BIS Central Banker's Speeches
In addition, consolidating TARGET2 and T2S provides an opportunity to further improve cyberresilience, to enhance the services offered to users and to establish a single access channel.During the investigation phase of the project, which will run throughout 2017, we will follow up onthis year’s market consultation that was launched in February with the release of a consultativereport on real-time gross settlement (RTGS) services.2. Settlement services to support instant paymentsFor the Eurosystem, the biggest challenge of digitalisation in the payments industry is to ensurethat the introduction of innovative payment products and services that are developed by themarket does not reintroduce fragmentation into the European market. That is why theEurosystem fosters the development and implementation of pan-European solutions.One of the most prominent of these innovative services is instant payments. By November 2017end-user solutions for instant payments in euro should be made available at pan-European levelby payment service providers. This means that by November 2017 the European financial marketinfrastructure has to be ready to clear and/or settle instant payments on a pan-Europeanscale. The Governing Council has decided that it will launch and closely monitor aninvestigation with market participants on the necessity of extending settlementoperating hours for a subset of its regular settlement services up to 24/7/365 to allow forreal-time settlement of instant payments.Instant clearing will be supported by the delivery of an enhanced TARGET2 functionality for theautomated clearing houses. The project per se does not question the efforts of the ACHs to offerinstant clearing. This is because instant clearing and instant settlement are complementaryservices (since the availability of instant settlement can make instant clearing less costly). It istrue that they are also alternative services (since instant clearing may replace the need forinstant settlement and vice versa).Furthermore, the project is the best guarantee that a pan-European solution for the processing ofinstant payments will be available since TARGET2 is already a pan-European solution.If deemed feasible, it is understood that real-time settlement of instant payments would beoffered by the Eurosystem at full cost recovery. As this is a pressing topic, the aim of theinvestigation is to reach a decision on whether to go ahead with this by the end of the first quarterof 2017 in order to not delay the go-live of announced market initiatives.3. Eurosystem collateral management systemAs the euro area’s banking and financial markets become increasingly integrated, demand formore efficient collateral management arrangements within the Eurosystem central bankcommunity is increasing. To date, collateral management in the Eurosystem is ratherfragmented as each national central bank has its own procedures and systems in place. As aconsequence, some collateral management services are not provided in a fully harmonisedmanner.As we look to the future, the Eurosystem will strive to drive harmonisation forwards, particularlyregarding Eurosystem operations for the mobilisation of marketable assets, as well as thehandling procedures for non-marketable assets, which still vary across the central banks.Furthermore, the Eurosystem will investigate, throughout 2017, the business case for andthe scope and cost of a possible common Eurosystem collateral management system formanaging eligible assets used as collateral in the Eurosystem credit operations.ConclusionThe three components of the Eurosystem’s strategy for the evolution of its market infrastructure 2 / 3BIS Central Banker's Speeches
are interconnected, such as shared software components, shared network infrastructure, sharedhardware components, the use of the future Market Infrastructure Single Gateway. At the end ofthe investigation into the business case for and the scope and cost of each one, a decision willbe taken as to whether they will be developed into projects with different durations. You may restassured that throughout the investigation and decision, we will live up to the Treaty and ourmandate.Thank you. 3 / 3BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Guy Debelle: The Global Code of Conduct for the Foreign ExchangeMarketSpeech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank ofAustralia, at the TradeTech FX, London, 14 September 2016.*   *   *Thank you for having me here today to talk about the Global Code of Conduct for the ForeignExchange Market. As I hope most of you know, Phase 1 of the Code was launched in New Yorkin late May. The Code is pretty easy to find. It is available on the JSC website or via the Bank forInternational Settlements (BIS) website.Today I will reiterate the motivation for the work we are doing on the Global Code, then updateyou on where we are at with the process and outline the way forward.Why is the work going on? As I have stated on previous occasions, the foreign exchange (FX)industry is suffering from a lack of trust in its functioning. This lack of trust is evident bothbetween participants in the market, and at least as importantly, between the public and themarket. The market needs to move toward a more favourable and desirable location, and allowparticipants to have much greater confidence that the market is functioning appropriately.A well-functioning foreign exchange market is very much in the interest of all market participants.This clearly includes central banks, both in their own role as market participants but also as theexchange rate is an important channel of monetary policy transmission. In a globalised world, theforeign exchange market is one of the most vital parts of the financial plumbing.The Global Code sets out global principles of good practice in the foreign exchange market toprovide a common set of guidance to the market, including in areas where there is a degree ofuncertainty about what sort of practices are acceptable, and what are not. This should help torestore confidence and promote the effective functioning of the wholesale FX market.To that end, one of the guiding principles underpinning our work is that the Code should promotea robust, fair, liquid, open, and transparent market. A diverse set of buyers and sellers, supportedby resilient infrastructure, should be able to confidently and effectively transact at competitiveprices that reflect available market information and in a manner that conforms to acceptablestandards of behaviour.The work to develop the Global Code commenced in May last year, when the BIS Governorscommissioned a working group of the Markets Committee of the BIS to facilitate theestablishment of a single global code of conduct for the wholesale FX market and to come upwith mechanisms to promote greater adherence to the code.There are two important points worth highlighting: first, it’s a single code for the whole industryand second, it’s a global code. On the first point, the Global Code is replacing the existing codesof conduct that have been present in the FX market, including the NIPS code here in London. Onthe second point, the Code covers all of the wholesale FX industry. This is not a code of conductfor just the sell side. It is there for the sell side, the buy side, non-bank participants and theplatforms; its breadth is both across the globe and across the whole structure of the industry.The Code is intended to apply to all aspects of the wholesale foreign exchange market.I am chairing this work, with Simon Potter of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York leading thework on developing the code and Chris Salmon of the Bank of England leading the adherencework. Our Working Group comprises representatives of the central banks of all the major FXcentres, drawing on the membership of the Markets Committee which is comprised of heads of123 1 / 4BIS Central Banker's Speeches
the market operations areas of the 15 major currency areas. Given our roles, we are all verymuch interested in the effective functioning of the FX market. Again, it is very much a global effortreflecting the global nature of the foreign exchange market.This work is also very much a public sector–private sector partnership. In that regard, we arebeing ably and vigorously supported in this work by a group of market participants, chaired byDavid Puth, CEO of CLS. The group contains people from all around the world on the buy side,including corporates and asset managers, and the sell side, along with trading platforms, ECNsand non-bank participants, drawing from the various Foreign Exchange Committees (FXCs) andbeyond. There are a number of members of David’s group that are from the London marketincluding non-banks, platforms, asset managers as well as banks. Hence all parts of the marketare being involved in the drafting of the code to make sure all perspectives are heard andappropriately reflected.At the outset we decided to split the topics we intend to cover in the Code into two parts. Thisfirst phase covers areas such as ethics, information sharing, aspects of execution andconfirmation and settlement. The second phase is covering further aspects of executionincluding e-trading and platforms, prime brokerage, as well as governance, and riskmanagement and compliance. We have made substantial progress in drafting the secondphase. It will be circulated for comment through the various FXCs in early October. So, the JSCwill be providing feedback on behalf of the London market.As was the case with the first phase, there will be three opportunities for market participants toprovide feedback on the material over the next six months or so. We will endeavour to makeclear how the feedback provided has been addressed through each of the feedback phases.The aim is for the full Code to be published in May 2017 and we are on track to achieve that.  I will now talk about a couple of the areas that are addressed in the first phase of the Code, whichis already in the public domain. In the first phase, topics were covered that the market waslooking for guidance on sooner rather than later and that were potentially having an adverse effecton market functioning.One example of this is around information sharing, where many market participants havehighlighted that they are unsure what information can be conveyed to counterparties and othermarket participants. While it is clear (or at least should be) that disclosing the details of a client’sorder book to a counterparty is not acceptable, market participants have noted that there is muchless clarity around what level of aggregation, say, is necessary in order to convey market colourappropriately.As a result, it appears some market participants are being very conservative in sharinginformation, which can have implications for the effective functioning of the market. This isnotwithstanding the guidance provided in this area in the Global Preamble put out by the globalForeign Exchange Committees, in March 2015. The Global Code takes the material in theGlobal Preamble and fleshes it out a bit more, including with some examples of what is, and isn’t,appropriate communication, and why. There will be more examples on information sharingprovided in the second phase of the Code.Similarly, there have been diverse opinions around what is appropriate behaviour in terms oforder handling. While there have been some very public instances of inappropriate behaviouraround order handling that have come to light in recent years, in other areas, the market isseeking greater guidance as to what principles should be followed, including the differentstandards that may apply depending on whether an intermediary is functioning as principal oragent.This is one area that was not adequately covered in the pre-existing codes of conduct that the345 2 / 4BIS Central Banker's Speeches
various FXCs had endorsed for the FX market. It is an area where we are aiming to provide thesought-after guidance. But we are not writing a procedures manual for order handling. Rather weare articulating principles that need to be taken into account. Individual firms may then take theseprinciples and reflect them in their own procedures manual. Our aim in articulating theseprinciples is to provide market participants with the framework in which to think about how theyhandle stop-loss orders. The emphasis here is very much on the word ‘think’. The Global Codewill not provide the answers to all your questions, but it should help you ask the right questions.In a similar vein, I will repeat a point that I have made a number of times in the past. One of ourmost central aims in drafting the Code is for it to be principles-based rather than rules-based.There are a number of reasons why this is so, but for me, an important reason is that the moreprescriptive the Code is, the easier it is to get around. Rules are easier to arbitrage thanprinciples. If it’s not expressly prohibited or explicitly discouraged, then it must be okay seems tobe the historical experience. Moreover, the more prescriptive and the more precise the code is,the less people will think about what they are doing. If it’s principles-based and less prescriptivethen, as I just said, market participants will have to think about whether their actions areconsistent with the principles of the Code.Adherence to the CodeAlongside drafting the Code, we have also been devoting considerable time and effort to thinkingabout how to ensure widespread adoption of the Global Code by market participants. Clearly, thathas been an issue with the various existing codes that have been in place in a number ofmarkets over many years. It is evident that they were ignored on occasion, wilfully or otherwise.As I said earlier, we are working with the industry to produce a principles-based code of conductrather than a set of prescriptive regulatory standards. It will not impose legal or regulatoryobligations on market participants, nor will it supplant existing regulatory standards orexpectations. But we do expect the principles in the Code to be understood and adopted acrossthe entire FX market.We laid out our overall approach to adherence to the Code in New York in May. Chris Salmonwill speak further on adherence in the coming weeks. Simon Potter spoke recently in New Yorkabout the philosophy underpinning our work.We intend to work closely with market participants in the period ahead to facilitate thedevelopment of market-based mechanisms which demonstrably embed the Global Code withinfirms’ culture and practices. These mechanisms need to be sensitive to existing law andregulation and to the diverse nature of FX markets globally. Hence a ‘one size fits all’ approach toadherence would not be appropriate. We need to strike the right balance between respecting theexisting diversity across different markets, and establishing globally consistent and effectiveadherence mechanisms.The adherence to a voluntary code will only come about if firms judge it to be in their interest andtake the practical steps to ensure the code is embedded in their practices. Firms will need totake practical steps such as training their staff and putting in appropriate policies andprocedures. We will probably recommend widespread use of attestations by firms about theiradherence to demonstrate how widely the Code is followed. Firms are more likely to adhere tothe Code if they believe that their peers are doing so too.The success of the Global Code in promoting integrity and restoring confidence in the wholesaleFX market lies in the hands of its participants. That is why the Global FXCs issued a jointstatement of support at the launch of the Code in New York, making clear their intention for theGlobal Code to become an integral part of the wholesale FX market.Furthermore the BIS central banks signalled their commitment by announcing that they6789 3 / 4BIS Central Banker's Speeches
themselves will follow the Code, and that they expect that their counterparties will do so too. Weare also talking to regulators in our various countries as to how they might use the Code inmonitoring market conduct.We are on track to complete the Code so that it will be released following the Global ForeignExchange Committee meeting here in London in May 2017. At the end of that process, for thecode to be effective and for it to achieve what we want it to achieve, it will need to be acceptedand endorsed by the FXCs and market participants more generally.That said, the process does not really end, because as the foreign exchange market continues toevolve, the Code will need to evolve with it.ConclusionThat, I trust, gives you a reasonable overview of the state of play on the Global Code.A lot of work has been done to get us to this point. There is still work to be done to complete thetask.The work to date has reflected a very constructive and cooperative effort between the centralbanks and market participants. All of us recognise the need to restore the public’s faith in theforeign exchange market and the value of the Global Code in assisting that process and also inhelping improve market functioning and confidence in how the market functions. I expect thatcooperative relationship will continue as we see this process through to its conclusion in Maynext year.See <www.bis.org/mktc/fxwg/gc_may16.pdf>.See <www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm>.See <www.bis.org/about/factmktc/fxwg.htm>.See <www.rba.gov.au/afxc/about-us/pdf/global-preamble.pdf>.I am not using these terms in the legal sense that is sometimes the case in particular jurisdictions, but rather interms of common market parlance.See <www.bis.org/mktc/fxwg/am_may16.pdf>.S Potter, ‘The Role of Best Practices in Supporting Market Integrity and Effectiveness’, Remarks at the 2016Primary Dealers Meeting, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 7 September 2016.<afxc.rba.gov.au/news/afxc-26052016.html><www.bis.org/press/p160526a.htm>9123456789 4 / 4BIS Central Banker's Speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Innovative financial inclusion Opening remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Global Symposium on Innovative Financial Inclusion, Kuala Lumpur, 21 September 2016. *      *      * While the global economy is still recovering from the Global Financial Crisis, the focus on boosting global growth has never eclipsed the financial inclusion agenda. In fact, policymakers continue to recognise the importance of financial inclusion and have accorded it as a global priority to address the widening income inequality gap, to promote the economic empowerment and protection of low income households and SMEs and to unlock the growth potential of the fast-expanding middle class population. Expanded opportunities to save securely, to invest in productive activities and to protect against unforeseen shocks, would meet the needs of the underserved. This would drive domestic demand, a key engine of growth for many economies. Between 2011 and 2014, the World Bank estimates that 500 million people have gained access to formal financial services for the first time. If our efforts continue, we are on our way to assisting the remaining 2 billion adults that remain financially excluded. A succession of technology breakthroughs combined with the ubiquity of mobile devices present significant opportunities to scale up financial inclusion to an unprecedented level. Beyond the socio-economic demands, there is a moral obligation for us to do more to help the millions who are still living in abject poverty and highly vulnerable to financial hardship, with no means to change their circumstances. This global symposium presents an opportunity for us to explore solutions from different perspectives. I see this as having “an eye for innovation”. Indeed policy makers are now improving their capabilities in technology and innovation, recruiting talent, establishing dedicated team and intensifying partnership with the private sector, to help them see things a little differently. While there is no shortage of ideas on new and innovative ways to increase financial inclusion, the key challenge to my mind is the ability to scale up and achieve sustainability. The symposium’s theme refers to “harnessing innovation”, but one needs to truly understand innovation in order to successfully tap on such innovation to attain the dual objectives of scale and sustainability in inclusive finance. With that in view, my remarks this morning will focus on three areas where an eye for innovation is needed: a. First, putting on a new lens to spot the opportunities from existing innovations that can be tailored to financial inclusion; b. Second, identifying and working on our blind spots by driving efficiency gains with technology-enabled financial inclusion; and c. Third, having a clear picture of the policymakers’ role in promoting an enabling environment for financial innovation and technology. Putting on a new lens: Exploiting mainstream innovations with a financial inclusion focus Today, financial innovations have penetrated, and continue to permeate almost every aspect of financial activity. This has been driven by faster computing speed, lower cost of storage and faster problem-solving capabilities. 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Technology is being used by financial institutions to improve operations – from improving customer experience to constructing better models to manage risks more efficiently and effectively. In many cases, strategic partnerships with fintech companies have been established to achieve similar outcomes. The advent of robo-advisers and algorithmic underwriting are some of the examples. These developments have largely evolved within the mainstream customer segments and have proven to be effective. Clearly, opportunities exist to leverage on capabilities that are already in place to create specific applications for financial inclusion. With proven application, the prospects for achieving greater scalability, faster time to market and increased take-up are correspondingly greater. For years, financial institutions have invested heavily in technology that has helped improve the collection and mining of financial and non-financial data to gain richer insights into customer preferences and behaviours. These same capabilities create immediate opportunities to identify specific barriers to financial inclusion for different target groups whose needs are shaped by very different priorities, experiences, values and norms. For example, cultural biases can be an important factor that is not fully appreciated and understood as a factor that limits higher levels of financial inclusion among women. Among lower income groups, a more granular level of analysis on income patterns is needed to structure solutions that address the irregularity in loan repayments. Financial inclusion for the ageing population is another critical area that requires more understanding. It is important that new products, delivery channels and technologies also work well for our senior citizens that are financially excluded. Many financial products and services offered today have age limits that create barriers to access financial services. This ought to be changed to ensure inclusive financial systems for the ageing population segment. Technologies that enable better data collection and analytics can support deeper research to fill this gap while mitigating the risks to providers of financial solutions. Beyond data applications, opportunities exist in other areas. For example, distributed ledger technology eliminates the need for centralised transaction validation and shortens the settlement chain, effectively lowering costs of real-time remittances. By incorporating adequate Know-Your-Customer (KYC) requirements, distributed ledger has the potential to address de-risking. Robo-advisers could potentially be adapted to increase financial literacy and support customers in less accessible locations. The adoption of open Application Interfaces (API) facilitates a sharing environment whereby improvements build on existing innovations could shorten the time to market for more offerings. These are just a hint of many more examples that can be examined. What is needed is a rethinking of today’s most promising financial innovations for applications and new gains in financial inclusion. Or to put it another way, we need to look at not just innovative financial inclusion, but inclusive financial innovation! Identifying and working on our blind spots: driving efficiency gains to promote sustainable financial inclusion The reduction of poverty and greater social empowerment through financial inclusion has been one of most enduring achievements of our era. Building on this momentum, our ambitions to pursue deeper financial inclusion over the next decade must be rooted in a deep understanding of the unique circumstances faced by the 2 billion people who remain excluded from the formal financial sector. This involves increasing the arsenal of financial inclusion tools that can overcome both the geographical and cultural barriers to deliver meaningful financial services to this segment. Ultimately, the provision of financial services to the underserved and unbanked must be economically viable for providers. In this aspect, the smart usage of technology can be a game changer in lowering the cost of financial intermediation. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  This in turn will unlock opportunities to progress from the single, narrowly-focused products which are typically offered by traditional financial institutions today, to a broader range of relevant products and services tailored for the underserved segments. The ability to clearly demonstrate and consistently track efficiency gains over time can attract more providers into this space, while driving continuous efficiency improvements in delivering financial services to the underserved. Great strides have been made in developing better measures of financial inclusion. We have moved beyond measuring access, to including measures of the usage and quality of financial inclusion services. We need to go further to include measurement on how efficiently we are increasing financial inclusion. Such measures do not exist widely, if at all, and have yet to be systematically propagated. This blind spot ignores one of the most important aspects of innovative strategies for financial inclusion, which is the potential to drive down the costs of delivering financial inclusion initiatives. A framework for evaluating financial inclusion efficiency can provide powerful incentives to harness technology in the most optimal way. This should drive lower the costs of delivering inclusive financial services over time, and thereby enhance the viability for both Governments and private actors. Sustainability also calls for the strengthening of financial institutions that provide services to low-income and vulnerable groups. The misconduct or underperformance of such institutions can have a disproportionate impact on the poor simply because they have lower buffers. It can also significantly set back financial inclusion efforts by further entrenching the mistrust of formal financial institutions. It is therefore, critical for such institutions to exemplify strong and socially responsible corporate governance, and to have the appropriate technical expertise that will enable them to expand product offerings, increase outreach and develop alternative delivery channels. They must also be adept at identifying and managing financial and operational risks inherent in their business models. This requires investments in systems and in the development of talent with deep knowledge within the institutions. Only then, can financial institutions expect to support the low income and vulnerable segments of our communities as long-term partners to create opportunities that will improve lives. A clear picture of policymakers’ role in promoting an enabling environment for financial innovation and technology Finally, policymakers can play a meaningful role to promote an enabling environment for innovation to support financial inclusion initiatives. I shall focus on three areas. First, regulation should aim to be technology-neutral and outcome-focused, proportionate to risks and harmonized across sectors. A technology-neutral approach allows policymakers to assess the merits of innovations based on the outcomes, without fear or favour for the underlying technology. Regulation should be proportionate to the risks that products or institutions present to the broader financial system. This requires continued efforts to strengthen the capacity among national regulators and supervisors to assess the benefits and cost of regulation. Only then can we really move from proportionality as a concept to practice. Regulation between different sectors should also be harmonised to focus on activities that should be regulated, rather than the institutions conducting such activities. For example, if an e-commerce platform collects, pays interest on and mobilises deposits, a banking license may be necessary as public interest is involved. Second, communicating clear expectations to the market while incorporating feedbacks through engagements with the private sector is important. Countries such as Australia, Hong Kong, the UAE, the UK, Singapore, and Malaysia have issued discussion papers, introducing a sandbox approach which allows fintech solutions to be tested in a controlled environment, with appropriate risk mitigation in place. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  Dedicated resources have been allocated to collaborate with private sector innovators and assess the feasibility of technology. Jointly, these efforts serve to build public-private consensus on how to deploy financial technology, by: a. Conveying national-level support for fintech innovations that place the customer firmly at the centre; b. Providing clarity to the public on the applicability of regulations to fintech solutions; and c. Supporting regulators and supervisors in understanding how underlying technologies function, as well as the benefits and risks. Third, it is important to address the role of Governments in national financial inclusion strategies. This is particularly relevant in encouraging e-payments as a key lever to expand the outreach of formal financial services. A clear commitment by Governments can secure the political capital needed to create the infrastructure and policies to accelerate financial inclusion such as unique identifiers and mandatory electronic G2P payments. Policymakers should also seek opportunities to promote the interoperability of supporting infrastructure for new financial innovations. This will preserve healthy competition and strong incentives for providers to continue innovating value-add solutions that meet the real needs of consumers. More often than not, small changes lead to major breakthroughs, if approached with an open mind and shared interests between providers and policymakers to genuinely serve the best interests of the unserved segments of society. In Malaysia, the agent banking initiative was an experiment in policymaking and regulation that has proved to be highly successful in both protecting the integrity of financial transactions, while significantly increasing financial inclusion. The agent banking initiative leveraged on existing high-volume touch points such as sundry shops, petrol stations and post offices to reach the rural population and perform basic banking transactions on behalf of financial institutions. The technology involved was hardly state-of-the-art, relying on POS terminals with real time connectivity, to back-end system of banks as well biometric identification, to meet the Know-Your-Customer requirements. Yet, it has enabled 99% of Malaysians, particularly those in rural areas, to conveniently access financial services, while saving up to 80% of costs in building brick-and-mortar bank branches. In February 2016, Bank Negara Malaysia also facilitated the implementation of the Investment Account Platform (IAP) which expands opportunities for retail and institutional investors to finance viable SME ventures more efficiently in a Syariah-compliant manner. Again, this was only possible because of technology. Conclusion This symposium is the inaugural gathering of public sector regulators, private sector innovators and funders that is specifically focused on how financial innovation can support financial inclusion. In its own way, this symposium sets out to disrupt the ordinary in order to achieve the extraordinary; invoke curiosity to inspire creativity; and challenge the conventional to embrace novelty. With open minds and thoughtful exchanges, the next two days present an excellent opportunity to generate a critical mass of ideas that form the foundation for new strategic partnerships to be built, and existing ones strengthened. The time is now to deliver on the financial inclusion promise to the 2 billion unbanked and vulnerable people who continue to live in the most challenging financial circumstances. With an “eye for innovation”, I am certain we can spot the opportunities that will deliver that promise. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 1  Stephen S Poloz: Living with lower for longer Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Association des économistes québécois, the Cercle finance du Québec and CFA Québec, Québec, Québec, 20 September 2016. *      *      * I would like to thank Anthony Landry for his help in preparing this speech. Introduction It is not often that I get to speak to a room full of economists and, believe it or not, I consider it a privilege. People say that economists can never agree on anything, but I suspect that we can agree on at least one thing. What is the number one issue that people ask economists about today? It is ultra-low interest rates. You probably get questions from both sides, just as I do. Young folks with mortgages regularly thank me for keeping interest rates low. When I think about how much cumulative interest I have paid in my lifetime, it is no wonder that they are grateful. But I also hear from people, especially retirees, who are unhappy because they have saved their whole lives and are getting very little income from those savings today. Now, it is natural to give central banks the credit – or the blame – for ultra-low interest rates. Low rates have been with us since the global financial crisis. The G7 central banks implemented coordinated interest rate cuts in 2008 – a sign of just how serious the situation was. Some of the hardest-hit economies, such as the United States, Europe and Japan, implemented unconventional policies to ease monetary conditions further. Without these efforts, the global economy could have fallen into a second Great Depression. We avoided that fate. But since that time, policy rates have generally remained extremely low, mainly because the economic headwinds that the crisis created have been slow to fade. Some central banks have even gone to negative interest rates, a bizarre concept for many, and bond yields across the curve are also ultra-low. In fact, more than US$10 trillion of government debt is currently trading with a negative yield. As economists, though, we can also agree that this is about much more than monetary policy. There are big, long-term, global forces acting on interest rates, and people need to understand them better. Senior Deputy Governor Carolyn Wilkins spoke about this same topic last week in London, focusing on the implications for financial stability. Today, I’m going to focus on the macroeconomic and monetary policy aspects of ultra-low rates and conclude with some thoughts on how other policies fit into the matter. Forces acting As economists, we naturally think of nominal interest rates as a combination of expected inflation and the real interest rate. Under Canada’s inflation-targeting regime, inflation expectations have been very well anchored, even during the global financial crisis and subsequent recession. It follows that a decline in real interest rates is the issue at hand, and a drop in the real neutral rate is a big part of this. The real neutral rate is a theoretical concept that can’t be directly measured, and central banks don’t control it. But it is extremely important to understand: it is the inflation-adjusted risk-free interest rate in an economy – the real interest rate that is neither stimulative nor contractionary when an economy is operating at full capacity without cyclical forces at play, thus balancing desired savings and investment. Presently, Bank staff estimate that the real neutral rate falls into the range of 0.75–1.75 per cent, which translates into a range for the 
   2 BIS central bankers’ speeches  nominal neutral rate of 2.75–3.75 per cent. This is down from a range of 4.50–5.50 per cent in the pre-crisis period. The most important force pushing the neutral rate down has been a steady decline in the potential growth rate of the economy. In turn, this decline is being driven primarily by the aging of our population, which is slowing the rate of growth of the labour force. In effect, the baby boomers boosted potential economic growth significantly, starting in the 1960s. Since that force has been in place for some 50 years, it is easy to think of that boost as lasting forever. But in a demographic sense, it was temporary. Those folks have been entering retirement for the past few years, and potential economic growth has been slowing as a direct result. There are other forces acting, of course, including rising global savings rates as developing countries grow to represent a bigger share of global GDP. At the same time, global investment spending has moderated, in part because of lower potential economic growth; firms need to invest less than they did in the past to sustain that lower potential output. Technological change is also playing a role. But this combination of higher savings and lower investment means that the price of borrowing those savings in order to invest – the neutral interest rate – has ground even lower. Today, those forces seem permanent to people, but of course nothing is really permanent. Just as the 50-year boost to potential growth caused by baby boomers is ending, the forces acting today will unwind eventually. Put simply, we’re dealing with lower for longer, not lower forever. Even so, these processes act so slowly that we must adapt to them today. We cannot just sit back and wait for these slow-moving forces to reverse. People and companies, investors and savers, all need to understand these forces and make adjustments. Lower for longer and savers One group that has certainly been affected by lower for longer is savers, particularly seniors who planned to finance their retirement with interest income generated by a life of working hard to build savings. I have heard from many Canadians who are rightly worried about their ability to live off their savings and who are seeking a return to higher interest rates. I certainly can sympathize and understand these concerns. Demographic and economic changes, along with the low interest rates that followed the financial crisis, have upended the calculations that many Canadians made in planning for retirement. That is not their fault. But at the heart of this discussion is the level of the real rate of interest. Having higher nominal interest rates because of higher inflation would not help savers, because higher inflation would just erode the future purchasing power of those savings. Maintaining a low-inflation environment is the Bank’s primary goal. We do this because we’ve seen that it is the best way to help bring about solid, sustainable economic growth. That growth benefits everyone, from business owners looking to expand, to workers looking for employment, to savers looking to protect their savings and find investment opportunities. In our most recent Monetary Policy Report, in July, we said that our current policy rate setting of 0.5 per cent was consistent with the economy returning to full capacity toward the end of 2017 and inflation returning sustainably to its target. We’ll update our forecast next month, but in our decision on September 7, we indicated that the risks to our projected inflation profile have tilted somewhat to the downside following recent data on investment in both the United States and Canada, and the recent data on our exports. It is quite evident that our economy is still facing strong headwinds, and we need stimulative monetary policy to counteract them and move us closer to full capacity. We also need to watch the full effects of the government’s fiscal stimulus unfold. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 3  However, the decline in the real neutral rate means that any given setting of our policy rate will be less stimulative today than it was a decade or two ago. The current policy rate, while certainly providing monetary stimulus, is not as stimulative as it would have been before the crisis. By the same token, an immediate rise in our policy rate back to, for example, the 4.25 per cent that prevailed before the financial crisis would represent an extreme tightening of policy and would have significant consequences. This is just another way of saying that low interest rates are actually having big effects today, but the headwinds pushing back on that stimulus remain quite powerful. For some savers, ultra-low interest rates do have positive effects. In particular, the value of most assets rises when interest rates decline, supporting gains in household wealth. This effect may not be as obvious as the impact of low rates on savings. But lower interest rates generally mean higher stock and bond prices, as well as increases in the value of real estate, which has been another important source of wealth for many savers, particularly seniors. I realize this may be cold comfort to those people who have to adjust retirement plans to a lower-for-longer world. But the difficult reality is that savers must adjust their plans. That may mean some combination of putting aside more funds, working a little longer than planned or changing the mix of investments. There are no easy answers, particularly for some who have already retired. Compounding the challenge is the fact that people are now living longer – life expectancy has risen by about 6 years since the early 1980s. I hope you will agree that this is unambiguously good news. But combining longer life expectancy with low interest rates means that a person starting to save today would have to set aside much more to generate the same retirement income as a person who began saving 25 years ago, if both wished to retire at the same age. Lower for longer and companies The other group I would like to talk about today is companies and, specifically, their decisions about business investment. Across the global economy, investment spending fell sharply during the financial crisis, and the recovery has been unexpectedly weak. The recent drop in oil and other commodity prices has lowered investment plans even further. When investment slows, it means an economy’s potential output also grows more slowly, which can reinforce the trend toward lower interest rates. In contrast, raising potential output through increased investment can ease the downward pressure on global rates. With interest rates as low as they have been, the cost of capital certainly is not a problem for well-established businesses. But as economists, we know that credit provision will always be less than perfect in a financial system such as our own. And there is a risk that changes to global banking regulation, designed to make the system safer, could worsen any such imperfections. Put another way, it is likely that financing gaps continue to exist – and could easily have increased in importance – for new and young businesses, for small and medium-sized enterprises, and for trade finance and infrastructure. Given the importance of young company growth at this stage of the business cycle, the Bank is monitoring data on company formation and credit flows carefully. Still, we are seeing a number of firms in Canada’s non-resource sector that are operating close to full capacity. Under normal circumstances, you would expect investment intentions to be rising, but so far that has not really been the case. Research done at the Bank of Canada and elsewhere, including conversations with business leaders, suggests that the main cause of weak investment is the high level of uncertainty that companies are facing, particularly about future demand prospects. 
   4 BIS central bankers’ speeches  And it is understandable that businesses would be uncertain. Companies have lived through the daunting experience of the financial crisis and Great Recession. On top of that, we have had all sorts of economic and geopolitical uncertainties across the global economy. In such an atmosphere, it’s not surprising that business leaders would be reluctant to commit to major new investments. However, in my conversations with Canadian firms I have picked up on another possible investment impediment – hurdle rates for new investments do not seem to have adjusted to the new reality. The hurdle rate is the lowest acceptable rate of return that a company chooses for an investment to proceed. Generally, you calculate the hurdle rate by adding together the risk-free interest rate, a measure of inflation expectations over the life of the project and a premium to compensate for the investment’s risk. Because the risk-free interest rate is closely related to the real neutral rate, and because the real neutral rate has been declining, it follows that hurdle rates should also be lower, all else being equal. I have had some business leaders tell me that they have been surprised to see, for example, companies in Asia pursuing investments with implicit returns of around 3 to 4 per cent, well below most companies’ hurdle rates. My response has been to say that in the current and prospective environment, 4 per cent will probably turn out to be a pretty good return. If uncertainty is the main impediment to investment decisions, then it should subside over time as economies heal, improving the investment climate. But if companies are maintaining traditional hurdle rates, they are unlikely to invest any time soon, and we will not see the kind of growth, productivity and job creation we are looking for. And neither will the companies. Policy prescriptions So far, we’ve talked about the adjustments that are needed in response to powerful, slow-moving global forces. We know that these forces have reduced the real neutral interest rate here in Canada and will keep the growth of potential output around 1.5 per cent for the next number of years. In such a context, increasing potential output growth by even a few tenths of a percentage point would make an important difference to all the issues I have spoken about today. Raising potential output growth would boost the real neutral rate of interest and long-term interest rates, and it would increase returns on investments for savers and companies alike. So if there are policies that would boost potential output – the sum of labour force growth and productivity growth – then we need to pursue them. Fortunately, there are many things that we collectively can do. The G20 has been discussing this for some time, describing it as the third leg of the policy stool – structural reforms to complement monetary and fiscal policies. Here in Canada, one way forward is to identify and remove impediments to business growth. For example, new and young firms are often the ones that can do the most to improve an economy’s productivity, create new jobs and raise potential output. So we need to make sure that our tax and immigration policies, as well as our ability to finance growth of young firms, are as enabling as they can be, so we can nurture those firms and see them flourish right here. One important impediment to business growth that is widely shared globally is weak infrastructure. We know that infrastructure projects spur growth in the short term by boosting demand. More importantly, infrastructure projects can support long-term growth by raising an economy’s potential output. Among economists, there has been some debate over the size of the impact on potential output that infrastructure projects can deliver. Deputy Governor Sylvain Leduc did some research during his time at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. The research 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 5  showed that, within six to eight years, US government spending on highway projects delivered at least one dollar, possibly two to three dollars, in increased output for every dollar spent. It would be helpful to have more research on the fiscal multipliers of infrastructure spending in Canada. But it seems likely to me that well-targeted infrastructure investments will yield more economic growth than just the first infusion of cash because they enable more growth to occur in the future. Another key avenue shared by all economies is trade liberalization. We all need to encourage this, both within Canada and internationally, since the world seems to be entering a phase of doubt about the benefits of international trade. Beyond the rhetoric, the future of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) has come into question, and the trade agreement between Canada and the European Union, while much more advanced, still must go through a long ratification process. We know from history that sliding into protectionism would be highly counterproductive. It is important for authorities to continually make the case for freer trade. Here at home, the announcement this summer of a preliminary agreement on interprovincial free trade is certainly welcome. There are many indications that interprovincial barriers are holding back the growth of individual companies and the economy as a whole. It is also important to recognize and understand the reasons behind rising anti-globalization sentiment. For example, people who have been affected by restructuring brought about by globalization often face difficult adjustments, including retraining and moving long distances. Policy-makers need to be sensitive to these difficulties and do what they can to facilitate those adjustments. At the same time, there is a role for economists to do compelling research that reminds people of the impact of trade. Increasing trade is a positive-sum game. Companies, too, could do more to demonstrate how globalization has made all kinds of goods and services more widely available at a lower cost, and how important trade is for their own employees. Making infrastructure investments, defending existing trade arrangements and pursuing new ones are certainly good candidates for boosting Canada’s economic potential. But when we move from theory to practice, how big can those effects be? Well, bearing in mind that we start our analysis with a projection that Canada’s economic potential is likely to grow by only around 1.5 per cent, which is not very inspiring, we need to take every decimal point of potential growth more seriously than we have in the past. Now, none of the structural initiatives I’ve mentioned is a silver bullet by itself. But together, they could make a large difference in our long-term economic prospects. Let’s consider the possibilities in light of existing empirical evidence. Begin with the removal of interprovincial trade barriers. Conservative estimates suggest that removing interprovincial trade barriers could add one- or two-tenths of a percentage point to Canada’s potential output annually. Some estimates are far larger. As for international trade, research conducted at the World Bank and elsewhere suggests that the TPP could add a further one- or two-tenths to our potential output growth. The Canada–EU trade agreement should also boost potential, though estimates suggest by less than the TPP. In a low-growth world, these three initiatives taken together could have a significant impact on economic growth, year after year. Now, let’s add the impact of targeted infrastructure spending. A prudent estimate is that this could add another tenth or two of a percentage point to potential output over the medium term. When you consider how the benefits of these policies would add up over years, you’ll see why every decimal point counts. A reasonable estimate is that these policies could raise the level of real GDP by 3 to 5 per cent by 2025, which would mean up to $100 billion more in income for Canadians every year. In a lower-for-longer world, these are opportunities we 
   6 BIS central bankers’ speeches  simply cannot afford to miss. This is especially true because other countries are not sitting still – in other words, we could actually lose ground as other countries become more competitive, so failing to take up these structural opportunities might still mean an erosion of the status quo. Conclusion It’s time to conclude. What I’ve tried to do today is be clear about the forces that have brought about this period of ultra-low interest rates and help identify the implications. While monetary policy actions played a role in the decline of interest rates, the Bank sets its policy rate to meet its primary mission: returning inflation sustainably to target, thus helping to get the economy back to full output. In this sense, ultra-low interest rates are a symptom of the conditions we face, conditions that we believe are improving over time. But some of the forces leading to low interest rates will persist for a long time, so we need to prepare for lower for longer. Individuals need to plan for retirement with different assumptions about longevity, interest rates and growth. Businesses need to make sure their expectations about investment returns reflect the current and likely future reality and reconfigure their investment plans accordingly. And policy-makers need to make sure they are working to increase the economy’s potential output and reduce uncertainty – whether economic, political or regulatory – that may be holding back investment. What the Bank can, and will, continue to do is to provide certainty about the future value of money through inflation control. Together, we can make the necessary adjustments and boost confidence that will foster the economic growth we all want to see. 
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:10)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:5)(cid:12)(cid:13)(cid:3)(cid:12)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:14)(cid:5)(cid:15)(cid:0)(cid:5)(cid:12)(cid:16)(cid:17)(cid:18)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:17)
(cid:21)
(cid:22)
(cid:23)
(cid:24)
(cid:25)
(cid:26)
(cid:27)
(cid:28)
(cid:29)(cid:30)
(cid:29)(cid:29)
(cid:29)(cid:21)
John Iannis Mourmouras: Implications of the UK vote to leave theEU – a view from the SouthPanel intervention by Professor John Iannis Mourmouras, Deputy Governor of the Bank ofGreece, at the Bank of Italy-OMFIF Main Meeting, Rome, 22 September 2016.*   *   *Intervention in a panel meeting with Lord (Norman) Lamont, former UK Chancellor of theExchequer, Ambassador Antonio Armellini, and Philip Middleton, Deputy Chairman, Ernst andYoung, OMFIFAdvisory Board, moderated by Fabio Pannetta, Deputy Governor, Banca d’Italia,at the Banca d’Italia-OMFIF Main Meeting in Rome (Italy) on 22 September 2016. Disclaimer: Views expressed in this speech are personal views and do not necessarily reflectthose of the institutions I am affiliated with.Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a great honour for me to take part in such a distinguished panel. On this very importantmatter of implications of the UK vote to leave the EU, I would like to focus on a couple of issues:Firstly, on the potential effects of Brexit on the dynamics of European integration and indeed offera southern point of view and, more particularly, make five points from the South on the Brexitvote. Secondly, I will examine the implications of Brexit on what central banks do in terms ofmonetary policy, including the ECB.1.  A SOUTHERN VIEW ON BREXIT’S IMPLICATIONS FOR THE EU The European Union is currently facing crises on multiple fronts (anaemic growth, highunemployment, persistently low inflation close to deflation, a debt crisis, an ongoing migrantcrisis), but Brexit represents the biggest medium- to long-term challenge of all. Point number 1: A deeper look into some European failures that influenced the Brexitvote Euroscepticism is now a strong sentiment in Europe. Populist, authoritarian parties are ingovernment or in a ruling coalition in nine (9) countries of the EU. This is an alarming figure.Referendums in Italy and Hungary, and national elections next year in the Netherlands, the CzechRepublic, France and Germany, are expected to reinforce this eurosceptic mood. Eurocratsshould take note of this reality.  Beyond the obvious economic concerns which triggered the UK vote to leave the EU, everyoneagrees that the EU needs to address the issue of its democratic deficit and accountability. This isobviously not resolved with a European Parliament that maintains two seats: a real seat inBrussels and a symbolic seat in Strasbourg, costing the EU, and thus European taxpayers, €114million per year. The EU is perceived as a sclerotic and costly organisation that fails to adapt tothe changing circumstances in a world of rapid upheavals. At the same time, persistent austeritypolicies – quite often ill-designed – adopted in Southern European countries increase therejection of the European project even in countries such as Greece or even Italy, which hadalways been pro-integration and where public opinion was always in favour of the EU.In addition, it has long been argued that the European Union remains a ‘market without a state’.This quote perhaps summarises the debate on European integration over the last 40 years atleast. The most frequent complaint regarding the way the EU works is that it is governed by anelite of unelected technocrats through several independent European institutions and bodies 1 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
(including the ECB). In light of the above issues of democratic deficit and accountability, Europeans are increasinglydisenchanted with the EU, as shown by the rise of populist, authoritarian parties. Support forpopulist political parties with eurosceptic credentials has been rising, that is, parties which are bynature more Eurosceptic and less oriented towards reforms, which of course the South badlyneeds. As a result, this is a major downside risk to debt sustainability in this part of the euroarea. Point number 2: Mushroom of referenda and political contagion For continental Europe, Brexit represents a shock to the institutions and norms that underpinmarkets, albeit different from the euro break-up fears of 2012, the global financial crisis of 2008or the bursting of the high-tech bubble of 2001. The origins of previous financial crises can belocated in multiple factors that are linked with the financial system and the economic cycle,respectively: imbalances in trade or capital flows between EU Member States; a combination ofdecades-long excessive borrowing, risky investments, and lack of transparency in the financialsector; and the speculative mania around the shares of so-called “dot-com” companies and thesubsequent collapse of the speculative bubble. The risk is not financial contagion, like in 1998.Instead, it represents a contagious political development. No matter whether we have a full-blownor a light Brexit, the political risk for the continent is that referendums may mushroom acrossEurope in a tug-of-war between populist forces and the political establishment and elites. Brexithas the potential to unleash centrifugal forces, leading perhaps to a breakup of the euro,especially if such a referendum were to be held this time in a major eurozone country. Perhapssuch a referendum is more likely in a southern eurozone country. Of course, democracy is the very foundation of our civilisation, but sometimes even well-intentioned initiatives can produce unintentional consequences (as we have seen with the UKvote). The public not only in Europe (but also on this side of the little pond) seems to have lostconfidence in the political and economic establishment to come up with visionary solutions thatare also pragmatic and improve things for most people. In 2017 we will be celebrating 60 years of European integration. Europe has emerged as astandard-bearer of freedom, democracy, the rule of law. So we should not be complacent aboutpopulist parties using the refugee issue as a key fear factor for European voters and turning itinto a major campaign theme to tell the EU to keep out of migration and human rights issues. It isparticularly worrying to see Member State governments turning the EU into the enemy fordomestic purposes. The agreed-upon migrant relocation scheme is founded on solidarity, thevery basic principle of European integration that has helped the EU become the major tradingbloc around the world that is has become. Point number 3: Duality and the way forward for the EU The theoretical debate about the EU’s post-Brexit future has seen three predominant scenarios:an EU that falls apart/disappears, an unchanged EU that continues to muddle through trying tocope with its underlying problems or an EU that integrates further, or at least some MemberStates moving forward, some others choosing to stay back. One idea that has circulated a lot inthe context of the Brexit debate – which I concur – that a balance between national sovereigntyand European solidarity and prosperity may be found in duality, i.e. two “Europes” coexisting in abroader European construct, independently from one another. One would be a political union(either taking the form of a federal state or a confederation of nations) to complete the EMU andbeyond, which is the vision of the EU’s founding fathers (Jean Monnet, Robert Schuman, AltieroSpinelli). The other would be based on market liberalisation, forming an outer rim of a newEuropean construct, in which Britain could obviously play a leading role, if it so wishes.  2 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
For Southern European countries of course, the 1-billion-dollar question is the following: if thisdual architecture becomes a reality in the EU (definitely not likely before the German elections)will the South of Europe be part of a “new eurozone” [a proper fiscal union, with a banking union ,a defence and a political union], or will it be left behind in a secondary, outer circle of countries?This is something I would not like to speculate about here today, and to be frank with you notever! But it’s not a matter of wishful thinking, it’s a matter of tough realism. Point number 4: Coup d’état in Turkey – Migrant crisis Clearly, Brexit is an issue for the whole of Europe and Southern Europe will not be immune to theimplications of Brexit, for instance because of tourism, external demand, etc. However, comingfrom one of the countries located on the EU’s external border, which has received massiveinfluxes of refugees from war-torn countries such as Syria (we have all seen the pictures ofboats washed ashore in Lampedusa, Gibraltar, or the Greek islands of Northern Aegean), itwould rather be an omission on my behalf not to discuss the more urgent problem for SouthernEuropean countries right now, which if it escalates further in the next 6-12 months may affect therest of the EU and eventually present an existential threat to the European Union itself. Migrationneeds to be recognised as a major policy issue that will play a critical role in shaping the EU’sfuture and it is definitely an issue that should not be underestimated. We have seen lastfortnight’s election results in Berlin and three weeks ago in the German Chancellor’s ownconstituency (Mecklenburg-Vorpommern) with the anti-immigration, right-wing (AfD) party gainingsignificant ground. It is urgent to tackle the migrant crisis and the linked labour mobility issue. I am particularly worried about recent developments in Turkey following the attempted coup andthe impact this will have on the migrant crisis, as a major challenge for the EU’s future. Againstthe backdrop of an escalating migrant crisis, the UN Declaration adopted two weeks ago in NewYork which calls for a more equitable sharing of the burden for hosting the world’s migrants andrefugees becomes even more relevant. Take, for instance, the recent EU deal with Turkey, whichhas promised to accept migrants back to its territory in exchange for financial aid. That wasbased on a premise that Turkey was a safe country for refugees. Lots of international analystscast doubts on this after the latest bout of political instability and the heavy crack-down onsuspected dissidents in the military, the judiciary and even higher-education in our neighbouringcountry.Point number 5: The British reform benchmark to be followed by South-eastern Europe Despite Brexit, the UK could be used as a reform benchmark by South-eastern European statesto be emulated in a number of ways. According to the OECD, the UK has the least regulatedlabour market and is second to the Netherlands as the least regulated product market in Europe.The UK also has low taxation (a corporate tax rate of 20% and there is speculation that this willgo down to 15% as an incentive to foreign firms to stay in Britain after Brexit). South European countries would stand to gain a lot by starting to resemble Britain in a number ofareas, including the attraction of FDI, public sector accounting, transparency, rule of law andstrong institutions including an efficient public administration plus credible government financialmanagement. This should be the agenda for the whole of South Europe in the years to come,with or without adjustment programmes, namely using the UK as a benchmark, except one thing:Brexit! 2.  IMPLICATIONS OF BREXIT FOR CENTRAL BANKSa. Less (?) monetary policy divergenceThe Brexit vote triggered a broad-based reassessment of the future path of monetary policyglobally. With improving headline growth still perceived as fragile in most advanced economies,and inflation still persistently low, the distinct response from major central banks to the Brexit1 3 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
uncertainty can be described as dovish: policy rates would stay “low for longer”. The Bank ofEngland cut the policy rate by 25 basis points (it is now 0.25%), and expanded the governmentbond purchase scheme by £60 billion, bringing the total to £435 billion. It also established a newcorporate bond purchase program of £10 billion, and launched a new Term Funding Scheme thatwill provide funding for banks at rates close to the monetary policy rate. Forward interest rates forDecember 2017 quickly dropped to the new level of the policy rate, reflecting the view that a quickpolicy reversal was not expected.  Following the Brexit shock in the US, a 2016 rate rise is not fully priced in the market with theimplied probability of a Fed rate hike in December 2016 to be around 55% today. The Bank ofJapan in its last policy meeting launched a novel kind of monetary easing as it set a cap on 10-year bond yields and vowed to take action to overshoot its 2% inflation target. Its decisiondemonstrates that central bankers are still willing to experiment with new monetary policy ideas,as inflation remains too low. Some observers characterised this shift as probably the biggestinnovation in monetary policy since the introduction of negative deposit rates by the Danishcentral bank in the summer of 2012! Finally, at its latest GC meeting, the European Central Bank (ECB) announced that it will extendits QE programme beyond March 2017 if needed. So far, there is some encouraging evidence from the ECB’s ongoing QE programme. In moredetail: Loan growth continued to recover gradually. Lending to companies grew by 1.9% year-o-year, while household lending grew by 1.8%. A significant improvement has also been observedin Eurosystem banks’ composite cost of debt financing, which declined in July to a new historicallow, after broadly stabilising in the second quarter of 2016. Also, banks reported a further neteasing of credit standards on loans to enterprises in the second quarter of 2016, suggesting acontinued improvement in financing conditions for corporate loans. Across the largest euro areacountries, overall terms and conditions eased across all larger countries except for Germany. Inmost of the large euro area countries, in particular, France and Italy, banks continued to report anarrowing of margins on average loans in net terms. Margins on riskier loans widened in netterms in Spain and Germany. Furthermore, composite lending rates on loans to euro area NFCs(corporate loans) and households (i.e. mortgages) fell by around 100 basis points. The reductionin bank lending rates was especially strong in vulnerable euro area countries, indicating reducingfragmentation in euro area financial markets. Over the same period, the spread between interestrates charged on very small loans (loans of up to €0.25 million) and those charged on large loans(loans of above €1 million) in the euro area followed a downward trend. This indicates that small-and medium-sized enterprises have generally been benefiting to a greater extent than largecompanies from the decline in lending rates. b. QE vs. negative rates Staying in the eurozone and taking as a given fact that we will move towards moreaccommodative monetary policy in the months ahead, a more open question is: which policyinstrument will be used? More QE or further negative rates? This is the essence of the monetarypolicy debate in the eurozone today. Clearly, there are limits to persistent negative rates, namely the underlying question is how farand for how long they can actually go. There are a number of concerns including banks’profitability, how negative rates may act as an anaesthetic to euro area governments especiallyin the euro area’s southern periphery, taking into account that the fiscal space gained from lowerdebt service costs may result in a slower implementation of necessary fiscal and structuralreforms. Policy rate cuts to negative levels have generally been reflected in corresponding declines in 4 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
money market rates and short-term government bond yield. In turn, the fall in bank wholesalefunding costs has helped lower lending rates, but to varying degrees across countries. Inaddition, there are concerns about the political and institutional feasibility of negative rates astheir long-term effects are still unknown. Most importantly, their effectiveness is put underquestion during a recession, if this were to emerge in the near future. I would personally, in my professorial hat, prefer to see more QE rather than further negativerates. If this is the case, the next question is where could more QE in the eurozone come from?In other words, does the ECB have the tools for more QE stimulus? Well, there are several options. From changing the parameters of the current QE programmelike, for instance, buying bonds below the deposit rate, increasing the 33% issue share limit,dropping the capital key allocation, or even adding new securities to the pool of eligible assetssuch as bank bonds or equity. c. The limits of central bank actions: a role for governments? In closing, it is worth reminding the words of President Mario Draghi , who said recently: “[lowinterest rates]… are not the problem. They are the symptom of an underlying problem, which isinsufficient investment demand, across the world, to absorb all the savings available in theeconomy.” Along the lines of the previous caveat by President Draghi, one could add, forinstance, that in countries with fiscal space, and/or at a eurozone-wide level, extra spending oninfrastructure investment especially in today’s environment of extremely low long-term rateswould clearly increase low demand in the eurozone, enhance its potential trend growth rate,make the task of monetary policy much easier and finally contribute to public debt sustainability inmany countries. In other words, the time has come to use policy tools other than monetarypolicy, including fiscal and structural ones. Thank you very much for your attention.A more detailed account on this can be found in my HABA-New York speech (October 2016).1 5 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
1  Bank of Uganda    Remarks by  Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile Governor, Bank of Uganda    Uganda Banker’s Association  Informal Dinner    Piato Restaurant     2nd December, 2016     
2  Good evening Ladies and Gentlemen,   Thank you all for coming here this evening for our informal UBA dinner.   I spoke last week at the Institute of Banking and Financial Services annual banking dinner about the current challenges facing the banking industry. Tonight I would like to make a few brief remarks about the current macroeconomic situation and prospects, notably as regards economic growth, the exchange rate and inflation.   Real economic growth, over the last five years, has averaged about five percent per annum. This is very likely close to the economy’s sustainable potential growth rate, given growth of the labour force, capital stock and productivity. In the last fiscal year, which ended in June 2016, real GDP growth was 4.8 percent, which is slightly below potential, but is far from being a recession as some people have claimed, although I appreciate that trading conditions have been difficult for many businesses.  
3   There were factors which probably depressed economic growth in FY 2015/16, such as the increase in market interest rates, the exchange rate volatility in the first half of the fiscal year and the election in the third quarter. Without an election, and with probably lower interest rates and hopefully less volatile exchange rates (although that is hard to predict) I would expect that conditions in the current fiscal year will be more conducive to growth and so I would expect that we will experience a small rise in the real GDP growth, to five percent or even slightly higher.       Let me now turn to the exchange rate, which has depreciated in recent weeks, after a long period – nearly 11 months – of stability. Against the US dollar, the Shilling has depreciated by 4.7 percent since the end of October. However, more than half of that depreciation is attributable to the strengthening of the US dollar against major currencies since the Presidential election in the US, which has led to expectations of higher interest rates in that country.   
4  My staff calculates an index of the Uganda Shilling against a weighted basket of Uganda’s trading partners. This index – called the nominal effective exchange rate index – has depreciated by only 2.3 percent since the end of October. Furthermore, a nominal depreciation of the exchange rate has been necessary to ensure that Uganda remains competitive against its trading partners. Our exchange rate policy, which entails a flexible, market determined exchange rate, is motivated by the need to ensure that our balance of payments is sustainable. Our interventions in the foreign exchange market, such as that which we carried out last week, are intended only to dampen volatility in the exchange rate, and not to impede adjustments in the exchange rate which are necessary to maintain external balance.  Finally, I want to address the issue of inflation. The outturn for inflation in 2016 has been better than we had feared it would be at this time last year, when inflationary pressures were building up. Annual core inflation declined during the first half of 2016 and for the last four months it has settled down at an average of approximately 5 percent, which is in line with our policy target for inflation.   
5  The better than expected inflation outturn in 2016 is attributable to a combination of the tightening of monetary policy by the BOU in mid 2015, when we raised interest rates, and the relatively stable exchange rate since October of last year. When we look at core inflation outturns over a longer horizon, we can see that they have been very close to our policy target. Over the last four years, annual inflation has sometimes been above 5 percent and sometimes been below, but it has averaged 4.9 percent. I hope that you will agree that this demonstrates the effectiveness of our inflation targeting monetary policy framework.  To conclude, ladies and gentlemen, I believe that the prospects for macroeconomic stability in the near to medium term are currently very good. In 2017 we can look forward to real GDP growth which is close to the economy’s medium term potential growth of around 5 percent per annum. With inflationary pressures firmly under control we can also be confident that annual core inflation will continue to trend around our medium term target of 5 percent.   Thank you for listening.   
Collegio Carlo AlbertoUniversità degli Studi di TorinoEconomic Challenges Facing Europe and the WorldPanel Discussion of Deputy Governor of the Bank of ItalyLuigi Federico SignoriniMoncalieri, 19 December 2016
     
   Germany and Italy have been called on to chair the G20 and G7 in economically and politically turbulent times, in the world at large as well as in our common European home. Several years down the road, the legacies of the global financial crisis and of the sovereign crisis in the euro area are still apparent. Sluggish growth, high private and public debt, unemployment and underemployment, as well as a general sense of disillusionment among broad swathes of the population are affecting many countries to varying extents. These facts and feelings are also engendering widespread ‘anti-globalization’ sentiment, as well as doubts about the European project.  This reaction has deep-rooted causes on which I shall spend a few words later but first of all, let me point out that this is one of the most compelling reasons why coordination between the German and Italian presidencies is so important. We must exploit synergies and join efforts to reach the broadest possible consensus among advanced and emerging economies, taking actions that can stem what I see as a potentially dangerous spiral of rising disaffection and protectionism. The Italian Presidency will continue the work of past G7s in well-known areas, combating money laundering and terrorist financing, fostering international cooperation among tax authorities and enhancing cyber security (the latter an increasingly pressing issue on today’s global agenda). But there is also the intention to promote an open-minded and broad debate on two issues that that go some way to addressing the concerns I mentioned earlier.  The first issue, financial regulation, has been at the centre of our agenda since the outbreak of the global financial crisis, when the G20 and its technical bodies took on the task of redesigning financial sector regulations to avert similar shocks in the future. The past few years have seen a comprehensive, radical overhaul of financial regulation. It seems reasonable now to step back for a moment and look at the bigger picture. Have we done enough? Or is it possible that we have been doing even too much?   
The re-regulation of the banking system has certainly been necessary, timely, and – within the limits of human fallibility – I believe it has done a lot to make banks safer. But we need to know where to stop, at least for some time. We need, first, to give a minimum of stability to the regulatory framework; second, to take stock of the work done and gain experience to evaluate its longer-term effects; third, and perhaps most importantly, strike a balance between securing the financial system and avoiding rules that would overly penalize risk-taking, without which no growth is possible. At the beginning of this year the group of central bank governors and heads of supervision of the G20 instructed the Basel Committee to refrain from ‘significantly increasing overall capital requirements’1 at this stage. The Basel 3 package is currently being finalised on this premise. While agreement is not yet assured, I think we are close. Let me take this opportunity to say that my firm view is that an agreement is necessary to give certainty to the financial world. The conditions are there and we should not miss the opportunity.  Assuming such an agreement can be reached, in the field of banking regulation the next few years should be devoted to maintaining the regulatory system, not to overhauling it radically once again; we also need to review the rules, by checking for any embedded procyclicality or other unintended consequences, rather than establishing further capital requirements.   Efforts to limit banking risks, however, are only part of the answer. The financial landscape is changing apace. The growth of intermediaries outside the banking sector points to the need for new micro- and macro-prudential tools. Work has begun in this area but much remains to be done.   Furthermore, a host of innovations (digital currencies, distributed ledgers, peer-to-peer lending, crowdfunding, to name but a few) have opened new frontiers for financial services and started to blur the boundaries of the financial sector itself. There is great potential for financial inclusion and efficiency gains here, but there are also implications for monetary operations and transmission, as well as new risks to stability, integrity, and end-user protection. This raises issues about the 1 Group of Central Bank Governors and Heads of Supervision (10 January 2016); as Stefan Ingves, chairman of the Basel Committee, recently noted, this must be one of the most frequently cited phrases in regulation debates these days.                                                           4
perimeter of financial regulation and the appropriate regulatory and policy measures. The FSB and various standard-setting bodies have already conducted a broad discussion on general themes like definitions, opportunities and risks; it is now time to turn to discussing concrete policy questions. A key point at this stage is to decide what requires swift international coordination, and what is best left, at least for now, to jurisdiction-level experimentation.  The G7 and G20 have a key role in steering the process of finalising the post-crisis financial regulation.   The second issue that the Italian presidency intends to move forward on is that of inclusive growth. Here, too, there needs to be interaction between the G7 and G20, not least because economic and social marginalization is a concern for advanced and emerging economies alike.   Inequality is a new subject to acquire top priority in the G7 agenda, but it is now at the forefront of the political debate. Its causes, trends and political consequences are discussed daily by the media and have become a popular topic in economic research as well.   Let me first state one fact that is too easily forgotten. Globalization has been an enormous driver of growth in emerging countries, including in the two largest countries in the world. It has thus reduced overall world inequality. It has lifted millions, indeed hundreds of millions, out of poverty.   At the same time, inequalities within countries have increased. This is most obvious in a number of emerging economies. But in advanced economies too, the benefits of globalisation have not been equally distributed. Growth has been more subdued than in emerging economies; the income of the median household in many countries has stagnated over the past decades; the middle classes’ perception of the future has worsened.  While this fact is more or less universally true, the causes and effects differ somewhat across countries. In Italy, for example, where the recession has been more severe and protracted than in other advanced economies, younger   5
generations have been hit hardest, with high (though now decreasing) rates of unemployment, a greater risk of poverty, and reduced income and career opportunities.   In any event, the perception that there is a need to counter rising inequality and mitigate its consequences is widespread. Policy options to deal with this fact will be the focus of the discussions that we propose to stimulate within the G7 and G20.   However, one should be aware that perceptions of economic unfairness and concerns about diminished lifetime prospects, while important, are hardly the whole story; dissatisfaction and disillusionment in our societies, and growing diffidence towards international and supranational institutions, are likely to have broader causes. In other words, the perception that something has gone wrong extends beyond the losers from globalization (as some analyses of the votes in the U.S and U.K. have suggested)2, and comprises a range of countries with different trends in growth and inequality.   This is certainly not the right occasion, nor am I the right person, to propose an exhaustive analysis of this extremely complex phenomenon. The question of what ultimately ‘lies behind it’, and where it will lead, is a very broad question, which must be left to future historians. Many factors are surely at play; most entail both opportunities and risks. Let me briefly allude to two points.  First, the fact that we are no longer in a world dominated by a clash between opposing blocks, where long-standing ideologies offered a general frame of reference for political debate, but one in which, to borrow Bauman’s3 term, social and political identities are more ‘liquid’, has freed minds, which is good. But it also risks making some policy debates narrow and context-free, and fostering identities based exclusively on the narrow local community or on ethnicity, feeding fear or hatred towards those outside a restricted group.   The explosion of social media and of new ways of sharing information and ideas, unfiltered by political and cultural elites, is also likely to have played a role. 2  Danny Quah and Kishore Mahububani, Project Syndicate, Dec 9, 2016 ‘The Geopolitics of Populism’. 3  Zygmunt Bauman, 2000, Liquid modernity, Cambridge (UK), Polity.                                                           6
Certainly, there is something very positive and intrinsically democratic about the ease with which so many people can access information and knowledge once reserved to privileged groups and rich societies. On the other hand, users may at times be left with no idea as to the reliability of the facts and depth of the analysis. (Umberto Eco, who passed away earlier this year, would have put it more strongly). In an ideology-free world, this may lead to uninformed policy discussions. Free, unfettered debate is a blessing; the lack of reality checks is not.    The reason why I mentioned all this is that I want to devote the second part of this speech to Europe, and attitudes towards the European project, which is certainly suffering as a result of this mood of disaffection and exacerbated localism. Consensus around Europe, which was once very strong in countries such as Italy and Germany, can no longer be taken for granted. People have started questioning what it is for, and what is in it for them.   The issue of the ultimate goal of European integration remains very much one of beliefs and identities and I shall not discuss it here (though I shan’t resist confessing to my own at the end). Regardless of such preferences, and just taking as given the considerable degree of integration that has already been achieved, it is fair to ask whether European institutions actually serve their purpose reasonably well, and what can be done to improve how they work. While the disaffection of Europe’s citizens may well be more general in its origins, it cannot be addressed without first answering this question.  There are many ways to do so, but let me propose here an institutional perspective which, I believe, has implications that tend to go largely unnoticed but are far from inconsequential.  If we look at the architecture of the European Union, it is possible to observe that it now bears a very close resemblance to ‘normal’ constitutions as far as Parliament and the judiciary are concerned, but not at all for the executive branch.  Today the EU has an elected Parliament with a central institutional role; it co-decides on legislation, mostly on a par with the Council; it has budgetary   7
and oversight powers; in short, though within a narrower mandate, its status, composition and powers are largely comparable to those of parliaments in any democratic polity.  The Union also has a judicial system that ensures the uniform interpretation and application of EU law. While the make-up of its constituent courts is somewhat unique, and while its rulings are obviously confined to matters that the Treaties assign to the Union, the attributions and actual functioning of the European Court of Justice are akin to those of an ultimate court of appeal or a constitutional court in many democracies.   The executive function, to the extent that this concept can be applied to Europe, is more unusual. The EU is in the unique position of having two institutional branches with powers of political direction, the Council and the Commission, with very different compositions and sources of legitimacy. Moreover, each branch exercises different functions beyond those typical of governments.   The European Council, made up of the heads of the governments of the member states, provides ‘impetus’ and, in a rather vaguely defined but practically important way, sets the policy agenda. It has maximum influence in foreign and security matters. At the same time, national governments, represented at a lower level in the Council of the EU, also play a key role in the legislative process.   The European Commission, on the other hand, currently resembles in many ways a government in a parliamentary system. The Commission’s President, while proposed by the Council, must survive a vote in Parliament; Commission members require Parliament’s consent. This is not just nominal: after the 2014 elections, Parliament made it clear that it would vote down any nominee except the Spitzenkandidat of the party that got the most votes. Like a normal government, the Commission manages and implements EU policies and the budget, and represents the Union outside Europe. But it lacks a clear ultimate power of direction.   At the same time, in certain fields and with respect to its general function of ‘custodian of the Treaties’, the Commission plays a role that would typically belong to the domain of independent, quasi-judicial regulatory authorities, for example by enforcing competition rules. As an executive body, it is essentially political; as a   8
technical authority, it is bound by objectivity and independence. The two do not square well: making discretionary policy choices and impartially enforcing technical rules are not the same thing.  I would also mention in passing that this complexity is heightened by the distinction between the EU and the euro area, the latter having a Euro Summit for agenda-setting and a Eurogroup in a coordinating role.   Why do I mention this? Because, regardless of what one thinks about any further moves to full political union, the amount of sovereignty that has already been pooled at the European level, especially in economic and financial matters, is very substantial. When Europe was mostly about things like fishing quotas and agricultural prices, important as these matters are, one could more or less live with a suboptimal arrangement. Now that it has a key role in certain issues that go to the heart of the political debate in any country, such as budget balances and financial stability, this is no longer the case. The issue of a proper executive must be addressed.  The lack of a conventional executive branch is paralleled by the lack of some of the instruments typically available to a government. On the eve of the single currency Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa noted that the Union’s ‘capability for macroeconomic policy is, with the exception of the monetary field, embryonic and unbalanced: it can avoid harm (excessive deficits) but it cannot do good (a proper fiscal policy). (…) It is thus right not only to applaud yesterday’s step but also to underline its unfinished nature, the risks and the rashness’.4   Without any clear institutional framework for discretionary political action, but in view of the massive transfer of sovereignty, European economic governance has largely been based on rules: budget rules, the ban on rescues between member countries, rules on banking supervision and resolution, and so on. Rules are necessary, but there is a limit to what they can achieve. You cannot run a large, advanced, diverse economy on autopilot.  4 Corriere della Sera, 3 May, 1998.                                                           9
Most transfers of sovereignty in fiscal and financial matters have been prompted by crisis situations. Since the eruption of the sovereign debt crisis, emergency measures have been progressively accompanied by reforms of EU governance and especially of the euro area, starting with enhanced public finance rules and macroeconomic surveillance. In the summer of 2012, the ‘Four Presidents’ Report’ envisaged complementing or replacing national intervention tools with common instruments. For banks, the report proposed transferring supervisory responsibility to the euro area and establishing joint crisis resolution and deposit guarantee mechanisms, to be supported with public funds through the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). As to public finance, in addition to implementing the reforms already approved (the Six Pack and the Fiscal Compact), it proposed gradual steps towards the creation of a euro-area budget and the issuance of common debt. Most of these proposals were taken up again in subsequent reports, including the ‘Five Presidents’ Report’ of June 2015.   Restrictions on the use of national mechanisms were put in place quickly. But the introduction of European instruments has been partial and virtually non-existent on the fiscal side. Member states are now constrained by more rules that say what cannot be done, while the EU has not gained more powers to decide what should be done, nor has it the tools or institutional framework to implement the policies that are needed. This creates a situation of vulnerability: there is a danger that national and European authorities will be unable to react appropriately to shocks.     By way of example, let’s consider fiscal policy in some detail.   It goes without saying that fiscal rules are necessary in a monetary union. They serve as a coordination mechanism, ensuring that all national fiscal policies contribute to maintaining financial stability in the area. Poor compliance with fiscal rules in the period preceding the crisis justified their being strengthened.   Coming from a country with a high public debt, I am especially conscious of this. Let me be absolutely clear: the Bank of Italy has constantly reminded Italian authorities of the importance of fiscal discipline. At Parliamentary hearings on budget plans I have not failed once to underline the strategic nature of the objective of debt reduction.       10
The issue is about what you can realistically achieve through a system based mainly on rules. Simple rules do not work well in practice. It would be unreasonable to take decisions on the fiscal stance without considering the cyclical situation of the economy, or exceptional circumstances. In the absence of a substantial EU budget, some degree of flexibility in the rules constraining national budgets is unavoidable.   Thus realism has required the introduction of more and more elements of flexibility, and these in turn have required more safeguards to fend off abuses. With exceptions and counter-exceptions, over time the fiscal rules and their application have become exceedingly complex. It now takes a specialist to navigate the various definitions of objectives and constraints in the Stability and Growth Pact. Certain definitions, like the ‘structural’ budget, rely on statistics that are open to interpretation and debate: there are many possible measures of the output gap, for instance. Waivers for exceptional circumstances require, by definition, a discretionary assessment. The system is too intricate to be transparent to the public, nevertheless, it remains incomplete: in the real world, there is no such thing as a ‘complete contract’.   This is one case where the ambivalence between the Commission’s political and technical roles is apparent. There are tensions between the impartial, technical, rule-based assessment that it is called on to perform, and the multitude of real-life circumstances that it faces, in a climate where discussions often reach a heated political temperature. In this context the Commission is unavoidably prone to accusations of arbitrariness.   The absence of a substantial European budget and the complications of the Stability and Growth Pact are interconnected. With some fiscal capacity at the European level, the constraints on national budgets could be made simpler.   The Commission’s recent focus on an appropriate fiscal stance for the euro area as a whole, and attempt to quantify it for the first time, are welcome developments. My point here is not to discuss whether this quantitative assessment is correct, a subject of intense debate. My point is to stress that in our current decentralized policy setting, implementing whatever aggregate fiscal stance one thinks appropriate is difficult, and may result in a suboptimal distribution of efforts across countries.     11
Automatic stabilizers embedded in a common budget, on which the discussion has mostly focused so far, would partially free national budgets from the pressures arising from adverse cyclical conditions. A common budget, however, could also be used to adopt discretionary measures consistent with the cyclical conditions in various economies and in the euro area as a whole.  Discretion does not mean total freedom from constraints: just as they have been introduced at the national level, constitutional limits on spending or deficits can be set at the European level. It only requires acknowledging that it is impossible to govern public finances by rules alone; that no complete contract exists in public finances that can allow a democracy to dispense with open, transparent debate on budget decisions; and that, to the extent that spillovers and the common good require the imposition of significant constraints on national budgets, some fiscal space must be found at the European level.   Just to be clear, a common budget for the future does not imply mutualisation of past debt. That is a different discussion.  No mechanism should entail permanent transfers across member states. Not only would this be politically unfeasible. My own experience with regional differences in Italy tells me that structural fiscal compensation of economic disparities eventually does not end them – it entrenches them. So, for instance, any EU-wide automatic stabilisers should be designed to be geographically neutral in the long run.   The need to complement rules that constrain local action with the constitutional capacity to act at the European level could be illustrated using several different examples besides the fiscal budget.   Bank supervision and resolution is another obvious example. Time constraints prevent me from going into detail on this; I will leave that for another occasion. But let me just briefly say that, while banking union has progressed considerably, it must ultimately incorporate all the elements envisaged in the original design: a single supervisor, a single and effective resolution mechanism, with pooled resources and the determination to use them when necessary, a common deposit insurance scheme, and finally a European public financial     12
backstop. This requires effective European resources and decision-making powers, so that institutions can act swiftly, boldly and freely when needed.    Building the capacity to act at the European level, and not just rules to constrain national action, requires trust and institutional foresight. Many would say that the current circumstances make such steps politically difficult. There can be no question of trying to forge ahead with measures that many citizens are not prepared to accept. Still, I think it is useful to point to issues in the functioning of European institutions that experience and reflection tell me are important.   A Europe that can only say ‘no’ is no consensus winner anyway.  I may be biased by a personal lifelong commitment to Europe. I often tell the story that my two grandfathers fought on opposite sides during the Great War. They might well have killed each other. They were, however, on different fronts, and they didn’t. That’s why I say sometimes that Europe is, literally, in my DNA.  I understand very well that such memories come to mean progressively less to younger generations. But the young are also those who seem to feel the most disaffected, the most estranged from the ‘establishment’, and the most in need of clearer, brighter long-term prospects. If something does not seem to be working, it is no use refraining from suggesting improvements, such as one can think of. If these suggestions have any merit, the time will come when they become feasible.   13
Peter Praet: Interview in the TelegraafInterview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, inthe Telegraaf, conducted by Mr Martin Visser and Ms Dorinde Meuzelaar on 12 December, andpublished on 20 December 2016.*   *   *How optimistic or pessimistic are you about the European economy?We see moderate but strengthening growth; that is better than it was a while ago. The mainwelcome surprise is the increase in employment, which is boosting people’s disposable income.How can you call this a surprise? We have had to wait for more jobs for so many years.Of course, that is a fair point. But that is because of the excessively high growth expectationsbefore the crisis. In Europe, there was a wide gap between overly optimistic expectations andreality. As a result, people were spending borrowed money. Governments were not overlyconcerned about the sustainability of their debts. The cause of this expectation gap was adecline in productivity. Sectors that had borrowed on the basis of excessive growth expectationsran into difficulties.And it then takes a long time to recover from the crisis?Indeed. Everyone needs time to bring their balance sheet back into shape.Year after year, the ECB and the European Commission’s projections were far toooptimistic. You always thought that things would be better in the coming year. Did thatnot fuel scepticism?Perhaps. In 2011 the European economy found itself in a second recession. We did not see thatcoming, as most analysts didn’t. Italy has even undergone three recessions. That explains why,eight years after the outset of the crisis, citizens are becoming impatient. But there is now adanger that they will be tempted by simplistic solutions.How much progress have governments made in restoring their economies?Not enough. Some countries have undertaken a number of reforms, Greece being a case inpoint. But it had to make up so much lost ground that it is by no means finished yet. But there arealso countries that are showing signs of reform fatigue.Which countries are those?You see that everywhere. We will have to see what happens in 2017, but 2016 was not a goodyear as regards economic reforms.Are you referring to Italy and France?Yes, but not only. Some reforms have been made there in respect of pensions and the labourmarket, but there is still a large backlog. Citizens are now displaying anger and resistance. Theyare disappointed in their expectations. We also see a deterioration in income distribution. Formany people, the rise in income is lower than the growth in the economy.Do you understand why voters are angry?Yes, of course I do. And there is a strong temptation to opt for simplistic and national solutions,which in my view could be disastrous. Protectionism leads to chain reactions. That game quickly 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
results in shrinking prosperity.All these voters underwent austerity measures, their taxes were raised, they sawEuropean politicians simply muddling through the crisis. And as a reward for all thismisery, they also have to face painful pension and labour market reforms. Do you thinkit’s any wonder that voters are saying “no"?Of course, quick solutions to make reality meet expectations would be great. But, unfortunately,that is not possible. Easy answers are an illusion, because the gap between growth expectationsand outcomes is real. The austerity measures are responses to this problem. If you set up yoursocial security, your government expenditure on the basis of economic growth of 4%, while only1% or less is realised for many years, then you enter into a vicious circle. That is why we need acomprehensive approach.Even if anti-euro parties do not win a majority, they will still have strong support.Confidence in the euro has remained high, also in the Netherlands, as the Eurobarometer surveyshows. However, confidence in the ECB has declined sharply, especially during the crisis years.The situation in which the ECB was the only player that was still solving problems did it nofavours, because people expected too much from us.Is the monetary union not a part of the problem?It was not only monetary union that led to a fall in risk premiums and interest rates, it was a globaldevelopment that started well before the euro. Countries joining the euro saw their interest ratesfall very quickly. That contributed to a real estate bubble in some countries. In other countries, itgave an overly favourable picture of public finances. At those low rates, the government debtsuddenly appeared sustainable. The euro was born during that period, but it is difficult todetermine what would have happened in twenty years without the euro.Has the euro contributed to the divergence of the economies?No, but I think there was an illusion of convergence. The real convergence of economies thatwas expected did not come about.Maybe even the opposite.No. When the crisis arrived, it made the divergence visible, but that does not make it the onlyreason.What does the single currency still need?I am not yet satisfied with the banking union. We are still in transition: supervision is European,but the consequences of potential bank failures are still largely borne at national level. But beforeyou can solve that at the European level, you have first to deal with legacy problems in thebanking sector. Banking union really has to be completed in five years, much faster thanpoliticians think.Are the biggest problems confined to Italian and German banks, or is it a wider issue?It is fortunately limited to a few banks in a few countries. But there is another problem and that isthe cost level of banks. It is still too high in many countries and it is the reason why banks’profitability remains weak. You need profitable banks to have a resilient banking sector that helpsthe real economy. There is hence a need for consolidation in the banking sector.You would like to see larger banks? 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
We need to have diversity, large and small-sized banks. But I definitely think that we must havepan-European banks. That means that, in the event of a national economic shock, banks are notoverexposed to any one country.Are you not afraid that banks would then emerge which are too big to fail?No, because at the scale of the euro area, they will not be too big. The basis is a Europeanbackstop.But if you had two or three Deutsche Banks, wouldn’t that be far too much for the euroarea?You can have large banks in small countries, if supervision and resolution are completelyEuropean. We are not there yet and  we still have to complete the banking union in full.The whole euro area is a fragile balance.It is a balance that we are gradually making more stable by setting up the right institutions. Weare on the right path. But there has to be a not too distant deadline for completing banking union.Have other crisis measures, such as purchasing hundreds of billions of sovereignbonds, had the impact you hoped for?Yes. It has stabilised the euro area and has resulted in better financing conditions. I think therehave been a number of episodes with major risks, even for strong countries like Germany, risks,which we managed to fend off.But banks, pension funds and savers are now weighed down by the low interest rates.We keep a close watch on whether interest rates are not so low as to interfere withtransmission, i.e. whether banks are still passing on the low interest rates to the real economy.As regards pension funds, one also needs to acknowledge that the performance of pensionfunds and their investments depends on many other factors and not only on interest rates.Many savers feel as if they are now paying the price for the crisis.I understand it can feel like that for savers. Borrowers benefit from favourable interest rates. Butthe costs for savers could have been much higher. Inaction would have led to a severe economicand financial crisis. They would probably have lost much of their wealth during the crisis. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Philip R Lane: Review of the Central Bank of Ireland’s MortgageMeasuresStatement by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, announcing the review ofthe Central Bank Mortgage Measures, Dublin, 23 November 2016.*   *   *Read FAQ on review of mortgage measures.View infographic on review of mortgage measuresThe Central Bank Commission met today to conclude its consideration of the review of themortgage measures.The Central Bank introduced the measures in February 2015 as part of our role as the nationalmacroprudential authority for Ireland, and our mission to safeguard stability and protectconsumers.Macroprudential policy is about limiting risk to the financial system as a whole. The mortgagemeasures are centrally important in achieving this objective.Every person has a stake in this. The mortgage measures are designed to ensure borrowerresilience, but they are also designed to ensure banks lend sensibly, and that excess credit doesnot build up within the Irish financial system.In order words, the measures serve a wider purpose – to guard against another credit-fuelledcrisis.The Central Bank first introduced the measures in February 2015. We made clear at the timethat they would be assessed on a regular basis, but that, given their importance, there wouldneed to be firm evidence for any changes.Today’s review is based on wide-ranging analysis by the staff of the Central Bank and hasbenefited from the approximately fifty external submissions we received from our publicconsultation process over the summer. Overall, the review has confirmed that the mortgage measures have been successfullyimplemented – the banks are operating within the measures, leading to sensible lending patterns,which in turn are contributing to financial stability.The overall framework is appropriate.The evidence shows that the probability of default for mortgages taken out under the measures islower. Put simply, those who bought properties under the measures are better prepared tomanage their mortgage payments in the event of a future downturn in the economy.The framework requires borrowers to satisfy two requirements.First, a household can borrow a maximum of 3.5 times its gross annual income (known as theloan to income, or LTI, ratio). This anchor remains firmly in place and is key to ensuring thatmortgage commitments are not too high relative to income levels. Second, a household must provide a sufficient deposit to ensure that the ratio of the mortgageloan to the value of the house (the loan to value, or LTV, ratio) is not too high.  Excessively-highLTV ratios fail to provide sufficient insulation in the event of a downturn in house prices, pushingborrowers into negative equity and raising default risk. 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Today, we are announcing some limited refinements to improve the effectiveness andsustainability of the LTV regulations, in order to ensure a more durable framework for the long-term.All first-time buyers will now be required to provide a minimum deposit of 10 per cent of the valueof the property, with the LTV ceiling set at 90 per cent.This replaces the current system whereby a deposit of 10 per cent was required on the first€220,000 of the price of a property and 20 per cent on the balance above €220,000. The requirement for second and subsequent buyers to provide a minimum deposit of 20 per centwhen taking out a mortgage remains unchanged. The buy-to-let regulations also remain unchanged, requiring investors to raise a 30 per centminimum deposit.The change for first-time buyers is motivated by two main factors.First, the current system is complex and would require regular updating, given that the economicand financial impact of the €220,000 threshold would necessarily shift in line with the evolution ofincomes, house prices and other factors.Under the new system, the measures should require adjustments only if wider macro-financialconditions – such as material shifts in credit patterns or financial stability conditions – warrantrevisions.As an illustration, this simplification shifts the LTV ceiling for a €300,000 mortgage from 87.3 percent under the previous system to 90 per cent.Second, there was evidence at the time of the introduction of the measures showing that first-time buyers defaulted less than second-time and subsequent buyers, with the differential indefault probabilities especially strong in the case of lower-valued properties.However, the most recent data show that the differential in default probabilities is no longerweaker for higher-value homes than for lower-valued homes, eliminating an important justificationfor the current asymmetric treatment of lower-valued and higher-valued properties in the LTVregulations.We are also refining the degree to which lenders can grant loans in excess of the LTV limits for alimited percentage of their loan books. Providing some capacity to lend in excess of the LTV limits allows banks to take into account thespecific circumstances of individual borrowers, which sometimes may justify a higher LTV ratio.There will now be separate allowances for first-time buyers and second and subsequent buyers.Twenty per cent of the value of new lending to second and subsequent buyers will now beallowed above the 80 per cent LTV limit for this group, while just five per cent of the value of newlending to first-time buyers will be allowed above this cohort’s 90 per cent LTV limit. Separate allowances for the two groups will ensure there is not excessive lending above thelimits to either cohort. And, in the long term, it will give the Central Bank flexibility to adjust thesespecific limits in a calibrated way if threats to financial stability emerge.The 20 per cent allowance for banks to lend in excess of the LTI ceiling remains unchanged.Finally, we have also decided to extend the current valuation period from two months to four 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
months, to take account of the fact that some sales can take longer than the average of threemonths.It is critically important to appreciate that our framework sets limits on the size of mortgages: theLTI and LTV ratios are not targets but ceilings.In buying a home, households should take into account the risk protections offered by higherdeposits, meaning they have less reliance on mortgage debt.Equally, lenders should assess the loan-bearing capacity of each mortgage customer andrestrict the size of the mortgage if indicated by the credit risk analysis.Today’s revisions do raise the maximum loan size for first-time buyers seeking to buy homesabove €220,000 in value.  However, it is important to bear in mind several contextual factors.  First, borrowers also have to satisfy the LTI requirement: for many households, this will limit thecapacity to increase the mortgage size.Second, under the current system, a significant fraction of first-time buyers in this category werereceiving allowances, such that the actual LTV ratios were not far below the new 90 per centlimit.Under the new system, a maximum of only 5 per cent of new loans to first-time buyers canexceed the LTV ceiling.Third, many first-time buyers opt for mortgage loans below the LTV ceiling: for loans above€220,000 in value, 73 per cent of borrowers put down a deposit in excess of the requiredminimum.Fourth, to the extent that the revisions lead to an increase in aggregate mortgage credit volumes,this should be interpreted in the context of the subdued level of lending in the aftermath of thecrisis.Fifth, our framework is designed to avoid spiral dynamics between house prices and creditvolumes.Since the mortgage measures were initially flagged in late 2014, there has been a sharpmoderation in expectations for annual gains in house prices, since it is widely understood thatpersistently-high rates of increase in house prices are not likely in a system in which measuresplace ceilings on LTI and LTV ratios.Moreover, our macroprudential regulations can be tightened if there is emerging evidence ofelevated risks in the mortgage market.Finally, it is important to appreciate that many factors influence the dynamics of house prices. While rising incomes typically might support some gain in house prices, the prospect of futureexpansion in housing supply and tightening in the global funding conditions for lenders aresignificant factors that may place downward pressure on house prices over the medium term. The range of uncertainty about the future path for house prices is an important risk factor thatmotivates the need for ceilings on LTI and LTV ratios.These refinements will improve the design of the framework and will take effect from January 1,2017.Looking to the future, the revised framework should require adjustments only if there are material 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
changes to the macro-financial environment that require a tightening or loosening of thesemeasures. It is important to appreciate that saving a deposit for a house is a basic requirement that ensuresbetter long-term outcomes both for the borrower and the lender, in terms of more affordablemortgages and lower credit risk.Everybody gains from the prudent borrowing and lending patterns that are essential for a stablefinancial system: our mortgage measures are designed to deliver this objective. 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
    Keynote speech by Klaas Knot “Innovation in Finance makes Africa work!” at conference “Africa Works!”, Amsterdam, Royal Tropical Institute, 10 November 2016  Amsterdam, Royal Tropical Institute – Innovations in finance will help Africa get on in the world, especially when combined with a further strengthening of institutions. This was the message Klaas Knot conveyed in his speech marking the opening of the two-day conference “Africa Works!  See below for the full speechL   Ladies and gentlemen,  I’m delighted to speak here today. How could I not be?  For one, the purpose of this conference is to inform, inspire, connect and catalyse the Dutch private sector with Africa’s business opportunities.  This is something I wholeheartedly support.  For if there’s been one continent that has seen many changes for the better in the last two decades, it is Africa!   Indeed, only 16 years ago, The Economist portrayed Africa as the “Hopeless Continent”, a nickname which would make every businessman or woman hesitant to invest. In less than one-and-a-half decennium, The Economist changed its mind and came up with the pet name “Hopeful Continent”.  What made The Economist, like many others, change its mind?  Well, basically two developments, I think.  First, its economic achievements. The years since the turn of the millennium have marked a period of sustained economic growth for the African continent.  Importantly, this boom has been shared by all countries in Africa, except for 
 a few countries where armed conflicts took place.   Admittedly, for some larger commodity-exporting African countries, such as Nigeria or Angola, the boom has been driven largely by the commodity super-cycle. We, in the Netherlands, are well aware that natural resources can be a mixed blessing for an economy. It’s what earned this phenomenon the nickname “Dutch Disease”!, referring to the possible decline in competitiveness following the appreciation of our currency after the discovery of natural gas resources in the North Sea.  The currently declining economic conditions in these commodity-exporting countries seem to illustrate that the “results of the past are no guarantee for the future”.   But this doesn’t take away the fact that the lives of many Africans have started to change as a result of the “African economic boom”, lifting millions of people out of direct poverty and gradually creating a rising well-educated middle class.  And, while the outlook for the commodity-exporters may have darkened, the outlook for the non-commodity exporters remains bright, with growth rates of more than 6 percent in countries such as Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Senegal.  The other development that altered many people’s view of Africa, were the political and security-related improvements.  While Africa is, unfortunately, still the continent where most conflicts take place, the absolute number of conflicts in Africa has declined over the past 25 years.   Many of the wars of the 1990s have ended, and despite some ongoing and intensifying conflicts in North Africa and the Middle East, overall Africa nowadays seems to be more peaceful than in the early 1990s.  Moreover, since the start of this millennium democratic governance has improved and institutional reforms have taken place in many countries, be it from a low level.  At the same time, business environments have taken a turn for the better.  
  While the starting point was perhaps less than auspicious, it is very encouraging to see that African countries as Benin and Senegal nowadays often appear among the global top 10 reformers  in the  World Bank’s  “Ease of Doing Business” indicators.  Due to these promising developments, Africa has become a region that boasts strong business opportunities, both for African entrepreneurs and for foreign ones.  Also Dutch firms are increasingly aware of these opportunities.  For instance, nowadays more than 2,000 Dutch firms are doing business in Africa, ranging from smaller – mainly trade-oriented – companies to major Dutch companies such as Heineken, Unilever and Philips.    Africa is also increasingly important for Dutch exports and imports.  Among the 20 most important emerging countries to which Dutch exports are destined, 9 are situated in Africa, with Togo, Ghana and Senegal even in the top 5. And, according to Statistics Netherlands, about 70 percent of our imported roses come from Africa, where, by the way, also  Dutch rose growers are active.  Certainly, Africa works for Dutch entrepreneurs!The second reason why I am delighted to be here is the theme of the conference: Innovation in Finance. In my view, this is a very well-chosen topic.  New technologies are changing our lives and our industries.  Also finance is undergoing a rapid transformation, most visibly in the field of payment transfers, but also in lending, insurance and, importantly, remittances.  The advent of smart phones, for instance, has led to the development of new mobile wallets, which makes it easy to “send money home”:  Goodbye long unsafe travels, hello smart phones!   Innovations in finance offer new opportunities to the financial sector.  This may especially be the case in Africa, where these innovations are perhaps less of a “threat” to the traditional banking sector than in “overbanked” Europe. But even more important in my view are the benefits 
 of innovation for consumers and businesses.  New technology in finance brings more choice, lower costs and greater convenience for users.   This not only holds for advanced countries with well-developed banking sectors, but certainly also for Africa with its many remote areas and still many “unbanked” inhabitants.  Indeed, a sustainable and prudent development and use of new technologies in finance will help to further promote financial inclusion in Africa.  And this is of vital importance.  For this relationship between financial inclusion and economic growth has been clearly established time and again. Financial services are the lifeblood of an economy. Access to financial services allows households to smooth out consumption and invest in their future. For businesses, access to credit enables them to expand and to create jobs. Financial inclusion, in short, is one key for promoting strong and stable economic growth.   Innovations in finance are perhaps the most promising way to advance financial inclusion. That is why it is so important that new technologies in finance are being exploited in Africa, as this will help unlock the continent’s massive “unbanked” population.   For companies involved in supplying this new type of services this implies that they will continuously need to embrace innovative strategies.  In this way, they will be able to shape financial products to fit consumers’ rising financial sophistication needs. Recent history suggests that African companies are able to do so quite successfully.   Kenya, for instance, has led the world in innovative financial services based on mobile telephony by introducing M-PESA and M-PESA-derived systems such as M-Shwari and M-Kesho. This has made several financial services available to anyone with a mobile phone at a fraction of the cost.   Exploiting innovations in finance is one. Strengthening institutions is the other. One of the most fundamental questions in economic science is “why 
 are some countries richer than others”?  Differences in the quality of legal, political and educational institutions between countries turns out to be an important part of the answer.   Indeed, the strengthening of such institutions often goes hand in hand with higher economic growth: countries with stronger institutions experience stronger economic growth compared to countries with weaker institutions.  There are several reasons why this turns out to be the case.  Strong institutions provide for the protection of property rights; foster contract enforcement; create a healthy investment climate and help the development of abilities. This makes for an economic environment in which individuals and firms can cooperate, to everyone’s benefit. And, importantly, an environment in which innovations in finance can develop and thrive.  Therefore, strong institutions will enable countries to realize the full benefits of innovations in finance.   Research by the IMF and the World Bank shows that there is still plenty of room for Africa on this front. Continuing efforts to further strengthen institutions are therefore highly needed.  Personally, as an economist, I consider tackling deficiencies in property rights protection as the key challenge for African countries.   After all, as several studies have shown, well-defined and strongly protected property rights go hand in hand with economic growth and development.   Let me conclude.  I am optimistic on Africa. Innovations in finance will help Africa get on in the world, especially when combined with a further strengthening of institutions.  It goes without saying that this will also create new opportunities for Dutch firms and entrepreneurs. I hope that this conference will contribute to exploiting these opportunities yet further.  I thank you for your attention and wish you a fruitful conference!   
Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Enterprise and technologicalinnovation - improving lives in SingaporeSpeech by Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, atthe FinTech Awards, Singapore, 17 November 2016.*   *   *Mr Wee Ee Cheong, Chairman, ABS and CEO, UOBDistinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,1   Thank you for joining us here at our inaugural FinTech Awards prize presentation ceremony.2   Let me begin by thanking the participating teams, as well as the international cast of judgeswho helped evaluate the entries, for their time and inspiring work.3   This evening, we are honouring winners from two competitions organised as part of theinaugural Singapore FinTech Festival: the Global FinTech Hackcelerator and the FinTechAwards.The Global FinTech Hackcelerator attracted a total of 655 submissions from more than 50countries. They produced solutions to address some of the 100 problem statements that thefinancial sector had put out.The FinTech Awards recognises innovative FinTech solutions that have actually beenimplemented by financial sector players and technology companies. We received 210entries, running the gamut from cyber security to payments.4   We celebrate the winning entries this evening. But equally, we are celebrating the spirit ofinnovation that each of the participants in these competitions demonstrated. They represent the passion to make things better, to create value for firms in a way thatgives customers value, and ultimately, to find innovative ways to improve everyday life.That is the FinTech spirit.5   These last four days of the FinTech Festival, there has been much discussion abouttechnology, regulation, infrastructure, markets, funding.6   Tonight, I would like to speak briefly on the critical people factor – not just for success inFinTech but more broadly in the innovation-driven economy of tomorrow:people having that spirit of enterprise and a willingness to be different; andpeople developing deep skills, skills relevant to the market, and a keenness to learncontinuously.7   That’s at the heart of what it takes for us to sustain and grow the FinTech movement – theentrepreneurial desire to find new ways, even disruptive ways, and the deep skills andcontinuous learning that we need to power innovation.Enterprise and innovation8   We are already seeing successes, and we want to provide a fertile ground for more newideas and solutions to keep cropping up. MAS has a regulatory sandbox framework to make iteasier for FinTech start-ups to test their business models. There are also various sources ofgovernment funding available for start-ups:  1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
MAS will provide strong support for ‘proof of concept’ trials. We will fund 50% of thecosts, up to a maximum of S$200,000 per project, for Singapore-based trials ofpromising FinTech ideas. The grant scheme is aimed at ideas that can benefit not justan individual financial institution or start-up, but the financial system at large, inSingapore or abroad.This is in addition to our other Government support schemes that FinTech players canbenefit from:i) SPRING Singapore will provide Singaporean start-ups grants matching S$7 for every S$3raised, up to a cap of S$50,000.ii) The National Research Foundation will co-invest, together with a technology incubator, upto 85% of an investment into a Singapore-based start-up.Deep skills and continuous learning9   Not all of us can be entrepreneurs.  But we all have to build the skills and expertise necessaryto power the digital economy.  The financial sector in particular has to build new capabilities. 10   We are often caught up in speculation as to which jobs technology will destroy and whatkinds of new jobs it will create. The likelihood is that many jobs will remain but most jobs willbe transformed, requiring new skills and capabilities to make the most of newtechnologies.11   In the financial sector, there is already growing need for skills in data analytics, in digital andmobile user interfaces, and in application development, in addition to core finance skills.Take for example bank relationship managers who provide wealth management advisoryservices. They are unlikely to be completely replaced by robo-advisers.But relationship managers will increasingly use data analytics tools to analyse client profilesand offer better, customised financial solutions.12   We are working to build up the skills and competencies in needed in the new world offinance, starting with the curriculum in our tertiary educational institutions, work placementprogrammes, and extending through to mid-career retraining and life-long learning.13   First, getting our students to be ready for FinTech.14   MAS is working with the five local polytechnics to review and enhance their curricula, forexample to develop skillsets in agile software development, mobile application development,cloud application deployment, and data analytics.15   We are also working with the polytechnics to increase the number of FinTech internshipsand joint projects with the FinTech community so that students can apply their skills and gainhands-on experience.In October, we embarked on the “PolyFinTech 100” initiative to secure 100 FinTech mentorsand 100 FinTech internships for 2017. I am pleased to announce that we have securedthese targets in the short span of a month.More than 2,500 students in the banking and IT-related courses in the polytechnics eachyear are expected to benefit from these initiatives.16   MAS is also partnering with the universities and polytechnics to expose students toperspectives from industry practitioners 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Next year, we will launch the MAS Tech Talks, a series of talks by FinTechprofessionals to share about their experiences in the industry. This will give students tobetter understand job opportunities available in FinTech and define their career aspirations.17   Second, as part of our broader SkillsFuture national initiative, MAS is partnering various otherplayers to enhance continuous learning. We must in particular equip financial professionalswith stronger digital skillsets:The Financial IT Academy (FITA) is delivering a digital transformation programme for mid-careers that includes topics such as data analytics and agile development, to deliversoftware faster and with high quality.The Institute of Banking and Finance (IBF) will be offering new learning modules on a set ofcore capabilities covering data science, human-centric design, agile thinking, and cyber-riskawareness.To develop the cyber security talent pool in Singapore, the Info-comm & Media DevelopmentAuthority (IMDA) and the Cyber Security Agency (CSA) have introduced the Cyber SecurityAssociates and Technologists (CSAT) Programme.The University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School will also be launching a newexecutive education programme in Singapore focused on financial innovation.i) Called the Wharton FinTech Innovation Program for Financial Institutions, it is expected tolaunch in the second quarter of next year.ii) The Program aims to expose senior managers in incumbent financial institutions tocurrent topics in FinTech.iii) Participants will learn to how to grapple with disruptive trends, and drive change andinnovation across their organisations to compete in the FinTech space.We also want to ensure that professionals trained in ICT skills have good placementoutcomes in the financial sector. We are doing this through the recently-formed FinanceCommittee of the Technology Skills Accelerator, or TeSA, programme.i) TeSA aims to identify specific ICT skills in demand and work with training providers tomeet these demands.ii) For example, the US-based Byte Academy has recently set up in Singapore, andhas come on board IMDA’s Tech Immersion and Placement Programme (TIPP). Bytewill offer a series of intensive courses on FinTech and data science to ‘convert’ non-ICT professionals to meet the software and programming needs of the industry.18   I encourage all companies, both start-ups and incumbents, and individuals, to tap on theseinitiatives and invest in the skills of the future.19   We cannot talk about expertise without talking about learning. And learning, unlearning andre-learning is what the game is about in the economy that we are creating together.20   We need to learn more about the things we do not know, and to constantly update ourknowledge in familiar areas. In every job, from the CEOs to the fresh entrant from school.21   We never know where our learning journey will take us, but it usually takes us somewherebetter. Take for example Vernon Heng, 32. After university, he worked overseas in a variety of fields,including construction, sales and marketing and supply chain.1 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
When he decided to return home to Singapore and explore new career options, his brother,a user experience (UX) designer, encouraged him to consider the field.He enrolled in a UX course at General Assembly under IMDA’s TIP Programme, and foundhimself enjoying every step of the process.Today, he is a UX designer at the Decision Science Agency and is also developing an app tohelp youths discover their talents and passions by picking up new skills through their peers.As Vernon puts it: “Always be open to learning something new. You never know where itmight take you.”Conclusion22   I would like to offer once again my heartfelt congratulations to tonight’s winners, and my bestwishes to all participants of both the Awards and the Hackcelerator. Let’s continue our journeytogether. CSAT provides co-funding to organisations who wish to send their staff for specialised cyber security training inareas such as threat intelligence analysis and digital forensics investigation.1 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Jacqueline Loh: Strengthening Asia's bond marketsKeynote address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority ofSingapore, at the Asia Securities Industry & Financial Markets Association's Annual Conference,Singapore, 17 November 2016.*   *   *Andrew Ng – Chairman, ASIFMAMark Austen – CEO, ASIFMAGreg Medcraft – Chairman, Australian Securities and Investments Commission, and my fellowkeynote speakerFellow regulators and central bankersDistinguished guestsLadies and gentlemen 1     It is my pleasure to join you this afternoon at the 10th ASIFMA Annual Conference.2     When I last spoke here two years ago, the global economy was confronted by what the IMFdescribed as “legacies, clouds and uncertainties”, and was forecast to grow at just 3.3%.  Twoyears on, in 2016, the IMF has lowered its forecast for the current year further to 3.1%, reflectinga more subdued outlook for advanced economies, before recovering to 3.4% in 2017.  This isbelow the immediate pre-GFC average of 4.2% over 1998–2007, though more aligned with itslong-term average of 3.1% over 1980–1998.3     The medium-term growth story for Asia is bright.  The IMF’s outlook for the next five years isfor emerging and developing Asia to grow by a robust 6.3%, well above the forecast for the US(1.9%), Europe (1.5%) and Japan (0.5%), and will underpin the higher investment returns in thispart of the world.  4     Asia’s bond markets have softened in recent years but has much potential alongside itsrelatively strong economic growth outlook.  Total debt issuance last year was USD 1.25 trillion,about 30% lower compared to 2013.  Morgan Stanley and Oliver Wyman estimate that industrybalance sheets committed to bonds, foreign exchange and commodities contracted 25% overthe past five years owing to tighter post-crisis regulations, and could decline another 10% in thenext three to four years, with banks looking to trim capacity to improve returns on risk-weightedassets as regulatory costs and challenging markets continue to drag on returns.5     However, the story going forward is more upbeat. Infrastructure and sustainable financingoffer opportunities for investors.  Asia will need USD 8 trillion of infrastructure by 2020, andwithin that, ASEAN will need USD 110 billion a year in infrastructure investment through2025. The World Bank Group has pledged to support climate-friendly development with USD 16billion per annum in direct funding and mobilised USD 13 billion in external private sector capitalannually by 2020.  Technology and innovation will underpin and drive such growth opportunities. The inaugural Singapore FinTech Festival running this week demonstrates the tremendouspotential that technology holds for capital markets to seize these opportunities and helps us copewith the market challenges.6     The ASIFMA conference programme reflects these trends, opportunities and challenges.Tomorrow’s concurrent panels will cover macro and market developments in China, India andASEAN, as well as opportunities in infrastructure financing, sustainable financing, big data and123456 1 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
cyber security. I hope to touch on some of the topics, and leave you with some thoughts as yougo about today’s and tomorrow’s sessions. The last decade7     As we celebrate ASIFMA’s 10th anniversary this year, let us reflect on how far Asia’s capitalmarkets have grown over the past decade: a. Ten years ago, only two Asian stock exchanges ranked in the world’stop ten by market capitalisation.  Today, four out of the ten largestexchanges are in Asia.  Asia contributes nearly half of the total numberof IPOs globally, compared to 28% a decade ago.  The value of sharetrading in Asia grew 80% over the past ten years, almost double thepace worldwide (41%).b. Asia’s bond markets grew to USD 4.7 trillion in 2015 from about USD700 billion ten years ago, representing an annualised growth rate of24%.  As a result, Asia’s share of the global bond market has increasedsignificantly, from just 2% in 2006 to 9% in 2015.8     The developments are being supported by two trends:a. On the demand side, Asia’s middle class is growing, per-capitaincomes are rising, and saving rates remain high.  The AsianDevelopment Bank estimates that 64% of ASEAN, 79% of China and69% of India populations will move into the middle-income bracketbetween 2010 and 2030.  This reflects a more than three-foldincrease to 3.6 billion persons in 2030, and will continue to drive theneed for long-term investment for retirement.  b. On the supply side, the major markets China, India and ASEAN havemade good progress in market reforms and cross-borderconnectivity. Allow me to elaborate on some recent measures.  9     China has facilitated greater cross-border investment flows and allowed for more cross-border market activities.  In the past year alone, China liberalised access to the interbank bondmarket to foreign financial institutions and institutional investors. Offshore corporates can nowtap the onshore market for Panda bond issuances, while Chinese corporates in certain parts ofChina – such as Chongqing, Suzhou and Tianjin – can issue bonds in offshore markets andrepatriate the proceeds to support onshore economic activities.10     India has likewise liberalised cross-border capital market activities. Indian banks andcorporates are now allowed to issue Rupee-denominated bonds overseas as part of theirexternal commercial borrowings which enables Indian issuers to diversify their funding base andachieve more efficient cost of funding. 11     In ASEAN, capital market development and integration efforts are underway.  The ASEANTrading Link provides investors with a single screen to access stock exchanges in Malaysia,Thailand and Singapore.  These three jurisdictions have also adopted fully harmonisedprospectus disclosure requirements known as the ASEAN Disclosure Standards, which facilitatethe multi-jurisdictional offering of equity as well as debt. The ASEAN Collective InvestmentFramework (CIS) was launched in 2014 to facilitate cross-border offering of CIS to retailinvestors in Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand, under a streamlined authorisation process.  Atotal of 12 funds are now available under the Framework. Together, these initiatives benefit bothissuers and investors by streamlining and lowering the cost of access to capital and investment,7891011 2 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
and help to recycle capital within the region.12     Singapore’s capital markets have likewise developed well on the back of Asia’s growth andcapital market liberalisation:a. Bonds.  The size of the corporate bond market grew 2% year-on-year to reach SGD 315 billion in 2015 comprising SGD 140 billion inSingapore Dollar bonds and SGD 175 billion in non-Singapore Dollarbonds. This represents an annualised growth rate of 12% over the pastfive years.  The market serves a diverse range of issuers, raising fundsin various currencies and instruments, including:(i)  One, Covered Bonds:  DBS issued the first coveredbond of USD 1 billion in July 2015.  UOB is the first globalissuer to publish its Harmonised Transparency Template(HTT) which was developed by the European CoveredBond Council, and aims to promote an enhanced level oftransparency and comparability for covered bondinvestors.  (ii) Two, Masala Bonds:  Following India’s liberalisation, asI mentioned earlier, three Masala bonds were issued inSingapore and listed on SGX this year: Adani Transmission,NTPC Limited and Indiabulls Housing Finance.  They alsorepresent the world’s first green corporate Masala bond andfirst privately-owned enterprise Masala bonds.(iii) Lastly, Green Bonds:  To meet the demands of anexpanding pool of socially responsible investors, aSingapore property company is set to roll out the first greenbond in Singapore.b.  Foreign Exchange.  A well-functioning bond market serving a broadspectrum of international issuers and investors needs to be supportedby a deep foreign exchange market, and Singapore is the largest foreignexchange market in Asia and the third largest globally.  Based on thetriennial survey by the Bank for International Settlements, average dailyturnover reached USD 517 billion in April 2016, a 35% increase fromthree years ago. Our share of global market has increased from 6% to8%.  Singapore exchanges offer a suite of 21 Asian FX currency futuresand option contracts. The Singapore Exchange’s Indian Rupee andRenminbi futures contracts are amongst the most liquid globally.The next decade13     As we chart our next lap in developing Asia’s capital markets, we need to take into accounttrends and driving forces that will shape capital markets in the years ahead.  Let me highlightthree of them:14     First, technology is transforming capital markets in significant ways. a. This is most obvious in foreign exchange, which is the mostadvanced in contract standardisation and market practices. Newelectronic trading platforms are blooming alongside mature systems,and are beginning to enter emerging markets. Technology is alsoenabling OTC platforms to clear on exchanges, and for exchange-12 3 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
traded futures to be distributed on OTC platforms. b. Even in bond markets, technology is being used to improve pre-market price transparency by pulling price feeds from tradersdirectly. To ameliorate the impact of bank balance sheets shrinking,companies are using technology to experiment with bringing buy-sideliquidity into secondary markets.  The challenge, as many haveobserved, is how these solutions can help to maintain liquidity in timesof market volatility.15     Second, companies are staying private for longer. According to McKinsey, in the US whichdrove the dot-com boom and is driving the “unicorn” and “decacorn” phenomenon, the averageage of technology companies going public in 2014 was 11 years, up from 4 years in 1999. Thishas been enabled by the prolonged period of low yields, which has driven institutional investors toseek higher returns from liquidity and credit risk in private markets.  McKinsey also found that 150software companies were able to reach USD 10 billion in value through private financing in 2015,compared to just 10 in 2011. In Singapore, private equity assets under management grew 24%per annum on average for the last five years to over USD 100 billion in 2015. This creates a rolefor industry bodies like ASIFMA, which are set up around public markets like credit and equity, tosupport companies on their longer journey in private markets, and introduce the benefits ofmarket transparency and market discipline while the companies remain private.16     Third, underlying macro trends are supportive of investment continuing to flow fromDeveloped Markets to Emerging Markets.  On the one hand, accommodative monetary policiesin developed economies will drive an ongoing search for relative yield in emerging markets,including in Asia.  On the other hand, emerging and developing Asia are expected to grow morethan three times as quickly as advanced economies. 17     In order for Asia to fully reap the fruits of these favourable macro trends, it will need to raisethe needed long-term capital for sustainable growth, including by further strengthening its bondmarkets.  Today, I will touch on three areas: first, a new Asian Bond Grant to support a broaderbase of Asian issuers; second, efforts to encourage rated issuances; and lastly, supportingsecondary market liquidity. Let me start first with the Asian Bond Grant initiative.Measures to strengthen Asia’s bond marketsIntroducing the Asian Bond Grant18     In many ways, Singapore has always been a bridge between Asia and the rest of the world,whether as an entry point for global investors looking into Asia or as a launchpad for Asiancompanies seeking to regionalise and globalise.  We have had some success in developing theAsian G3 bond market, but Asian local currency issuances have room to grow.  When I spokehere two years ago on integrating Asia’s capital markets, it was against the context that themarkets were fragmented on several dimensions: laws, currencies, market practices as well asmarket infrastructure.  Investors need to understand each market and each set of laws beforeinvesting.  Likewise, Asian companies seeking to raise international capital, on top of domesticcapital, may need to obtain international ratings and international documentation, and theserequire international lawyers and accountants, and international roadshows.  19     Singapore already offers an excellent ecosystem of financial institutions, professionalservices like legal and accounting, credit rating agencies, and market infrastructure for Asiancompanies to issue, market, list and trade their bonds.  To make it more attractive for Asianissuers to raise international capital in Singapore and benefit from the ecosystem here, we willintroduce an Asian Bond Grant scheme next year.  The scheme aims to broaden the base ofissuers in our bond market, which will add to the breadth and diversity of debt instruments for the1314 4 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
investing community.  Qualifying Asian issuances will be able to offset up to 50% of one-timeissuance costs such as international legal fees, arranger fees and credit rating fees.  We haveconsulted with local market participants on various aspects of the scheme to ensure a smoothimplementation.  I am glad to say that the industry has been supportive of this initiative, andtogether we are confident that this will enhance Singapore’s value proposition.Encouraging rated issuances20     Even as we draw Asian issuers to Singapore, we want to encourage these issuers to berated.  Credit ratings improve general market transparency by providing independent andcomparable assessments of the credit worthiness of issuers.  Together with business andfinancial information provided in the offering documents or company announcements, creditratings can assist investors to better understand the issuer’s business and financial health. Issuers that are rated, in comparison, also gain access to a broader investor base, as manyinstitutional mandates invest only in rated bonds.  To encourage rated issuances, rated issuerswill be eligible for a larger grant quantum under the Asian Bond Grant.21     Ratings can also benefit bond issuers.  In the Singapore Dollar bond market, we have beenencouraging frequent bond issuers to obtain credit ratings. The Housing and Development Board(HDB) is an example of a frequent domestic issuer that recently obtained a rating and benefitedfrom tighter issuance spreads.  About 40% of outstanding Singapore Dollar bonds are rated,and we would like to see this share go up.  To give this another boost, we are considering waysto nurture a healthy and sustainable credit rating culture in our bond market.  For instance, underthe Asian Bond Grant scheme, for Singapore Dollar bonds, only rated issuances would beeligible.  Another possibility we are considering is to help existing issuers offset the costs inobtaining a credit rating.22     Even as we encourage more rated issuances, I must caution against basing investmentdecisions solely on ratings.  Regardless of whether a bond is rated or not, investors need tomake their own credit assessments.  Perhaps more importantly, and as the saying “do not put allour eggs in one basket” goes, the key to long-term investing is diversification and avoidingconcentrated exposures to any one security.  This approach is inherent in the way institutionalinvestors manage portfolios – broad diversification across asset classes, sectors andsecurities. 23     Individual investors building their own investment portfolios should take special care todiversify and avoid concentrated exposure to any one investment or issuer.  One way forindividual investors to gain exposure to a diversified portfolio of bonds in a cost-efficient manneris to invest through bond funds.  MAS has for many years promoted the development of indexbond funds in the regional markets, through the Asian Bond Fund (ABF) initiative led by theEMEAP Group.  Today, there are many such offerings, some of which can be bought and soldthrough the exchange as exchange-traded funds (ETFs).  We encourage fund managers toincrease the number and variety of bond funds and ETFs available to individual investors.Supporting secondary market liquidity24     Let me now turn from our efforts in the primary market to secondary market liquidity. Market participants generally agree that bond market liquidity has become more challenging. This is the case globally but also in Singapore. Banks continue to provide prices for a majority ofbonds issued here, although the amounts they are willing to transact in, may be smaller forweaker credits and smaller issuances.25     A functioning secondary market is critical for the sustainable growth of the bond market.  Todeepen the secondary market, MAS has been working with the industry on several initiatives overthe years.  For example, to improve price transparency, we collaborated with banks and serviceproviders, such as Bloomberg and Markit, to make available end-of-day corporate bond prices on15 5 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
their platforms.  Last year, MAS launched the Securities Repo Facility, under which eligible bankscan borrow certain Singapore Dollar corporate bonds via repo transactions to facilitate theirmarket making activities.  These efforts will take time to bear fruit.  We are also engaginginvestors, issuers and intermediaries to assess if more can be done to facilitate an active repomarket and whether this will help deepen liquidity in bond markets.26     Before I conclude, I should address the issue of defaults and restructuring exercises in thedomestic bond market recently.  These have so far mostly been from the oil and gas sector, andreflects the protracted weakness in the sector arising from a slump in energy prices.  Risingdefaults over the late part of the credit cycle and difficulties in particular sectors are to beexpected, but MAS’ stress test suggests that most corporates in Singapore remain fairly resilient,and banks’ exposures to weaker issuers are likely to be manageable.  The key here again is toensure that one has a diversified portfolio. Following the recent restructurings and defaults, wehave also received feedback calling for a review of the regulations and market practices aroundthe Singapore bond market.  Some ideas include enhancing sales practices, recourse forinvestors when a bond defaults, and the need for credit ratings. We are considering thesefeedback and will respond soon.Conclusion27     To sum up, Asia’s capital markets have enjoyed a very good run, owing to a confluence ofmacroeconomic fundamentals and policy liberalisation. ASIFMA has supported that journey overthe past ten years by improving transparency through market surveys, advocating innovativesolutions through white papers and roadmaps, and building consensus on best practices throughevents like these and collaboration with other industry bodies.28     The economic opportunities in Asia are immense, and despite the cyclical slowdown, theregion’s financing needs will continue to grow.  Asia needs to continue strengthening its capitalmarkets, especially its bond markets.  Singapore will support Asia’s bond market by introducing anew Asian Bond Grant scheme, encouraging rated issuances, and supporting secondary marketliquidity.29     Please enjoy the rest of the conference. Thank you.IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2014IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2016Dealogic data“Learning to Live with Less Liquidity”, Morgan Stanley and Oliver Wyman, 13 March 2016“Infrastructure for a seamless Asia”, Asian Development Bank, 2009 "The ASEAN Investment Report 2015 Infrastructure Investment and Connectivity”, the ASEAN Secretariat andUNCTAD, November 2015 World Federation of Exchanges 2015 and 2006 data“EY Global IPO Trends”, Ernst & Young, 2006–2015 and “IPO Watch, Asia”, PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2007–2014World Federation of Exchanges 2015 and 2006 dataDealogic data“ASEAN, PRC and India”, Asian Development Bank, 2014“United Overseas Bank (UOB) publishes the first global Covered Bond Label Harmonised Transparency123456789101112 6 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
Template”, Covered Bond Label, 19 January 2013 “Grow fast or die slow: why unicorns are staying private”, Mckinsey & Company, May 2016 IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2016 MAS estimates as at 30 September 2016131415 7 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
For release on delivery 1:30 p.m. EST  December 19, 2016         Commencement Remarks    by  Janet L. Yellen   Chair   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System  at  University of Baltimore 2016 Midyear Commencement    Baltimore, Maryland         December 19, 2016  
 Thank you, President Schmoke, for this award and for the opportunity to be here today to offer my congratulations to the members of the Class of 2016.  I would also like to recognize the vital support students have received from family, friends, and others, many of whom are here to share this great occasion.   In a moment, I will explain why I am particularly proud and honored to be speaking to the new graduates of this university, but first I’d like to address students on a topic that I expect is on the minds of many of you, which is the job market. The short version of what I have to say is that while I expect workers will continue to face some challenges in the coming years, I believe, for two reasons, that the job prospects and career opportunities for new graduates at this time are very good.  First, after years of a slow economic recovery, you are entering the strongest job market in nearly a decade.  The unemployment rate, at 4.6 percent, is near what it was before the recession.  This is a level that has been associated with good job opportunities.  Job creation is continuing at a steady pace; the layoff rate is low; and job openings are up over the past couple years, which is another sign of a healthy job market.  There are also indications that wage growth is picking up, and weekly earnings for younger workers have made strong gains over the past couple of years.  That is probably one reason why younger workers reported feeling significantly more optimistic about the job market compared with 2013, according to a survey published just today by the Federal Reserve.1 Challenges do remain.  The economy is growing more slowly than in past recoveries, and productivity growth, which is a major influence on wages, has been disappointing.                                                    1 See Board of Governors (2016).  In a survey conducted in 2015, 61 percent of young adults reported feeling optimistic about job opportunities, compared with 45 percent who felt that way in 2013.  
 - 2 - But it also looks like the economic gains of the past few years are finally raising living standards for most people.  Median household income grew and poverty fell significantly in 2015, although these measures were still lagging their levels from before the recession.2  An improving economy may be especially important for you, as new graduates.  Those who graduate and enter the workforce during a strong economy are more likely to find employment, remain employed, and enjoy persistently higher earnings.3 The second reason for optimism is that you have already done the one thing that research shows is most important to a successful and stable working life:  earning the degrees you will receive today.  Economists are not certain about many things.  But we are quite certain that a college diploma or an advanced degree is a key to economic success.  Those with a college degree are more likely to find a job, keep a job, have higher job satisfaction, and earn a higher salary.  The advantage in earnings is large.  College grads’ annual earnings last year were, on average, 70 percent higher than those with only a high school diploma.  Back in 1980, the difference was only 20 percent.  The gap in earnings is significant only a few years after graduation--almost $18,000 a year, according to some recent data.  Beyond these advantages, research also shows that a college or graduate degree typically leads to a happier, healthier, and longer life.4  One explanation for the greater advantage in recent decades conferred by higher education is that it reflects an increase in the demand for educated workers compared                                                  2 For more on median household income adjusted for inflation and the poverty rate, see Posey (2016) and Bishaw and Glassman (2016). 3 See, for example, Kahn (2010); Oreopoulos, Von Wachter, and Heisz (2012); and Altonji, Kahn, and Speer (2016).  4 For recent estimates of the college earnings premium over time, see Pew Research (2014) and Council of Economic Advisers (2016).  For a discussion of some nonpecuniary benefits of completing college, see Oreopoulos and Salvanes (2011).   
 - 3 - with others.  The drivers of this increasing demand for those with college and graduate degrees are likely to continue to be important.   Let me mention two of the most important factors.   First, technology.  For decades, technological advances have increasingly allowed simpler, repetitive tasks to be done more cheaply and safely by machines.  This kind of work in factories, stores, and offices often required only a high school education.  At the same time, technological advances have increased demand for workers with the education necessary to perform the ever-growing share of jobs where technology is important.  More recently, further advances are automating increasingly complex tasks and allowing workers with the ability and flexibility to use technology to be more productive.  Higher education has also changed in response, and one of the most important things many of you learned at the University of Baltimore was how to learn, adapt, and succeed in the technology-rich environment of most workplaces.   The second major development in the job market is globalization, which allows goods and services to be produced wherever it is most economical.  Offshoring and trade have profoundly affected the U.S. economy.  No one knows which jobs and which industries will thrive as globalization continues or how each of you will be affected, but I can say that the education you have earned will provide an important advantage.  Like technological change, globalization has reinforced the shift away from lower-skilled jobs that require less education to higher-skilled jobs that require college and advanced degrees.  The jobs that globalization creates in the United States, serving a global economy of billions of people, are more likely to be filled by those who, like you, have secured the advantage of higher education.  
 - 4 - While globalization will likely continue and technology will continue to advance, we don’t know how fast the economy will grow, what new technologies will be developed, or how quickly and consistently employment will expand.  What is considerably more certain, however, is that success will continue to be tied to education, in part because a good education enhances one’s ability to adapt to a changing economy. One reason for the increasing economic advantage of a college or graduate degree is the very slow growth of earnings in the last few decades for those with only a high school education.  It concerns me, as it should concern all of us, that many are falling behind.  Improvements in elementary and secondary education can help prepare more people for college and the opportunities college makes available, but for those who do not attend college, we must find other ways to extend economic opportunity to everyone in America.    In discussing higher education, you may have noticed that I have spoken in terms of completing your degrees.  Research shows that a large share of the benefits I have described from higher education comes only to those who graduate.  Even those completing three or more years of college benefit much less when they don’t get a degree.5  For example, some of you may be worried about paying off loans you have taken out to pay for your education.  The good news is that the vast majority of student borrowers who complete their degrees find work that allows them to keep up with their payments and pay off their loans. Everything I have said so far could apply to the graduates this year of any college or university.  The rest of what I have to say is about you, the 2016 graduates of the                                                  5 For example, see Oreopoulos and Petronijevic (2013) and Bound and Turner (2011). 
 - 5 - University of Baltimore.  I have learned a bit about you recently, with the help of the university’s staff.  Let me tell you a few things about some of your classmates that you may not know.     Among you today is a full-time student who found the time each semester to volunteer with non-profit organizations, including one that helps refugees from other countries find their place in this community.  Another of your fellow students, who used to doubt that she could ever afford college, has become a student leader.  She made the Dean’s List every semester after transferring from community college.  Like many of you, another of your fellow graduates took day and evening classes to balance work and family demands.  She was forced to change jobs to accommodate this schedule.  She later decided her future lay in digital communications, which required her to switch majors after taking some required classes.  Today she will become the first person in her family to graduate from college.    Some of you were born in other countries.  One of you lived in four other countries before coming to the University of Baltimore for a master’s degree.  Many of you have contributed to the sense of community at the University of Baltimore by actively participating in student life.  One of you has even decided to seek a career helping other students as a student affairs professional. These are a few of the outstanding people who will join you in walking across this stage today.  Let me describe one more. To that student, sitting in the audience, I would say: you deserve a tremendous amount of credit.  Based on what I have learned, you did not have all of the advantages that can pave the way to college and graduate school.  You overcame obstacles to make it 
 - 6 - here, and more obstacles to complete your degree.  One of the biggest of these obstacles, in fact, was that some people doubted you could or would succeed.  But others in your life believed in you.  Some of them are here today.  They believed in you, and you believed in yourself, and your talent and intelligence and hard work enabled you to earn the degree you are about to receive.   If this sounds like you, then you are absolutely right, because I am not describing just one member of the University of Baltimore’s Class of 2016--I am trying to describe every one of you.  In different ways, I expect all of you have overcome obstacles and demonstrated resilience and determination to succeed.  All of you have gained knowledge and used your intelligence and talents to complete your degrees.  As impressed as I am with any individual graduating today, I am more impressed with what all of you have achieved. Let me tell you what else I have learned.  More than the students of some colleges and universities, I know that many of you have deep roots in this city and in the county.  Many of you will start careers, build your lives, and raise your families here.  The challenges you have overcome are the challenges faced by many people in Baltimore and in communities throughout America.  Your success, which we celebrate today, is also the promise of a brighter future for this city.  The degrees you have worked so hard to earn and the opportunities now opening up to you represent the stubborn, earnest hope that anyone and everyone who strives to succeed still can succeed.   And that is why I consider it a rare privilege to speak to you today, and a great honor to be associated with the University of Baltimore and the members of the Class of 2016.  Thank you, and congratulations.  
 - 7 -  References Altonji, Joseph G., Lisa B. Kahn, and Jamin D. Speer (2016).  “Cashier or Consultant?  Entry Labor Market Conditions, Field of Study, and Career Success,” Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 34 (S1), pp. S361-S401.  Bishaw, Alemayehu, and Brian Glassman (2016).  “Poverty:  2014 and 2015,” American Community Survey Briefs, ACSBR/15-01.  Washington:  U.S. Census Bureau, September, www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2016/demo/acsbr15-01.pdf.  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016).  Experiences and Perspectives of Young Workers.  Washington:  Board of Governors, December, https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/2015-experiences-and-perspectives-of-young-workers-201612.pdf.  Bound, John, and Sarah E. Turner (2011).  “Dropouts and Diplomas:  The Divergence in Collegiate Outcomes,” in Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen J. Machin, and Ludger Woessmann, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Education, vol. 4.  Amsterdam:  North Holland, pp. 573-613.  Council of Economic Advisers (2016).  Investing in Higher Education:  Benefits, Challenges, and the State of Student Debt.  Washington:  Executive Office of the President of the United States, https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/page/files/20160718_cea_student_debt.pdf.   Kahn, Lisa B. (2010).  “The Long-Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from College in a Bad Economy,” Labour Economics, vol. 17 (2), pp. 303-16.  Oreopoulos, Philip, and Uros Petronijevic (2013).  “Making College Worth It:  A Review of the Returns to Higher Education,” Future of Children, vol. 23 (Spring), pp. 41-65.  Oreopoulos, Philip, and Kjell G. Salvanes (2011).  “Priceless:  The Nonpecuniary Benefits of Schooling,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 25 (Winter), pp. 159-84.  Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz (2012).  “The Short- and Long-Term Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession,” American Economic Journal:  Applied Economics, vol. 4 (1), pp. 1-29.  
 - 8 - Pew Research Center (2014).  The Rising Cost of Not Going to College.  Washington:  PRC, February, www.pewsocialtrends.org/files/2014/02/SDT-higher-ed-FINAL-02-11-2014.pdf.   Posey, Kirby G. (2016).  “Household Income:  2015,” American Community Survey Briefs, ACSBR/15-02.  Washington:  U.S. Census Bureau, September, www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2016/demo/acsbr15-02.pdf.  
  News conference   Page 1/7    Berne, 15 December 2016 Andréa M. Maechler Introductory remarks by Andréa M. Maechler  I will begin by reviewing the situation on the financial markets, before going on to talk about the impact of negative interest on the money and capital markets. I will finish my presentation with a few comments on the progress that has been made in reforming benchmark interest rates. Situation on the financial markets Since the last news conference in June, movements on the financial markets have been heavily influenced by two political events: the unexpected outcome of the Brexit vote in June and the US presidential election in November. Both events generated short-term uncertainty among investors. Nevertheless, positive risk sentiment prevailed overall. Leading equity indices in the US, Japan and Europe have recorded price gains since mid-year (cf. chart 1). In the US, all key indices hit new record highs at the beginning of December. In Switzerland, the SMI, however, lagged behind the general trend: it is currently virtually unchanged from its mid-year level. The reason for this is the index’s strong weighting in defensive equities, from the healthcare and consumer goods sector for example. These securities, which tend to benefit less from increasing risk appetite among investors, came under selling pressure as a result of rising interest rates. On bond markets, high-quality government bond yields have climbed since mid-year (cf. chart 2a). Firstly, economic data bolstered investor confidence in a global economic recovery. Secondly, inflation expectations rose steadily – albeit from a low level – particularly in the UK and the US (cf. chart 2b). This trend was reinforced by the outcome of the US election, which fuelled expectations of a more expansionary fiscal policy and a stronger increase in US government debt. The rise in yields also reflects higher risk premia caused by generally heightened uncertainty surrounding the future course of US fiscal and monetary policy. 
 Berne, 15 December 2016 Andréa M. Maechler News conference   Page 2/7   Thus, the increase in yields was particularly pronounced in the US. Ten-year US government bonds recently stood at around 2.5%, 1 percentage point up from mid-year. By contrast, yield increases in Japan and Europe were on a smaller scale. Yields on ten-year Swiss Confederation bonds recently stood at –0.1%, half a percentage point up from mid-year. Approximately 60% of outstanding Confederation bonds are currently still generating negative yields, compared with around 95% at the end of June. The global rise in yields has led to a reduction in the share of negative-yielding government bonds worldwide from over 30% at the end of June to around 20% most recently. Although this trend can be seen as a step towards normalisation on the bond markets, it is important to recognise that higher US yields and the associated appreciation of the US dollar could become a burden for some emerging economies. On the foreign exchange market, the Swiss franc came under increased upward pressure for a brief period after the Brexit vote. This pressure abated again, not least due to the Swiss National Bank’s willingness to intervene on the market. While the pound sterling continued to lose value over the summer months, other key currencies, including the Swiss franc, moved sideways within a narrow range (cf. chart 3). Heightened uncertainty in the run-up to the US presidential election was once again reflected in growing demand for safe-haven currencies on the foreign exchange market, leading to slightly higher Swiss franc exchange rates. Following the US election, the US dollar appreciated on a broad basis. The strengthening of the currency occurred against the backdrop of the rise in US interest rates mentioned earlier. The dollar gained approximately 3% in trade-weighted terms after the election. The recent developments in the US also had an impact on other currency areas. Currencies in emerging economies in particular came under pressure and, as a group, weakened by around 4% against the US dollar. On a trade-weighted basis, the Swiss franc has changed little from its end-June level. Nevertheless, Swiss franc exchange rates moved in different directions. While appreciating more sharply against the yen than against the euro and pound sterling, the Swiss franc weakened against the US dollar and currencies of commodity-exporting countries. Overall, the Swiss franc is still significantly overvalued. The market environment remains challenging and fraught with global economic and political risks. The SNB therefore continues to monitor events on the foreign exchange markets very closely. Impact of negative interest on the money and capital markets Let me now turn to the impact of negative interest on sight deposits at the SNB on the Swiss franc money and capital markets. As you know, since the introduction of the negative interest rate in January 2015, key money market rates such as the three-month Libor have hovered, as intended, around –0.75% (cf. chart 4). The negative interest rate has ensured that the traditional interest rate differential with other currencies has been at least partially restored. On the secured money market – the repo market – interest rates have also stabilised at a lower level. This applies in particular to SARON, the reference rate for call money. Activity on the 
 Berne, 15 December 2016 Andréa M. Maechler News conference   Page 3/7   repo market remains unaffected by negative interest and the very high level of sight deposits. Banks and insurance companies use the market for their short-term liquidity requirements and the efficient management of their collateral holdings. The introduction of the negative interest rate even resulted in an increase in the trading volume on the repo market (cf. chart 5). One reason for this is that repo trades can be conducted in order to use up exemption thresholds. Yields on Confederation money market debt register claims are below interbank levels (cf. chart 4). This is mainly attributable to relatively high investor demand for safe Swiss franc investments. On the foreign exchange swaps market, where currencies are exchanged on a temporary basis, implied interest rates for Swiss franc investments lie well below –0.75%; this applies in particular to US dollar swaps. The reason for this is abundant Swiss franc liquidity as well as structurally high demand for US dollar funding in the international financial system. These factors lead to a relative oversupply of Swiss francs against the US dollar, which depresses implied Swiss franc interest rates in the foreign exchange swap market. This makes it more expensive for the relevant investors to hold Swiss francs, on top of the negative interest rate of –0.75%. Yields on long-term Confederation bonds on the capital market likewise fell substantially following the introduction of the negative interest rate. The interest rate rise observed since mid-year on longer-term securities in Switzerland took place in parallel with international interest rate developments. Since, at the same time, money market rates remained stable, this resulted in a slightly steeper yield curve for Swiss franc investments, which also mirrored international developments. Overall, negative interest is having the expected impact on the money and capital markets and is making it less attractive for investors to hold Swiss francs compared to other currencies. Reform of benchmark interest rates To conclude, I would like to talk briefly about ongoing interest rate benchmark reforms. In 2014, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) recommended strengthening the existing global interest rate benchmarks, in particular the Libor. It also called for the development of alternative benchmark rates. The SNB is taking an active part in these reform efforts. It is represented on the relevant committees and plays a supportive role by participating in discussions with market participants, as well as with Swiss and foreign authorities. Reforms have been implemented at international level, particularly as far as the Libor is concerned. They focus on standardising the interest rate calculation by the panel banks and making it more transaction-based. However, volume in the market segment underlying the Libor remains low.  At national level, the main emphasis is on the replacement of the TOIS fixing.1 The TOIS fixing is a panel-based reference interest rate for the unsecured call money market and is used   1 TOIS stands for Tomorrow/Next Overnight Indexed Swap. 
 Berne, 15 December 2016 Andréa M. Maechler News conference   Page 4/7   for interest rate derivatives. Despite extensive reform efforts, no stable long-term solution has been found. Underlying trading volume continues to be very low and other banks are unwilling to report interest rate conditions. For this reason, the TOIS fixing will be abandoned as of end-2017. SARON, the reference interest rate for secured call money, will be used in its place. SARON was launched by the SNB in cooperation with SIX in 2009. We are confident that it will establish itself as a key Swiss franc reference rate. Further work will be coordinated by a working group comprising financial sector representatives. Key information on this topic is publicly available on the SNB’s website.2     2 http://www.snb.ch/en/ifor/finmkt/fnmkt_benchm/id/finmkt_reformrates 
 Berne, 15 December 2016 Andréa M. Maechler News conference   Page 5/7   Slides          
 Berne, 15 December 2016 Andréa M. Maechler News conference   Page 6/7            
 Berne, 15 December 2016 Andréa M. Maechler News conference   Page 7/7    
Yannis Stournaras: Prospects of the Greek economy after six yearsof adjustmentSpeech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the EU-Arab WorldSummit "Partners for Growth and Development", Athens, 3 November 2016.*   *   *It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you today and have the opportunity to share mythoughts on the prospects of the Greek economy after six years of economic adjustment. I willfocus on four issues: First, the achievements made so far during the difficult years of economicadjustment. Second, the missteps and delays in the adjustment process. Third, recentdevelopments and future challenges and prospects. And fourth, I will highlight the main reasonswhy Greek assets constitute a prime investment opportunity. 1. Economic adjustment over the past six yearsSince the beginning of the sovereign debt crisis, six years ago, Greece has come a long way inadjusting its fiscal and external imbalances and has implemented a bold programme of structuralreforms.  First, there has been unprecedented fiscal consolidation. The fiscal consolidationeffort contributed to an improvement in the general government primary balance as apercentage of GDP by more than 11 percentage points over the period 2009–2015, despitethe deepening recession. In fact, in the period 2013–2015 Greece managed to maintainsmall primary surpluses (as defined in the programme) in the general government budget forthe first time since 2001. Adjusting for the effect of the recession, the improvement in the“structural” primary balance over the period 2009–2015 reached 17 percentage points ofpotential GDP; twice as much as the adjustment in other Member States that were underEU-IMF programmes.Second, competitiveness has been restored. The cumulative loss in labour costcompetitiveness vis-à-vis our trading partners recorded between 2000 and 2009 has beenfully recovered. This development reflects the effect of structural reforms in the labour market, which allowfor greater flexibility in the wage bargaining process, as well as the impact of the sharp risein unemployment on labour costs.Third, the external adjustment has been significant. The current account posed a smallsurplus in 2015 (0.1% of GDP). This marks a significant turnaround of the current accountbalance by about 15 percentage points of GDP since 2008. Adjustment has come primarilyfrom a decline in imports of goods, particularly in 2009, when world trade collapsed due tothe global recession. However, since 2010, exports, excluding shipping, have contributedsignificantly to the improvement.Exports of goods in real terms have actually rebounded in line with those of our euro area peersand the shares of goods exports have increased significantly vis-à-vis non-EU countries. On theother hand, exports of services in real terms have underperformed primarily due to the weaknessof the shipping sector. This was driven by domestic economic uncertainty and the imposition ofcapital controls, as well as global factors, such as the weaker growth of global trade, lowercommodity prices and a supply overhang in the global shipping sector. 1 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
In more detail, the share of exports in GDP increased from about 19% in 2009 to close to 30% in2015, with about 2/3 of this increase stemming from goods exports and 1/3 from servicesexports and, in particular, receipts from tourism. It should be noted that goods exports stood atabout 14% of GDP in 2015 compared with 7.5% of GDP in 2009.Fourth, the policy agenda has included bold structural reforms. A series of structuralreforms have been implemented in the labour and product markets, as well as in publicadministration. These reforms are expected to boost the growth potential of the Greekeconomy in the long-term through higher productivity and employment growth. According tothe OECD, the reforms implemented in the period 2010–2014 are expected to raise realGDP over a 10-year-horizon by about 5.6%. Adding the reforms currently being implementedor planned under the ESM programme, the overall increase in real GDP comes to about13.4% over a 10-year-period. However, this estimate is a lower bound in the sense thatadditional reforms, for example improving the judiciary system, strengthening bankruptcyregulations, modernising the public administration and resolving the issue of non-performingexposures (NPEs) cannot easily be quantified. In-house work by the Bank of Greece pointsto similar estimates with the main effect coming from higher total factor productivity (TFP)growth.Fifth, the rebalancing of the economy has been remarkable. The restructuring of theGreek economy towards a new, extrovert, growth model based on tradable goods andservices and a higher share of exports in GDP is already underway. In more detail, therelative prices of tradable goods and services rose by about 10% in the period 2010–2015,making their production more profitable. As a result, the share of tradable goods andservices in the private economy has risen in recent years. For example, in gross valueadded terms, the relative size of the tradable sectors grew by approximately 12% in theperiod 2010–2015 in volume terms and by about 24% in nominal terms, while in employmentterms it grew by around 8%. This development is attributed both to the structural reformsimplemented so far and to the fact that tradable export-oriented sectors have gone through amilder recession and have thereby gradually gained some ground in terms of volume andemployment shares.An additional aspect worth highlighting is that on account of the decline in domestic demand andthe scaling back of construction in Greece, a great number of dynamic construction companiesexpanded their businesses abroad (Middle East, Balkans) transforming a previously thought tobe a non-tradable activity into an internationally tradable one.Going forward, structural reforms and improved financing and liquidity in the economy areexpected to speed up the restructuring of the economy in favour of tradable goods and services. Sixth, bank recapitalization and considerable consolidation have taken place. Overthe past few years, the landscape of the banking system has changed significantly with thenumber of banks having been reduced through mergers, takeovers and resolutions. Todaythe system comprises four core banks and a number of smaller ones. The banking system,following successive rounds of recapitalization involving significant private sectorinvolvement and the implementation of restructuring plans, is now well-placed to address themajor challenge posed by the high stock of non-performing exposures (NPEs). Effectivelymanaging NPEs is key to the recovery of credit growth and to the restructuring ofbusinesses and sectors in the real economy.2. Missteps and delays in the adjustment processHowever, despite the huge efforts to avert default and address imbalances, Greece remainsunder an adjustment programme, unlike Cyprus, Ireland and Portugal, which have alreadycompleted their respective programmes, even though they entered these programmes later thanGreece did. 2 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
This lagging behind can be attributed to several factors, including: lack of ownership of thenecessary reforms and lack of commitment, by part of the political system, to correct pasterrors, the anti-bailout rhetoric, rivalry and failure to reach an understanding among politicalparties, and the various – small and large – vested interests that have resisted reform.Meanwhile, the fact that our European partners have yet to deliver on their commitment toprovide further debt relief, as stated in the Eurogroup decisions made as far back as inNovember 2012 (and iterated most recently in May 2016), and the threat of default and euro areaexit brandished against Greece by some of our partners whenever negotiations seemed to stall,even on just technical matters, has weighed heavily on market sentiment, further fuelinguncertainty and negatively affecting the economic climate in Greece.Certain miscalculations in the design of the economic adjustment programmes could alsoexplain Greece’s lagging behind vis – a – vis the other countries, previously under programmes.Given the size of the fiscal imbalances back in May 2010, when the first economic adjustmentprogramme was initiated, more emphasis was placed on fiscal consolidation, pension reform,streamlining budgetary procedures, increasing fiscal transparency, as well as financial sectorrestructuring. Less emphasis was given on growth-enhancing labour market reforms and, mostnotably, on product and services market reforms and reorganizing the public sector. In addition,growth forecasts were too optimistic and fiscal multipliers turned out to be higher than initiallyanticipated. As a result, the economy was trapped in a vicious circle of austerity, recession,rising unemployment and private debt overhang.Despite the recouping of losses in international competitiveness, exports have underperformedrelative to what could have been anticipated based on historical correlations. This can in part beexplained by the lack of financing, higher long-term borrowing costs, increased uncertainty, aswell as the higher tax burden, which slows or even halts progress towards restoring overallcompetitiveness. In addition, this can also be attributed to a number of inherent structuralweaknesses that hamper the international market penetration of Greek products and involve non-cost aspects such as product quality, protected designation of origin and branding, red tape, etc.Hence, despite the improvement in structural competitiveness over the period 2013–2014(according to a number of indices compiled by the OECD, the World Bank, and the WorldEconomic Forum), Greece still ranks at the lower end of the advanced economies, and progresshas stalled or even reversed slightly in recent years.3. Recent developments and prospectsIn spite of the delays and missteps, progress in correcting past mistakes has been remarkable.For example, the new ESM programme in place since August 2015 builds on the successes ofthe first two programmes (i.e. the correction of fiscal and external imbalances and theimprovement of labour cost competitiveness) and aims at prioritizing reforms that will increasepotential growth in the medium-to-long term, i.e. reforms in product markets, publicadministration, institutions and the business environment, bank recapitalization and resolution ofNPEs.Building on the progress achieved so far, the completion of the first review of the ESMprogramme had a positive effect on confidence and liquidity and is expected to boost economicactivity in the second half of 2016.Most importantly, the reinstatement of the waiver for Greek government bonds enabled Greekbanks to obtain low-cost financing from the European Central Bank (ECB). This, along with thegradual dissipation of uncertainty, the stabilization of private sector deposits and the progressachieved in restructuring and recapitalizing Greek banks, has contributed to the lowering of theemergency liquidity assistance (ELA) ceiling for Greek banks by about €40 billion since July2015, bringing it down to €51.1 billion as of today. 3 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
These developments are expected over the medium term to encourage a return of deposits tothe Greek banking system, which will allow an easing and, ultimately, the lifting of capitalcontrols. Coupled with a more effective management of non-performing loans, this will contributeto reducing borrowing costs and will gradually increase the lending capacity of Greek banks, withpositive effects on the financing, hence the growth performance, of the Greek economy.The gradual economic recovery is already reflected in the performance of several keyindicators of economic activity, such as: industrial production, retail sales, dependentemployment flows in the private sector, and real exports of goods.The current forecasts of the Bank of Greece point to a recovery starting from the second halfof 2016 and continuing through 2017 and 2018. Specifically, GDP is projected to post a smalldecline of 0.3% in 2016, but then to grow by 2.5% and 3% in 2017 and 2018 respectively. Theseprojections assume that the programme implementation will remain on track, the relevant loantranches will be disbursed on time, and that the monetary policy of the ECB will continue to beaccommodative.Nevertheless, risks to the outlook of the Greek economy remain. Delays in theimplementation of reforms and privatizations envisaged in the programme would dampeneconomic growth, thereby refueling uncertainty, undermining confidence and weakening theprospects of a definitive exit from the crisis.Meanwhile, there also are risks and uncertainties regarding the course of the globaleconomy, stemming, among other things, from protectionist voices and actions around theworld, the implementation of a hard Brexit, and a likely exacerbation of the refugee crisis. Theserisks could slow down the recovery of the Greek economy, both through negative effects ontourism and trade and through a slower-than-expected decline in yields on Greek governmentbonds due to the risk aversion from global investors.The containment of the abovementioned risks and the realization of the positiveprospects of the Greek economy require a number of tangible and concerted actions.These actions, which will ensure the successful conclusion of the ESM programme and thereturn to financial markets, comprise the following:1st Stepping up the pace of reforms and privatizations. The government should remaincommitted to the timely implementation of the structural reforms and privatizations that havebeen agreed upon with the Institutions. Particular emphasis should be placed on:simplifying investment licensing procedures, reducing administrative burden on businessesand facilitating competition,opening up the remaining regulated professions and network industries,scaling up the privatization and public real estate programme, and improving its governance,modernizing and strengthening public administration,enhancing judicial efficiency and speeding up court proceedings.In this context, the on-going second review should be completed without undue delays, so as tosolidify the recovery prospects and the return to robust positive growth in 2017.2nd Tackling the high stock of non-performing exposures (NPEs). Alongside the structuralreforms, using idle public property to attract foreign direct investment through appropriate landuse legislation and speeding up privatization, there is an urgent need to address the privatedebt overhang problem, in order to facilitate the recovery through a stronger pick-up in lending.On the one hand, the high stock of NPEs reduces bank profitability and thus constrains thesupply of credit, which primarily affects bank-dependent SMEs. On the other hand, high NPEs 4 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
delay corporate restructuring and thus thwart the ability of viable firms to finance new investmentprojects.Tackling the high stock of non-performing loans is currently the greatest challenge facing theGreek banking system and the Greek economy. Greece has the second highest NPE ratio inEurope (after Cyprus), with non-performing exposures at the end of the first half of 2016 reaching45.1% of total exposures or €108.7 billion.A number of initiatives are underway with the goal of setting up an accelerated and efficientframework for private debt resolution. These initiatives, amongst others, include:the development of a secondary market for both performing and non-performing loans;the establishment of an enhanced framework for out-of-court workouts and pre-bankruptcyprocedures, as well as the overhaul of bankruptcy legislation;the recently revised Code of Conduct for banks for the transparent, effective and, whereappropriate, flexible treatment of cooperating borrowers facing difficulties in servicing theirdebt obligations;amendments to legislation to ensure the cooperation of old shareholders in the restructuringof the underlying businesses;the launch of a comprehensive monitoring framework in relation to banks’ non-performingexposure resolution activities, and, finally,a series of targets and key performance indicators that aim at reducing overall non-performing exposures by 40% by the end of 2019.On their part, banks need to pursue a more active policy for NPE management, by promotinglong-term solutions and multi-creditor workouts, as well as focusing on the restructuring of viablebusinesses. These lines of action, coupled with the economy’s path out of the recession andback to growth, should bring about a stabilization and, subsequently, a decline in the NPE ratio.3rd Addressing the large public debt overhang The commitment of our European partners inMay 2016 to take action in order to ensure the sustainability of public debt in the short andmedium-to-long term, reaffirmed their November 2012 Eurogroup decision and is a positivestep forward. However, the envisaged long-term public debt management measures have notbeen specified yet. Urgent action is warranted on the specification and quantification of theforeseen debt relief measures. This will enhance the credibility and acceptance of the policiespursued, thereby helping to further consolidate confidence, strengthen economic recovery, lowerthe tax burden and facilitate the return to financial markets after the end of theprogramme.4th Easing and eventually lifting remaining capital controls. The gradual relaxation of capitalcontrols, along with improvements in confidence and liquidity, are expected to contribute to thenormalization of economic conditions by facilitating both enterprises and individuals in theirtransactions.4. Final remarks: investment needs and opportunities in GreeceGreece is poised to return to economic and financial normality and to shift to a new, extrovert andsustainable growth model, based on tradable goods and services. To this end, the improvementsin cost competitiveness of recent years provide considerable room for higher exports in goodsand services in the near future.However, new investment will be needed in order to strengthen the export base of extrovert firms.The further opening-up to international trade, the participation in global value chains and thecloser trade links with countries and businesses with cutting-edge technology internationally will 5 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
enable the adoption of new technologies by export firms and their diffusion across the Greekeconomy, strengthening its long-term growth prospects.New investment, by facilitating innovation and the introduction of new technologies, will bothbroaden the export base and improve the quality of Greek exports, raising total factor productivityof the Greek economy. In turn, this will make the reduction in the external deficit sustainable andincrease potential output over the medium-to-long term.Therefore, Greece needs a substantial amount of foreign direct investment (FDI). The policychanges made in recent years are conducive to growth, thus creating profitableinvestment opportunities. For example, the implementation of reforms in the labour, productand services markets and in public administration, the enhancement of financial stability, theutilization of public real estate, the stepping-up of the privatization programme, and efforts totackle the private and public debt overhang problem improve confidence and rebuild financialmarkets’ trust. Hence, they generate positive growth prospects and help attract foreign directinvestment.In this context, prospective investors will also benefit from the presence of high-skilled humancapital by OECD standards and a vast pool of idle labour resources. According to the GlobalCompetitiveness Report 2016–2017 of the World Economic Forum, Greece ranks quite high interms of workforce education and skills (38th out of 138), in higher education and training (45th),in the availability of scientists and engineers (10th), in technological readiness (42nd). Although, alarge number of high-skilled youth have moved to other EU countries since the outbreak of thecrisis, the opening-up of new jobs in Greece as growth returns and investment picks up willcontribute to the repatriation of many of them, further improving the skill and knowledge contentof the labour force.Furthermore, the new investment incentives law (L.4399/2016) provides a clear frameworkand a stable business environment for the commencement of a variety of individual investmentprojects. The new law envisages several aid schemes, for example: tax exemption, subsidies forthe acquisition of new machinery and other equipment, subsidy of the cost of createdemployment, a stable corporate income tax rate for a period of 12 years from the completion ofthe investment project. In order to qualify for the aid schemes, the investment projects shouldentail initial investment, for example, investment in buildings, machinery, intangible assets, andshould meet certain conditions (i.e. creation of new production units, expansion of existingproduction units’ capacity, etc.).On top of the above, the recent conclusion of a number of major privatization projects — such asthe privatization of the port of Piraeus, which will upgrade its role as a shipping hub, the sale of14 regional airports in key tourist destination islands and cities, the sale and real estatedevelopment of the old Athens Airport facilities at Hellinikon, as well as the participation of privateinvestors in the recapitalization of Greek banks — constitute an important vote of confidencefrom major foreign investors, who decided to position themselves early on the Greek market, inanticipation of even better future prospects for the Greek economy.Going beyond recent policy changes, Greece provides significant investment opportunities onaccount of its geographical location in Southeast Europe and its close proximity to the MiddleEast and the Arab world. There are potential gains in the trade, logistics, transport and energysectors as Greece aspires to become a transport and energy hub in future years, which impliessignificant infrastructure, networks and other investment needs.Moreover, significant investment opportunities exist in tourism as Greece is a major touristdestination, and at the same time it has a sizeable public real estate property that is available forutilization by private investors in order to expand capacity and quality of tourism infrastructure. 6 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
Last but not least, Greece is both a member of the European Union and the euro area.Currency redenomination issues are off the table for good. Consequently, prospective non-EUinvestors will benefit from gaining access to the EU Single Market and will enjoy a stableinstitutional environment, investor protection, as well as access to a sound banking andfinancial system.Therefore, Greek assets in general can be regarded as undervalued, which, on account of all therecent policy changes, the improvement of labour cost competitiveness and the country’scompetitive advantages, have great potential to perform much better in the future, generatingsubstantial profits for new investors.*    *    * In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once again that economic adjustment and structuralimprovements over the past six years have rendered Greece more business-friendly and haveopened up significant investment opportunities, in particular for those who will positionthemselves early in the Greek economy. At the same time, foreign direct investment is alsoessential for Greece, because it will set in motion a virtuous circle signaling investor confidencein Greece’s future prospects, a definite exit from the crisis and a return to sustainable andextrovert economic growth.Sources:Bank of Greece (2016), Annual Report 2015, February. Bank of Greece (2016), Monetary Policy 2015–2016, June. OECD (2016), Greece, OECD Economic Surveys, March. Stournaras, Y. (2016), “The Greek Economy: Developments, Opportunities and Prospects”.Speech at the Federation of Industries of Northern Greece, Thessaloniki, 13 May 2016. Stournaras, Y. (2016), “Greece and the Eurozone at a crossroads”. Speech at an eventorganised by the Young Presidents’ Organization in Athens, 23 September 2016.  7 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
1   TALKING POINTS Mr. Erwin Rijanto, Deputy Governor of Bank Indonesia “FINANCIAL INCLUSION FOR SME IN INDONESIA” Kathmandu, 9 November 2016  I. INTRODUCTION 1. A very good afternoon and warm greetings to: a. Mr. Shitangshu Kumar Sur Chowdhury, Chairman of APRACA; b. Mr. Shiba Raj Shrestha, Vice Chairman of APRACA; c. The member of APRACA;  d. Ladies and gentlemen. Distinguished guests, 2. We are all aware that financial inclusion has become a priority in the world, but it has now also been considered as national agenda for Indonesia. 3. In this honorable meeting, I would like to share Indonesian’s experience regarding the financial inclusion in Indonesia, and its relation to SME. Ladies and gentlemen, II. CURRENT CONDITION IN INDONESIA 4. Considering the current condition, Indonesia with its population of almost 250 million people which 28 million people living in poverty line remains to be unbanked. Taking a closer look these large portion of the unbanked clustered around poverty line remains vulnerable. Geographic condition adds the challenge in providing access to this target group as Indonesia consist of almost 17.000 island and most of poor people live in a very remote area with REGIONAL FORUM ON  “EMERGING OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES OF FINANCIAL INCLUSION” 
2  different culture. On the supply side, there are several factors inhibiting services to the community such as limited communication network and electricity infrastructure. 5. Based on our survey, banked people reached 39% in 2015. It is still in a long journey to reach the target of 75% banked people at the end of 2019. The percentage of 39% in our survey means they have a savings or credit account, insurance or formal means of low-cost payments. Outside of 39% still use financial services but rely on the age-old informal mechanisms: family and friends, the rotating savings club, the moneylender, the pawnbroker, cash under the mattress and long-term savings in the form of livestock. These mechanisms are incomplete, and can be very unreliable, risky and expensive.  6. Interestingly, Indonesia is one of the fastest-growing user smartphone in the world: Nearly 60 million of the country's citizens will have smartphones in 2016. Continuously, Indonesia’s smartphone users are expected to grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 11.2% between 2016 and 2020, to reach more than 100 million and become the fourth-largest global market. 7. On the other hand, Indonesia faces some challenges regarding the implementation of digital financial inclusion such as cash based mindset, lack of information of non-cash instrument, limited interconnection, coordination amongst stakeholders, and lack of infrastructure. 8. Regarding the challenges as mentioned, Indonesia has high concern to increase financial access, especially for unbanked and underbanked, through the financial inclusion policy. Financial 
3  inclusion policy will eliminate the barriers for people to reach financial access.   Ladies and gentlemen, III. PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 82 YEAR 2016 REGARDING NATIONAL STRATEGY OF FINANCIAL INCLUSION ON SEPTEMBER 1ST 2016 9. Financial Inclusion has been considered as national priority for Indonesia; therefore in 2012, Indonesia launched its National strategy for Financial Inclusion (NSFI)1. With the vision to improve the coordination between ministries, Bank Indonesia, related institutions and bodies in implementing this strategy, NSFI has been amended and formulated as legal entities in Presidential Decree No. 82 Years 2016 regarding National Strategy for Financial Inclusion. 10. NSFI has 5 Pillars and 3 enablers as follow : a. Pillar 1: Financial Education, aims to improve public knowledge and awareness about the formal financial institutions, financial products and services, as well as to improve public’s skills in financial planning and management. b. Pillar 2: Public Property Rights, aims to expand the guarantee thus people could access credit from formal financial services. c. Pillar 3: Financial Intermediation Facility and Distribution Channels aims to expand the range of financial services to meet the needs of the different groups of people.  d. Pillar 4: Financial Service in Government Sector, aims to improve the governance and transparency of public services in                                                            1 In NSFI, Financial Inclusion is defined as: a condition when every individual has access to a wide range of quality formal financial services in a timely, clear, and secure with affordable price according to the needs and capabilities in order to improve their welfare 
4  the distribution of government funds. This can be achieved by distribution of aid through non cash which is expected to increase targeting accuracy, quantity, price, time, quality, and administrative. e. Pillar 5: Consumer Protection, aims to provide a sense of security to the community to interact with financial institutions, and take advantage of the products as well as financial services and payment systems offered. Principle of consumer protection are transparency, equal treatment, reliability, confidentiality and security of data / consumer information, and  complaint handling, as well as consumer dispute resolution in a simple, fast, and affordable cost. 11. The five pillars of National Strategy of Financial Inclusion must be supported by three enablers as follows: a. Conducive Policies and Regulations: The implementation of inclusive financial programs needs policies and regulations of the government and authorities/regulators. b. Supportive Infrastructure and Information Technology: It is necessary to minimize information asymmetry that is obstacles or bottlenecks in accessing financial services. c. Effective Organization and Implementation Mechanism: The diversity of financial inclusion actors and organizations leads to a need of mechanism to encourage the implementation of various activities together and integrated.  Distinguished guests, IV. ROBUST, SOUND, EFFICIENT AND SECURE PAYMENT SYSTEM TO SUPPORT FINANCIAL INCLUSION INITIATIVES 12. Bank Indonesia as the payment system regulator also put high concern in financial inclusion. By bringing people to financial 
5  system, we believe it will support financial stability. First, it will increase the resilience of financial system through the increase of financial buffer from the retail deposits. Second, with expanding financial access to retail sector, for both saving and borrowing side, it will diversify liquidity and credit risk. Meanwhile, financial inclusion combined with electronification2 will increase the efficiency of financial transaction. For the benefit of the economy, financial inclusion will bring positive impact in minimizing the gap, reducing the poverty level, and increasing asset accumulation of people. 13. To support access to finance, Bank Indonesia implements a dual policy approach, which include financial inclusion and electronification. Currently, 64% of the unbanked people in Indonesia are subject to financial inclusion through electronification via e-money and Digital Financial Services agents. Once these unbanked people are accustomed to perform cashless transactions and able to maintain the amount in their electronic money (registered with maximum amount Rp 5 million), they will be asked to open a savings account at a bank through the Laku Pandai program. Thus, overtime, these unbanked people will become bankable and are subsequently expected to utilize other financial service products through Banks and Insurance. 14. In the mean time, the 36% banked people are also encouraged to utilize electronic payments. This is carried out through the National Non Cash Movement initiative that is supported by G to P (Government to Person), P to G (Person to Government), and P to P (Person to Person) programs. 15. Payment technology in terms of financial inclusion implementation is perceived as enabler because it creates more efficient usage of                                                            2 Electronification is a change mechanism from cash to non-cash and from manual to electronic.  
6  financial services and plays an important role to enhance financial access for the society. To increase the effectiveness and efficiency of transaction, Indonesia supports the interoperability and inter-connectivity among payment infrastructure.  16. In order to increase financial access, Bank Indonesia implement financial inclusion program. Most of our financial inclusion programs are developed based on digital technology. As a main access is Digital Financial Services (DFS) and develop ecosystem through electronification. Both programs are implemented through sectoral approach, such as electronic Government to People (G2P) assistance, People to Government payment, especially public services, electronification for migrant worker and fisher community, and electronic payment in smart city. 17. Implementing the financial inclusion strategy will promote the financial access of SME as well because it is fundamental for enabling SME, as the engine of economic growth and employment, to expand their business. Distinguished guests, V. SME FINANCING 18. Indonesian SME dominates the number of business units with the percentage of 99%. They also create employment opportunity for 97% of the total workforce and contribute to 60% of Indonesia’s GDP. In contrast with the number and contribution of SME, their financing is still relatively low. The SME loans share on August 2016 is 19.7%. Most of them are disbursed to trade sector for about 53%. Some issues trigger the low percentage of SME financing are  a. Banks encountered difficulties in assessing the financial viability of SMEs. 
7  b. There is asymmetric information where Banks require the information on the potential SMEs and the eligibility of SMEs. c. Banks looked at SMEs as high risk business. d. The limited public access to finances, especially in remote areas.  Ladies and gentlemen, VI. CONCLUSION 19. Despite the limitation in telecommunications network in Indonesia and lack of socialization and assistance for end user, Bank Indonesia continuously perform our best efforts to improve SME access to finance through the means of information technology (IT) since IT will broaden the range of SME access to finance facilities/infrastructure in an easier, cheaper, and reach out to broader and remote region. Then, it could also facilitate change of SME behavior in recording and conducting financial transactions of its business. Finally, information technology is also expected to encourage SME to utilize the development/innovation of technology in conducting its business Distinguished guest, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to conclude my presentation by quoting the statement from Christine Lagarde, Managing Director of the IMF: “Greater financial inclusion has tangible economic benefits, such as higher GDP growth and lower income inequality. By providing access to accounts, credit, infrastructure, women and low income users, financial inclusion helps make growth more inclusive”. Thank you. Kathmandu, 9 November 2016 Mr. Erwin Rijanto Deputy Governor of Bank Indonesia 
  News conference   Page 1/3    Berne, 15 December 2016 Fritz Zurbrügg Introductory remarks by Fritz Zurbrügg  In my remarks today, I will start by presenting our current assessment in the area of financial stability, looking first at the big banks before turning to the domestically focused banks. I will end my remarks with a few words on the new banknote series. Big banks Since the Financial Stability Report was published in June, the Swiss big banks have improved their capital situation slightly; at the same time, they have substantially increased their holdings of bail-in bonds. Bail-in bonds are debt instruments that can be written off or converted into equity in the event of restructuring or resolution. They form the basis for a crisis-hit bank to be resolved or restructured in an orderly way. Alongside capital requirements, the qualitative and quantitative requirements on such debt instruments are a key component of the revised ‘too big to fail’ regulations which came into force at the beginning of July. These revised regulations envisage that the requirements will gradually be increased to the specified level over a phase-in period ending at the beginning of 2020. As regards core capital (Common Equity Tier 1, CET1), both big banks already largely meet the targets that will apply after the end of the phase-in period. There is still a need for action before the transition deadlines expire, as regards bail-in instruments and high-trigger contingent convertible capital instruments – or high-trigger CoCos. These CoCos can be converted into CET1 equity or written off in order to absorb losses in current operations. When accumulating the necessary bail-in instruments and high-trigger CoCos, banks have the opportunity to replace existing instruments with the required higher-quality instruments. The further strengthening of resilience through the accumulation of high-trigger CoCos, as foreseen by the regulations, is important and necessary. One reason for this is the big banks’ loss potential, which continues to be substantial relative to their capitalisation. Given their 
 Berne, 15 December 2016 Fritz Zurbrügg News conference   Page 2/3   significance to the Swiss economy, it is important that the big banks remain adequately capitalised, even in the event of such losses occurring. A second reason is the critical assessment by the markets as regards the resilience of banks, both in Switzerland and worldwide. By strengthening their resilience, banks can convince the markets of their soundness. The likelihood of share price collapses and sharply increased premia for credit default swaps, such as those observed at some banks this year, would thus be reduced. In addition to a strengthening of resilience, it is also essential that the big banks further improve their resolvability. This requires both sufficient holdings of bail-in instruments and the formulation of credible emergency and resolution plans. Emergency plans are aimed at ensuring that, in the event of imminent insolvency, functions that are important for Switzerland can be maintained. This requires effective cooperation with foreign authorities in a crisis, for which, in turn, the global resolution plans are an important prerequisite. As regards emergency plans, both Swiss big banks have introduced significant measures by setting up Swiss subsidiaries which combine systemically important functions in one entity. The key point here is that the Swiss units must be sufficiently independent from the rest of the bank, both operationally and financially. Both big banks have to implement their emergency plans by end-2019 at the latest. FINMA is responsible for the definitive assessment on whether the plans allow systemically important functions to be maintained in practice. Domestically focused banks I would now like to turn to the domestically focused banks. For these banks, the mortgage and real estate markets still represent the greatest source of risk. Growth on these markets has remained fairly constant over the last six months, and at a relatively low level. At the same time, imbalances on the mortgage and real estate markets have fallen slightly overall, owing to developments in fundamentals. Despite this most recent development, the risks that have been building in the Swiss banking sector since the beginning of the low interest rate period in 2008 remain considerable. Thus, imbalances on the mortgage and real estate markets are still approximately as high as they were in 2014, when the sectoral countercyclical capital buffer was set at 2%. Moreover, risk appetite at domestically focused banks is still high, as is reflected in the interest rate and affordability risk exposures in their mortgage business. Stress tests carried out by the Swiss National Bank suggest that these risks are currently sustainable, thanks to good capitalisation overall. Against the backdrop of persistently low interest rates, this is welcome. In the future, too, a decisive factor for financial system stability will be the banks’ ability to maintain risk exposures at a sustainable level. The current low interest rate environment creates strong incentives to increase interest rate or affordability risk exposures in lending business. For instance, there is a public debate about whether the imputed interest rate used to assess affordability should be reduced. The level of this imputed interest rate is not set by the 
 Berne, 15 December 2016 Fritz Zurbrügg News conference   Page 3/3   regulator and varies between banks. However, it does play a key role in affordability assessments. Banks typically use a rate of 5%. Let me go into this topic in further detail. While today’s period of low interest rates could well persist and the rise in interest rates might only be very gradual, mortgages generally influence borrowers’ financial situation and banks’ balance sheets over a period of decades. As such, when assessing affordability and calibrating risk exposure, long-term interest rate developments are also relevant. Despite the current pressure on interest rate margins, banks should therefore continue to take a long-term view in their risk policy. In the context of long-term interest rate developments, there are some good arguments which say that, in the future, the average interest rate level could be lower than in the past. But that does not mean we should assume that the current level of interest rates represents the new equilibrium. Even assuming that the average interest rate level will decline, the prevailing level of interest rates in recent years has been exceptional. For example, long-term rates are currently just under 300 basis points lower than the average in the ten years before the onset of the financial crisis. Moreover, experience shows that, depending on economic developments, interest rates can increase very rapidly and unexpectedly, overshooting long-term equilibrium values. A broad-based reduction in the imputed rate or a further increase in interest rate risk exposures across the board could also lead to a renewed acceleration of momentum on the mortgage and real estate markets. The SNB will continue to monitor developments closely, and will regularly reassess the need for an adjustment of the countercyclical capital buffer. Announcement of issuance date for 20-franc note I would like to close with a few remarks about the new banknote series. On 12 April 2016, the SNB successfully released the new 50-franc note. The new note has since proved its worth and its reception among the public and experts alike has been broadly positive. As expected, today – a good six months after the new note was issued – around two-thirds of the eighth-series 50-franc notes originally in circulation have been exchanged. The next denomination to be released will be the 20-franc note. It will be presented at a press conference on Wednesday, 10 May 2017, and the first notes will be issued one week later, on 17 May 2017. The new 20-franc notes will be put into circulation continuously from that date onwards. Issuance of the third denomination, the 10-franc note, is planned for autumn 2017. We will announce the exact date in due course. 
Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Financial System ReviewOpening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the pressconference following the release of the Financial System Review, Ottawa, Ontario, 15 December2016.*   *   *Good morning. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I are happy to be here to discusstoday’s Financial System Review (FSR). Let me begin with a few remarks about GoverningCouncil’s deliberations.First, a brief reminder about our methodology. Most of the analysis in the FSR is aboutvulnerabilities here in Canada. These are pre-existing conditions that may interact with changesin our economic situation to present risks to the financial system. Macroeconomic shockshappen all the time and economies adjust to them. But if significant financial vulnerabilities arepresent, the effects of those shocks on the economy and on the financial system may bemagnified through interactions with the underlying vulnerabilities. The metaphor we have used isthat of a large tree with a crack in it—the situation may improve or worsen over time, but there’sno immediate crisis until the wrong sort of storm comes along.Within this analytical framework, many possible shocks could, in theory, transform financialvulnerabilities into financial stability risks. We offer illustrative risk scenarios in the FSR. Ofcourse, it is possible to draw logical links between almost any macroeconomic shock, anywherein the world, and financial stability here in Canada, like a “butterfly effect.” We make no attempt tocatalogue all of these possibilities, the consequences of which would all look quite similar.Instead, we focus more of our analysis on underlying vulnerabilities in Canada.That being said, household financial vulnerabilities continue to rise in Canada. We separatethese vulnerabilities into two areas, household indebtedness and housing market imbalances.This separation is important, since although they often go hand-in-hand, it is possible that overtime one of them will diminish more than the other.This separation has always been present in our analysis, but Governing Council sought tosharpen the distinction in this FSR. This is because macroprudential measures have beenintroduced in recent months that will serve primarily to mitigate the potential consequences forthe financial system of rising household debt. These measures relate to mortgage qualifyingcriteria, which will raise the underlying quality of household indebtedness over time, and tofinancial institutions’ capital requirements and pricing criteria, which will make them moreresilient to future shocks.Accordingly, these policies will help mitigate financial stability risks over time. When it comes tohousing activity and prices, the measures will weigh on demand, especially for more expensivehouses. But demographic demand remains robust, job creation and income growth have beenstrong in the greater Vancouver and Toronto areas, and housing supply constraints continue tobind. There is a box in the FSR that describes the macroprudential measures that have beentaken and how they might be expected to affect housing fundamentals. The important takeawayis that one cannot judge the effectiveness of these policies simply by observing whether houseprices continue to rise. This is because the measures are aimed at mitigating risks tohouseholds and to the financial system, not at house prices per se. The effects of these policieswill be greatest in Vancouver and Toronto, because that is where the majority of high loan-to-income mortgages are being granted.In this context, Governing Council noted that price increases have begun to slow noticeably inVancouver, but it is too early to determine the new trend. It is noteworthy that market activitybegan to slow before the imposition of the special tax on sales of homes to non-residents, which 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
suggests that other factors may have begun to interrupt the cycle of extrapolative priceexpectations. However, the situation remains highly uncertain, and we have seen no signs of asimilar moderation in the Toronto area. Again, we must emphasize that a moderating housingmarket, as we have seen in Calgary, for example, may ease financial stability concerns on onefront, but leave the level of household debt at a very high level.Governing Council’s discussions of these risks were also influenced by the backup in globalbond yields since the US election. Canada’s bond yields have responded, as is typically thecase, albeit in less than a one-for-one fashion. This has led to some increases in Canadianmortgage rates. We will monitor these developments carefully in the months ahead. As we madeclear in our recent interest rate announcement, we will continue to follow an independentmonetary policy in Canada, one aimed at returning inflation to our 2 per cent target.Finally, there has been considerable discussion in financial markets about possible shortages ofbond market liquidity. Many have pointed to regulatory changes as contributing to this. At thesame time, markets functioned exceptionally well following the UK referendum on leaving theEuropean Union and the US election.This issue continues to draw attention at the international level. In this FSR, we bring some newanalysis to the table, which draws upon an in-depth market survey conducted by the CanadianFixed-Income Forum, an industry group established by the Bank. Governing Councilacknowledges that there are pockets where liquidity problems are more evident, such ascorporate bonds, off-the-run government bonds and certain repo markets. But we also recognizethat markets have yet to fully adapt to the new regulatory requirements. Further, the pre-crisisperiod may not be the best standard for comparison, because liquidity was excessive andvirtually costless at that time. It is reasonable to expect that liquidity will be marginally more costly—and market-making less lucrative—under the new regulatory regime, and that marketparticipants will continue to adapt against the backdrop of a more resilient financial system. Wewill continue to monitor market behaviour and to engage with market participants, while pursuingwork on the impact of regulatory reforms at the international level.With that, Ms. Wilkins and I will be happy to respond to your questions. 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
John Iannis Mourmouras: Post-Brexit effects on global monetarypolicy and capital marketsSpeech by Professor John Iannis Mourmouras, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at anevent organised by the Hellenic American Association for Professionals in Finance (HABA), NewYork City, 5 October 2016.*   *   *Views expressed in this speech are personal views and do not necessarily reflect those of theinstitutions I am affiliated with.Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a great pleasure to be here. I would like to thank the Directors and the new President ofHABA, Fanny Trataros, for the kind invitation and also Bob Savage for his welcoming remarks.Fanny, please allow me here to wish you all the best with your work for the Greek-Americanfinancial community. In the early days following the UK vote to leave the EU, most people were very apprehensive,even fearful, I dare say, about what the future would bring. Once again the end of the world hasnot come… yet. I decided to speak today about the implications of this seminal decision by theBritish people for themselves, but also for the rest of continental Europe, offering a moresanguine and all-around view. No matter if it is a light or full-blown Brexit, the surroundinguncertainty impacts political sentiment in other EU Member States and heightens pressure toadopt inward-looking policies. As a result, the future European and global economic and financialoutlook remains inconclusive. My lecture will be structured around the following three questions. Firstly, a little bit of financeand, more specifically, which are the future post-Brexit prospects of global capital markets. Icouldn’t avoid this question given the audience’s involvement in the financial industry. My secondquestion is about monetary policy and, in particular, about the implications of the Brexit vote forwhat central banks do, including the ECB. The third question regards the dynamics of Europeanintegration following the Brexit vote, offering a Southern point of view on the subject. 1. The post-Brexit prospects of global capital markets It is true that financial markets have weathered the spike in uncertainty in the aftermath of theBrexit vote surprisingly well, while the IMF has downgraded from high to medium the risk forBrexit’s repercussions on the UK itself, the EU and the global economy. However, for marketanalysts, private investors and the official sector, the question remains pending: has the tail riskscenario really diminished? First, allow me to make two-three general remarks on the globalfinancial markets’ latest developments before giving you my own insights on the prospects byyear-end for the so-called G4 (US, UK, eurozone and Japan) major currencies, as well as equityand bond markets. • General remarks 1. Heightened policy uncertainty While the market outlook stabilises, political risks take center stage, as there is almost onemonth left (only 32 days) until November election day. After Brexit any ballot can bring disorder.Looking ahead, we will see a busy electoral agenda on both sides of the Atlantic. First is the USpresidential election, it follows the Italian referendum on constitutional reform in early December,and in 2017 there are elections in the Netherlands, the Czech Republic, France and Germany. 1 / 15BIS central bankers' speeches
Italy is set to follow in early 2018. Given rising populism, there is a non-negligible risk that one ofthese events might produce a political “accident”. Moreover, the prevailing uncertainty is likelyalready to be acting as a headwind (Figure 1). Brexit, however, offers an interesting lesson.Rather than the dramatic event of imminent recession and financial turmoil feared, it looks set tobe a prolonged, slow process driving structurally weaker growth. 2. Volatility remains low in fragile global markets Following the Brexit vote, implied volatilities followed a downward trend towards or below levelsrecorded at the start of the year. Stock market volatility quickly approached the lows last seen inJuly 2014 and FX implied volatility is trading today near historic lows. Volatilities in other marketswere less subdued, fluctuating around their recent averages and are still far from their depths in2014 (Figures 2, 3, 4).  2 / 15BIS central bankers' speeches
Although, markets proved resilient to a number of potentially disruptive political developments,questions linger as to whether the configuration of asset prices accurately reflected theunderlying risks. The apparent contrast between record low bond yields, on the one hand, andsharply higher stock prices with subdued volatility, on the other, cast a shadow over suchvaluations. 3. Global growth is continuing along at a slow pace A range of indicators suggest that the euro area economy remained remarkably resilient after thevote. The negative impact of the UK’s vote to leave the EU on growth, in the UK and the euroarea appears to have been materially less than initially expected. ECB’s President Draghi saidrecently that the effect of the Brexit vote on the eurozone’s growth is estimated at around 0.5%over three years. Despite an array of negative domestic and external events over the past twoyears – the Ukraine crisis, the fear of a Grexit, China’s currency volatility, banking sector volatilityand the Brexit vote – the euro economy has sustained a remarkably steady pace of growthbetween 1.3% and 1.8%. Thus, the GDP growth for the euro area is estimated at 1.7% growth forthis year, while for next year, the economy is seen slowing to a pace of 1.6%, as Brexit hampersinvestment and export flows in the region. As far as the UK is concerned, resumed political stability, a weaker currency and the Bank ofEngland’s policy response look to have stabilised activity, after confidence fell sharply in the wakeof the vote, and now the British economy is expected to exhibit significant resilience post-Brexit.That may be sufficient for GDP to avoid a modest contraction. According to the Bank ofEngland’s latest Inflation Report, GDP is forecast to remain unchanged to 2% in 2016, whereasthe 2017 forecast was slashed to 0.8% from a previous estimate of 2.3%, i.e. a drop exceedingthe one seen during the 2008 financial crisis! Correction in asset prices, a housing marketdownturn, or a large decline in consumption, represent downside risks to the UK’s economy. As regards other advanced economies, the 2016 growth forecast was marked slightly down to1.6%, while the global growth is projected to slow to 3.1% in 2016 before recovering to 3.4% in2017. One of the more problematic features of the current cycle is its over-reliance onconsumers, while business investment and trade continue to disappoint. • Foreign exchange markets  3 / 15BIS central bankers' speeches
I turn to foreign exchange (FX) prospects by end-year. The euro against the dollar Political developments on both sides of the little pond seem to be the major driver of FX pricedevelopments (US Presidential elections, referendums-national elections in Europe). As a result,the dollar’s strength is expected to be limited and the euro against the dollar to move in a tightrange of 1.06–1.16 by year-end. British pound The pound sterling lost almost 10% in value after the referendum result was announced, by 16%since mid-November 2015 and has not recovered since. Of course, the Bank of England’smeasures announced in August have also contributed to avoiding a shock wave in the face ofgreat uncertainty. Still, the uncertainty surrounding the timing and the “type of Brexit” to beimplemented, given the size of the current account deficit and the uncertainty around thecontinuation of foreign capital inflows, poses a big risk for the pound and further depreciation isexpected, albeit, at a somewhat lesser extent than originally expected. Sterling investors thusface continuing pain for the foreseeable future. As a result, an expected range for the euroagainst the pound by year-end is between 0.83–0.90 (Figures 5, 6).  4 / 15BIS central bankers' speeches
 Yen My personal view is that the most challenging currency the months ahead is the yen! Monetarystimulus has not achieved a lasting weakening of Japan’s currency and the reflation of theeconomy is still away. Since Bank of Japan’s last policy meeting, the new name of the game forits monetary policy is “QQE (qualitative quantitative easing) with yield curve control”. Although the Bank of Japan kept interest rates unchanged at minus 0.1%, it announced a newframework with two main elements: the first is a pledge to cap 10-year government bond yieldsat 0.0%. Second, the Bank of Japan has pledged to continue buying assets until inflation“exceeds the price stability target of 2% and stays above the target in a stable manner”. This is anew inflation overshooting commitment. Sounds to me a bit optimistic! An expected range for theEUR/JPY exchange rate by year-end is between 1.10–1.25 (see Figure 7).  5 / 15BIS central bankers' speeches
• Equities Global equity markets have also recovered from Brexit and by mid-July, despite flaggingearnings, stock markets in the US had broken through all-time highs, while the emerging marketequities experiencing strong performance, returning to levels last seen a year earlier. All threemain equity indices (S&P 500, Dow Jones, Nasdaq) reached all-time highs around the middle ofAugust. European stock exchanges have recouped the losses suffered as a result of the Brexitvote (Figures 8, 9). However, recent developments surrounding the banking system, clearly addto uncertainties making equity markets outlook rather foggy! Taking into account the recentDeutsche Bank’s troubles, I just wanted to mention that it is among the systemically mostimportant banks in the world and the IMF concluded in its June Financial Stability assessmentthat it made the largest net contribution to global systemic risk. However, there are somereassuring factors. The global financial system is now much better capitalised and able towithstand shocks than it was in 2008. Even if the worse came to worst, it seems likely that theGerman Government would provide a bailout. And the German Government could easily afford abail-out without raising concerns about its own finances.  6 / 15BIS central bankers' speeches
• Bonds Finally, on fixed income, core bond yields continued to probe historical lows after Brexit. Moreprecisely, German 10-year bond yields hover in the area of –0.07% and the peripheral bondshave been the main beneficiaries of the hunt-for-yield environment along with the benign riskenvironment as reflected in declining volatilities across asset classes. Also, the US governmentbond yields declined further near 1.50%, mainly due to the Fed’s delay in raising rates (Figure10). Thus, markets went through the Brexit vote with little or no disruption to functioning withample liquidity.   7 / 15BIS central bankers' speeches
2. Implications of Brexit for central banks a. Less monetary policy divergence The Brexit vote triggered a broad-based reassessment of the future path of monetary policyglobally. With improving headline growth still perceived as fragile in most advanced economies,and inflation still persistently low, the distinct response from major central banks to the Brexituncertainty can be described as dovish: policy rates would stay “low for longer”. Bank of England The Bank of England cut the policy rate by 25 basis points (it is now 0.25%), and expanded thegovernment bond purchase scheme by £60 billion, bringing the total to £435 billion. It alsoestablished a new corporate bond purchase program of £10 billion, and launched a new TermFunding Scheme that will provide funding for banks at rates close to the monetary policy rate.Forward interest rates for December 2017 quickly dropped to the new level of the policy rate,reflecting the view that a quick policy reversal was not expected (Figure 11).The prospect offurther Bank of England policy easing in the coming months cannot be ruled out, as the minutesfrom the September 14th Bank of England MPC meeting revealed that the majority of the policymembers are expected to support a further rate cut in the course of the year if the UK’seconomic outlook is judged to be “broadly consistent” with August projections (i.e. GDP growth isexpected to slow to 0.1% quarter-on-quarter in Q3 2016 from 0.6% quarter-on-quarter in Q22016).  8 / 15BIS central bankers' speeches
Federal Reserve Following the Brexit shock in the US, a 2016 rate rise is not fully priced in the market with theimplied probability of a Fed rate hike in December 2016 to be around 55% today (Figure 11, right-hand panel). In addition, the Fed at the September policy meeting cut the longer-run federal fundsrate to 2.9% from 3.0% previously, while, based on the updated dot-pot, the median path ofappropriate monetary policy for 2017 shifted in a dovish direction. Bank of Japan The Bank of Japan in its last policy meeting launched a novel kind of monetary easing as it set acap on 10-year bond yields and vowed to take action to overshoot its 2% inflation target. Itsdecision demonstrates that central bankers are still willing to experiment with new monetarypolicy ideas, as inflation remains too low. Some observers characterised this shift as probablythe biggest innovation in monetary policy since the introduction of negative deposit rates by theDanish central bank in the summer of 2012! But what actually does this new monetary policyframework in Japan mean (we may call it long-term interest rate targeting) and what are itsimplications? There are two main issues here under consideration: firstly, this is another policy dilemma of thenature “prices vs. quantities” and secondly, it is a further accommodative monetary policystance, but with an asterisk. Starting with the first, it seems that the role of quantities such as themonetary base is downgraded and becomes much less important than before. In other words,instead of committing to buy a fixed amount at a market-determined rate, the Bank of Japan willbuy a potentially unlimited amount at a pre-determined rate (price). It is true that the package of measures allows a lot of flexibility for the Bank of Japan to determinelong-term rates (in addition to short-term base rates), but also raises many questions. For onething, the Bank of Japan is now attempting to control both prices and quantities, which is simplynot feasible! On the other hand, fixing 10-year rates at 0% may require to buy whatever quantityof bonds necessary to deliver rate stability, which may mean buying more or less than its targetpace of ¥80 trillion per year. In other words, the Bank of Japan could reduce the pace of QEpurchases in the future if it thinks it can achieve its yield target with fewer bond purchases, for 9 / 15BIS central bankers' speeches
example in a scenario where markets perceive the Bank of Japan’s yield target as credible oryields turn negative! Any potential reduction in bond purchases would be equivalent to tapering. Itis exactly this built-in tapering mechanism that explains the asterisk I mentioned above. In otherwords, it is conceivable in the future that the Bank of Japan could be forced to sell JGBs ifmarkets challenge the central bank by pushing the 10-year JGB yield well below its 0% target.This selling would be equivalent to a reversal of QE, it could be self-defeating in the case whereinflation is still too low. ECB At its latest GC meeting, the European Central Bank (ECB) announced that it will extend its QEprogramme beyond March 2017 if needed. Looking forward, markets expect the eurozoneeconomy to need more stimulus from the ECB as the gap between current headline inflation(0.2% year-to-date average), the ECB’s inflation forecasts (1.2% in 2017, 1.6% in 2018) and itshigher target justify further policy easing (Figure 12).   So far, there is some encouraging evidence from the ECB’s ongoing QE programme. In more detail: Banking credit channel Loan growth continued to recover gradually as the annual growth rate of the monetary financialinstitutions (MFIs) loans to the private sector (adjusted for loan sales, securitisation and notionalcash pooling) is expected to increase further in the second quarter of 2016 and in July (seeFigure 13), particularly for private companies (non-financial corporations or NFCs in ECB jargon)(see Figure 14) which recovered substantially from the trough of the first quarter of 2014. Lendingto companies grew by 1.9% year-o-year, while household lending grew by 1.8%.  10 / 15BIS central bankers' speeches
A significant improvement has also been observed in Eurosystem banks’ composite cost of debtfinancing, which declined in July to a new historical low, after broadly stabilising in the secondquarter of 2016 (see Figure 15).  Also, banks reported a further net easing of credit standards on loans to enterprises in the 11 / 15BIS central bankers' speeches
second quarter of 2016, suggesting a continued improvement in financing conditions forcorporate loans. Across the largest euro area countries, overall terms and conditions easedacross all larger countries except for Germany (Table 1). In most of the large euro areacountries, in particular, France and Italy, banks continued to report a narrowing of margins onaverage loans in net terms. Margins on riskier loans widened in net terms in Spain and Germany. Furthermore, bank lending rates for the private sector remained on a downward trend in thesecond quarter of 2016 and in July (see Figure 16). Composite lending rates for NFCs andhouseholds have decreased by significantly more than market reference rates since June 2014,and between May 2014 and July 2016, composite lending rates on loans to euro area NFCs(corporate loans) and households (i.e. mortgages) fell by around 100 basis points. The reductionin bank lending rates was especially strong in vulnerable euro area countries, indicating reducingfragmentation in euro area financial markets. Over the same period, the spread between interestrates charged on very small loans (loans of up to €0.25 million) and those charged on large loans(loans of above €1 million) in the euro area followed a downward trend. This indicates that small-and medium-sized enterprises have generally been benefiting to a greater extent than largecompanies from the decline in lending rates.  12 / 15BIS central bankers' speeches
b. QE vs. negative rates Staying in the eurozone and taking as a given fact that we will move towards moreaccommodative monetary policy in the months ahead, a more open question is: which policyinstrument will be used? More QE or further negative rates? This is the essence of the monetarypolicy debate in the eurozone today. Clearly, there are limits to persistent negative rates, namely the underlying question is how farand for how long they can actually go. There are a number of concerns including banks’profitability, how negative rates may act as an anaesthetic to euro area governments especiallyin the euro area’s southern periphery, taking into account that the fiscal space gained from lowerdebt service costs may result in a slower implementation of necessary fiscal and structuralreforms. Policy rate cuts to negative levels have generally been reflected in corresponding declines inmoney market rates and short-term government bond yields (see Figure 17). In turn, the fall inbank wholesale funding costs has helped lower lending rates, but to varying degrees acrosscountries. The decline in rates on new loans has been particularly notable in the eurozone (Viñalset al. 2016, Jobst and Lin 2016). Inflation expectations have continued to decline in mosteconomies with negative interest rate policies (also known as NIRP countries). 13 / 15BIS central bankers' speeches
In addition, there are concerns about the political and institutional feasibility of negative rates astheir long-term effects are still unknown. Most importantly, their effectiveness is put underquestion during a recession, if this were to emerge in the near future. I would personally, in my professorial hat, prefer to see more QE rather than further negativerates. If this is the case, the next question is where could more QE in the eurozone come from?In other words, does the ECB have the tools for more QE stimulus? Well, there are several options. From changing the parameters of the current QE programmelike, for instance, buying bonds below the deposit rate, increasing the 33% issue share limit,dropping the capital key allocation, or even adding new securities to the pool of eligible assetssuch as bank bonds or equity. Let me now turn to the effects of Brexit on the dynamics of European integration and indeed offera southern point of view and, more particularly, make five points from the South on the Brexitvote. 3. A Southern view on Brexit’s implications for the EUThe European Union is currently facing crises on multiple fronts (anaemic growth, highunemployment, persistently low inflation close to deflation, a debt crisis, an ongoing migrantcrisis), but Brexit represents the biggest medium- to long-term challenge of all. I will focus hereon a couple of rather important points. 1 14 / 15BIS central bankers' speeches
Euroscepticism is now a strong sentiment in Europe. Populist, authoritarian parties are ingovernment or in a ruling coalition in nine (9) countries of the EU. This is an alarming figure.Referendums in Italy and Hungary, and national elections next year in the Netherlands, the CzechRepublic, France and Germany, are expected to reinforce this eurosceptic mood. Beyond the obvious economic concerns which triggered the UK vote to leave the EU, everyoneagrees that the EU needs to address the issue of its democratic deficit and accountability. In addition, it has long been argued that the European Union remains a ‘market without a state’.This quote perhaps summarises the debate on European integration over the last 40 years atleast. The most frequent complaint regarding the way the EU works is that it is governed by anelite of unelected technocrats through several independent European institutions and bodies(including the ECB). In light of the above issues of democratic deficit and accountability, Europeans are increasinglydisenchanted with the EU, as shown by the rise of populist, authoritarian parties. Support forpopulist political parties with eurosceptic credentials has been rising, that is, parties which are bynature more Eurosceptic and less oriented towards reforms, which of course the South badlyneeds. As a result, this is a major downside risk to debt sustainability in this part of the euroarea. For continental Europe, Brexit represents a shock to the institutions and norms that underpinmarkets, albeit different from the euro break-up fears of 2012, the global financial crisis of 2008or the bursting of the high-tech bubble of 2001. The origins of previous financial crises can belocated in multiple factors that are linked with the financial system and the economic cycle,respectively. The risk today is not financial contagion, like in 2008. Instead, it represents acontagious political development. No matter whether we have a full-blown or a light Brexit, thepolitical risk for the continent is that referendums may mushroom across Europe in a tug-of-warbetween populist forces and the political establishment and elites. Brexit has the potential tounleash centrifugal forces, leading perhaps to a breakup of the euro, especially if such areferendum were to be held this time in a major eurozone country. Perhaps such a referendumis more likely in a southern eurozone country. Thank you very much for your attention. For a more detailed account, see my speech (September 2016) at Banca d’ Italia, Rome.1 15 / 15BIS central bankers' speeches
Yannis Stournaras: The Greek economy and the contribution oftourism to growthSpeech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the Conference of theGreek Tourism Association (SETE) "The Greek economy and the contribution of tourism togrowth", Athens, 17 October 2016.*   *   *Taking stock of the programme implementation We are now a third of the way through the extent of the programme agreed in July 2015 andending in June 2018. This agreement reoriented economic policy towards realistic goals and came up as the onlysolution in view of the major risks that hanged over Greece in the summer of 2015. As an interim stocktaking of programme implementation, our assessment is that progress hasbeen slow, but with expected positive results: The completion of the first review and the recent enactment of the second set of prior actionshave strengthened confidence and the prospect of economic recovery. This developmentbrought multiple benefits, which have a positive impact on liquidity and should boost economicactivity in the second half of 2016. In particular, following the reinstatement of the eligibility of Greek government bonds as collateralfor Eurosystem operations, Greek banks can now have access to lower-cost refinancing fromthe European Central Bank (ECB), which, combined with changes in the domestic bankingsystem, can translate into lower borrowing costs for businesses. Moreover, the dissipation ofuncertainty, the stabilisation of private sector deposits and the progress made with therestructuring of Greek banks have enabled since early June 2016 successive reductions of theemergency liquidity assistance (ELA) ceiling for Greek banks, by €16.3 billion in total, so that theceiling currently stands at €51.8 billion. The above developments, coupled with the lifting of restrictions on cash withdrawals when thefunds come from new deposits in cash (new money), should encourage, in the medium term,the return of deposits to the domestic banking system, which in turn will allow a further easingand ultimately the elimination of capital controls. The economy’s gradual improvement starts being reflected in the course of severalmacroeconomic indicators. Specifically: Industrial production rose by 2.0% year-on-year in January-August 2016, mainly due to asignificant rise in manufacturing (+4.8% yoy). In July 2016, the retail sales volume index increased by 9.7% year-on-year, while theseasonally adjusted retail sales volume index increased by 4.9% month-on-month. According to data from the ERGANI information system of the Ministry of Labour, SocialSecurity and Solidarity, the balance of salaried employment flows in the private sector inJanuary-August 2016 was positive, with the creation of 237,817 new jobs, up by 51,793relative to one year earlier. Data from ELSTAT’s Labour Force Survey for the second quarter of 2016 suggest a declinein the unemployment rate to 23.1%, from 24.9% in the previous quarter and 24.6% in thecorresponding quarter of 2015. The forecasts of the Bank of Greece point to economic recovery starting from the second half of 1 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
2016 and continuing in the years 2017 and 2018. Specifically, a small reduction in the order of0.3% in GDP is expected for 2016, followed by growth of 2 5% and 3% for 2017 and 2018,respectively. These forecasts are based on the assumption that the reforms and privatisationsagreed between the Greek government and the institutions will be implemented and the relevantfund disbursements will be completed in time, so as to support liquidity in the Greek economy,and that the ECB’s monetary policy accommodation will remain in place. Regarding the inflation outlook, the downward trend of prices is expected to bottom out in 2016and be followed by gradual increases in 2017 and 2018. The unemployment rate is expected tokeep falling in 2016, although at a slow pace that should pick up in 2017–2018. However, risks to the path of the Greek economy remain. Any delays in the completion of thesecond review, and particularly in the implementation of reforms and privatisations, woulddampen the increase in economic activity, resulting in a resurgence of uncertainty, underminingconfidence and weakening the prospects for a definitive exit from the crisis. Meanwhile, there are still a number of risks and uncertainties surrounding the outlook of theEuropean and world economy, relating to, among other things, the planned UK exit from theEuropean Union (EU) and a possible worsening of the refugee crisis. Also, risks are posed by apotential surge of protectionism and more simplistic approaches to complex problems, on bothsides of the Atlantic, based on isolationism rather than cooperation and coordination. These riskscould slow the recovery of the Greek economy, through a negative impact on tourism and tradeor a slower-than-expected decline in Greek government bond yields due to risk aversion amonginternational investors. To address these risks and confirm the positive outlook, we need to promptly and effectivelytackle a number of major issues lying ahead, which will ultimately determine the outcome of theprogramme as a whole and Greece’s ability to regain access to markets thereafter. 1st Speeding up the implementation of the programme The first and most important issue refers to commitment to the programme’s objectives, inparticular the need to speed up the implementation of the agreed reforms. The next few days willsee the start of the second review, which will be looking at a number of fundamental structuralreforms, with expected positive effects on economic activity. The review must be completedwithout any delay. This will allow these positive effects to be felt soon, thereby strengthening theprospect of growth in the Greek economy at an accelerating pace from 2017 onwards. 2nd Non-performing loans The second, equally serious, issue that represents a challenge for banks, the government andthe Bank of Greece alike, refers to the restructuring of the banking system, so as to restorenormal financing conditions in the private sector. Strengthening the banking system and freeing-up resources for financing the economy requires tackling the bulk of non-performing loans assoon as possible. Effective management of non-performing loans is key to both the recovery of credit expansionand the restructuring of enterprises and sectors across the economy. To this end, the Bank of Greece has stepped up its efforts by promoting, in cooperation with thegovernment, a number of major initiatives, the implementation of which needs to be acceleratedand completed in the coming months. Let me indicatively mention some of these initiatives: the development of a secondary market for loans (performing or non-performing); the reform of the framework for out-of-court debt settlements; the improvement of infrastructure and expertise of the judicial framework;  2 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
the legislative reform to ensure that existing shareholders participate in the reorganisation ofcompanies, or otherwise immediately withdraw. In parallel, however, banks need to adopt a more active NPL management policy, focusing onlong-term solutions, multi-creditor workouts and restructuring of viable companies, with theparticipation of shareholders. During the protracted period of the crisis, the private sector has paid a high toll. Uncertainty,crumbling demand, funding constraints and high indebtedness as a legacy of the past havedriven many companies out of business, thousands of workers to unemployment and the volumeof NPLs to burgeoned levels. At the same time, though, we also see certain sectors of theeconomy that have suffered less or no losses from the crisis, but still do not reduce – as onewould reasonably expect – their non-performing loan ratios. Regarding the industries that are directly related to tourism (accommodation and food serviceactivities), during the crisis their shares in terms of both value added and employment haveincreased. At the same time, however, the non-performing exposures as a ratio of total loans tothese sectors has also risen, to 54.3% at the end of the first half of 2016, a level much higherthan the corresponding NPE ratio for the total economy (45.1%). This is a phenomenon thatneeds to be investigated and addressed. 3rd Debt The third major challenge lying ahead pertains to the launch of in-depth discussions with ourpartners on debt relief measures. Debt relief is crucial, in both the long and the short run. For, ifthe Greek debt is seen as unsustainable, the country’s predicted exit to markets in 2018 will notbe feasible. Therefore talks have to begin now and conclude as soon as possible. Besides, thediscussion of ways to alleviate the Greek debt is a commitment undertaken by our partners asearly as in 2012, and reaffirmed last May, but not fulfilled as yet. *** The role of tourism in the new growth model Unquestionably, the problems I mentioned are large and hard to solve. But I believe that we canovercome them, if we act with prudence, determination and mutual understanding. I also believethat the Greek economy has the ability and the potential to return to a sustainable upward paththrough a new extroverted growth model, taking advantage of its strong comparative advantagesand the opportunities presented. In this process, tourism has a key role to play, for the followingreasons: It is by definition an extroverted industry. It has been comparatively less hit by the recession and has preserved its productivecapacity. Especially from 2013 onwards, it has shown remarkable growth performance, as Ialready mentioned. Second, it represents a sizeable share of GDP. In 2015, travel receipts contributed directlyabout 8% of GDP, compared with 5% in 2008. In terms of macroeconomic multipliers,various studies estimate that every euro in tourist spending adds €2.2-2.6 to GDP. Researchalso suggests that the sectors which benefit the most from the development of the tourismproduct are trade, financial services, property management, construction andmanufacturing. As regards the export performance of the economy, for 2014 tourism services representedroughly 43% of total receipts of the services balance, while net tourism receipts (receiptsminus payments) accounted for 62% of the services surplus. In 2015, due to the negativeimpact of capital controls on shipping, the weight of tourism receipts rose to 50.6% in total 3 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
receipts from services, while net tourism receipts accounted for about 71% of the servicessurplus. Third, tourism as a business activity is being modernised, and the quality of the tourismproduct is being improved: search for new markets, promotion and exploitation of the culturalproduct of Greece, new innovative units, promotion and development of the country’s cities. Surveys conducted by the Bank of Greece The Bank of Greece recognises the importance of tourism to the Greek economy andunderstands that timely and objective information on the development of tourism-relatedaggregates is essential for fulfilling its mandate. We attach great importance to the collection ofreliable and comparable statistics over time on the tourism sector. For this reason, we gobeyond what is required to meet our obligations to the ECB and international organisations, andcollect more thorough and detailed data regarding this sector. Since 2002 the Bank of Greece conducts the Border Survey, aiming not only to record inboundand outbound traveller flows, but also, and most importantly, to calculate travel expenditure inGreece. The survey on incoming travellers is based on a very large sample, of at least 25,000inbound visitors. The Border Survey is fully harmonised with the guidelines of internationalorganisations (IMF, ECB, Eurostat). In particular, the relevant mirror statistics, compiled on anannual basis by Eurostat (in the context of the Travel Working Group), show Greece’s travelexpenditure and traffic data to be fully consistent with the corresponding figures of the otherEU28 countries, with differences of below 2%. The Border Survey, among the mostcomprehensive ones in the EU, is conducted at the 12 largest airports of the country, whichcover around 95% of visitors, at all seaports of entry and at the six main road entry points. Theresulting data are combined with administrative information and regularly cross-checked againstrespective data from the visitors’ countries of origin, so as to ensure compliance with thestandards set for the quality checks carried out by the ECB. The Border Survey is conducted at the time of departure from Greece, when visitors knowexactly how much they have spent here. To calculate expenditure, respondents provide anestimate of: (a) their total expenditure; (b) any relevant amounts they have paid in their homecountries (e.g. through a travel agency, directly to an airline, etc.) for transport, accommodation,other services or a cruise package; (c) if possible and more specifically within the previouscategory, any amount corresponding to travel costs; and (d) the breakdown of the amount spentin Greece for accommodation, cafes and restaurants, transportation, entertainment, andshopping. The Border Survey is conducted according to a consistent methodology over time to ensureintertemporal comparability, but its content and scope are expanded and adjusted in response tochanges in international rules and to the changing information requirements. Since the beginningof 2016, the Border Survey has included a specific question about the visitors’ geographicaldestination within Greece, and the first data should be published towards the end of this year.This information will be particularly useful in the development of the tourism satellite accounts,which is a long-standing demand. Further to the Border Survey, in 2012 the Bank of Greecelaunched a more focused Cruise Survey. This survey, unique in Europe, relies mainly onadministrative data from 16 major ports that account for 85% of total cruise traffic, which –starting from this year – will be enriched with data from targeted sample surveys. Recent developments In 2016, Greek tourism faced a number of challenges after a record year in terms of arrivals andreceipts in 2015. Let me recall that in 2015 Greece welcomed over 26 million tourists, 7.6% morethan in 2014, while tourism receipts exceeded €14 billion, rising by 5.5%. In addition to economicweakness in Europe, where most visitors come from, the refugee crisis combined with 4 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
geopolitical developments in our region and increased fears of terrorism have discouragedvisitors from coming to Greece. It is estimated that during the first half of this year, when theimpact of the refugee crisis was stronger, road arrivals decreased by 15%, while to date flightarrivals to the islands of the eastern Aegean are particularly reduced. The UK’s decision to leavethe EU has been a further negative factor. In this respect, let me mention that in July, the firstmonth after the British referendum, the decline in tourism spending by UK citizens in our countryexceeded 35%, whereas previously the British had been one of the most robust categories ofvisitors. Without this reduction, total receipts in July would have increased instead of decreasing. Tourism stakeholders in our country have tried to respond to external challenges by redoublingefforts to attract visitors. The number of arrivals has thus remained on an upward trend in 2016as well. To some extent, however, this was achieved by highly competitive pricing, somethingthat ultimately had a negative effect on total travel receipts. For the year as a whole, prices arelikely to show a decline, slightly faster than the average rate of decline observed in the last tenyears. On a positive note, however, the downward trend in average stay in our country hasbottomed out, and the first half of 2016 saw a slight increase. The differentiation of tourism demand The decline in tourism receipts despite the growing numbers of visitors is partly attributed tolower prices, as noted above. However, it also relates in part to a longer-term trend, namely thedecline in spending per visitor and per night of stay, observed in the past few years. Since 2005such spending has fallen on average by 2.5% annually, coming down to €598 per visitor in Julythis year, from €746 in 2005. To some extent this reflects the downward trend in the averagedays of stay in the country, from 10.7 days in 2005 to 7.2 in 2015. This is a result of changes inboth the income situation of visitors, as Greece attracts fewer high-income visitors, and the mixof visitors’ countries of origin, as well as of long-term trends in the global economy, such as theentry of new competitor countries and the use of the Ιnternet that allows price comparisons andintensifies competition. Moreover, arrivals, mainly from traditional markets (UK, Germany, etc.)are close to a saturation point. This means that the tourism growth model has to be adapted,aimed towards a further improvement in product quality and higher specialisation. This would involve: Increasing the number of target markets through appropriate marketing policies and market-specific advertising campaigns. Particular emphasis should be placed on countries with thehighest expenditure per night. Extending the tourist season throughout the year, by developing the tourism product beyondthe traditional “sun and sea” model, creating diversified products, focusing on alternativeforms of tourism such as cultural, conference, religious and medical tourism and themeparks. Particular emphasis should be placed on attracting visitors for short stays (citybreaks), which are typically associated with higher expenditure per day and are lessconcentrated in peak summer months. Establishing Greece as a homeporting and last port country rather than just a port of call forcruises. Reforms A crucial contribution in this direction, i.e. towards stimulating and diversifying tourism demand,will come in the future from the reforms undertaken in recent years. These reforms willstrengthen long-term potential growth by removing existing barriers and increasing competition.Actually, by improving the long-term prospects of tourism, such reforms have already helpedboost investment in high-quality hotels (for instance, between 2009 and 2014 the number of five-star hotels increased by 34% and the number of beds by 32%). Therefore, the improved futureprospects as a result of reforms should further encourage investment and speed up recovery. 5 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
The positive experience of tourism should make all other sectors of the economy equallyreceptive to reforms that enhance competition and extroversion, and ultimately benefit thesectors themselves by increasing demand for their products. Here are some examples of the reforms already enacted: The privatisation of the 14 regional airports, which will strengthen their competitive positionand enable the development of new tourist facilities with direct flight connections to the citiesof departure. The simplification and acceleration of the tourist visa procedure for visitors from emergingmarket economies (Russia, Turkey, China). Regulatory reforms such as the removal of cabotage restrictions, which have alreadyencouraged the development of cruise tourism. Setting up a “one-stop shop” service by the Greek National Tourism Organisation for thepromotion and licencing of large tourism investments. Simplification of the licensing procedures of all tourism businesses in order to reduceadministrative costs and licensing lead times, speeding up the procedures for starting atourism business (which refers to any type of license, such as installation, operation, takingup of business and environmental permits), and processing of licensing applicationselectronically and, in some cases, on the same day. Development of a new form of integrated tourism companies, i.e. tourist complexes. Theserefer to five-star hotels constructed on land plots of no less than 150,000 square meters,together with (a) furnished tourist residences with a minimum surface area of 100 sq.m.available for sale or long-term lease as separate properties; and (b) special tourisminfrastructure facilities, such as golf courses, conference centres, marinas, thalassotherapyand spa resorts, rejuvenation centres, etc. Liberalisation of the tourist guide profession, allowing archaeologists and historians tobecome tourist guides, which was not permitted in the past. Streamlining of procedures and elimination of restrictions on the operation of travel agenciesand car rental companies. Introduction of extended visiting hours for museums and archaeological sites during thespring period. In addition to these reforms, there are a number of other actions that would further strengthentourism, including: Modernisation and upgrading of the other regional airports in the country. Strengthening competition between airlines, as the reduction in air fares will stimulatetourism demand. Upgrading and development of infrastructures such as marinas, which can help to increasesea and nautical tourism, further boosting tourism traffic in Greece. Upgrading of port infrastructures and establishment of a national plan for the development ofcruise tourism – especially home porting cruises. Overall, the enhancement of infrastructures is a prerequisite for the improvement of the tourismproduct. A lot needs to be done in this respect. In particular, I would like to refer to the utilisationof public property and the settlement of outstanding issues regarding land use planning. This willenable us to attract new investment, which will upgrade the tourism product.During the crisis period, the tourism industry – like all other sectors of the Greek economy – wasforced to operate in an environment of increasing tax burdens, which affects competitiveness.The Bank of Greece has repeatedly pointed out this issue and has stressed that fiscal 6 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
adjustment should focus on reducing public spending rather than increasing tax rates. Equallyimportant, though, are the adjustment gains to be achieved through a more effective use of publicproperty and through privatisation.If this happens, it will be easier to alleviate the tax burden by lowering the tax rates. This isessential for creating a business-friendly institutional environment and attracting new investment.*** In closing, I would like to point out that the structural reforms implemented in the past few years,coupled with lower prices, have supported the growth of tourism and mitigated the impact of theeconomic crisis, through a sectoral restructuring of the economy. Increased investment in high-quality hotels and the upgrading of hotel capacity, combined with the tourism industry’s provenadaptability to the new economic conditions, must not be merely continued but intensified, so thattourism can be a driver and an example of the new growth model the country is in need of.  7 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
1  Keynote Speech “Integrating Islamic Commercial and Social Finance to Strengthen Financial System Stability” Agus D.W. Martowardojo Governor of Bank Indonesia  at International Seminar and the 2nd JIMF Call for Papers Surabaya – Indonesia, 27-28 October 2016  Distinguished Speakers, Seminar Participants, Ladies and Gentlemen, Assalamualaikum Warahmatullahi Wabarakatuh, And very good morning to all of you. [Introduction] 1. It is a great honour for me to be here today and to have this opportunity to welcome you in this International Seminar on Islamic and Finance, which also facilitate the 2nd Call for Paper Conference for the Journal of Islamic Monetary Economics and Finance in 2016.  2. As we have already seen across the globe, many people are in a search for a comprehensive formulation of Islamic economics and finance which can be developed not only conceptually, but also implementable to support the economic development in complement to the existing one.  3. The financial turbulence that has deeply impacted to the global economy is still waiting for a momentum to regain its strength and stability. The economic challenges that we are facing today has proven that even for the long standing conventional economics, new approaches and formulations are required to address and to overcome the challenges, such as sustainability of the economic growth and inclusive economic development.  
2  4. The new approach in economic development concept, including the development of Islamic economic concept, should be able to address current issues and to provide credible solutions to the government. This conference serves as one of effective vehicles to facilitate exchange of thoughts and to formulate possible new approach that are worth-considering to complement the existing economic policy to come up with greater inclusiveness and sustainability.  Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 5. The development of Islamic economic and finance has been promising. The three sectors covering Islamic banking, Islamic capital market and also takaful could serve as additional pillars to foster the Islamic economic development. Those three elements have shown tremendous progress in terms of business volume, financial products and also the wider networks to entertain the customers.  6. The Global Islamic commercial finance still dominated by Islamic banking sector, which is accounted for 80% of the whole system. While Islamic banking sector has demonstrated its resilience aftermath the global financial crises by delivering a strong average growth of 17.1% in 2008 to 2011, the latest development showed a moderation pace of growth with an average of 13.8% during 2011 to 2014, or in particular 10% for 2013 and 2014.  Nevertheless, the first half of 2015 has posted a non-annualized upswing growth of 7.96% and therefore, global Islamic banking assets growth in 2015 is expected to once again sustain its double-digit rate.  7. However, subdue global macroeconomic outlook poses considerable risks to global banking sector performance in general. Similar with the performance of Islamic banking sector, the global Sukuk market also experience a slowdown after reached record years for global Sukuk issuances in 2012 and 2013. In 2014 the Sukuk market slowed down to 
3  just over USD100 billion issuances, and the downward trend continue to 2015 where the issuance slides 43% to just around USD60 billion.  8. The development of Islamic commercial finance in Indonesia has similar down trend as the development of global Islamic commercial, especially in 2012-2015, where the growth of Islamic banking reached its lowest of 8.8% annually in 2015, compare to 9.2% annually of its conventional counterpart. However, by July 2016, the growth of Islamic banking has rebounded to reach 12.0% y.o.y, while its conventional counterpart still showed down trend to reach 7.2% y.o.y. Meanwhile, the share of Islamic banking has been stagnant at 4.8%.  9. Nevertheless, Islamic banking in Indonesia is claimed to be the biggest retail Islamic banking in the world with more than 18 million customers and more than 4.500 branches in 2015. 10. The development of Sukuk in Indonesia showed a slight down trend for corporate sukuk in 2009-2014 and for government sukuk in 2011-2014. However, the growth of sukuk has rebounded to 39.4% in 2015 and 29.8% by July 2016 for corporate sukuk, as well as 39.7% in 2015 and 36.28% by July 2016 for government sukuk. The share of sukuk by July 2016 has reached 3.8% for corporate sukuk and 15.6% for government sukuk. 11. The Islamic social finance sector comprises zakat, awqaf and non-profit microfinance institutions.  Although development around Islamic social finance sector is not globally well documented, countries data indicates promising potential. Research by the Islamic Research and Training Institute of IDB (IRTI-IDB) shed some light for the development of global Islamic social finance.  12. It is estimated  that the potential zakat collection in South Asian and South East Asian countries is around USD30 billion in 2011, while in Sub-Saharan Africa countries it could reach around USD24 billion in 2013. On the other hand, the process of estimation of potential 
4  resources from awqaf is more challenging due to gross absence of data in most countries. 13.  The Islamic social finance allows the government to reach wider segment to entertain, particularly the low income society that have been neglected due to inability to provide low cost funds. Henceforth, it becomes our real challenge to better formulate and define the concept of Islamic economics to reach compatibility in both concept and implementation, so that it can be integrated in to the mainstream economic policy. In this international seminar, the Islamic social sector becomes the center point of discussion after considering its potential to further equip the government in delivering prosperity to the society.     Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 14.  Zakat enables those who are considered poor and extremely poor to fulfill their basic needs. Zakat can also be a mean of empowering the poor capable of doing work for producing goods and/or services, but have no or little access to the formal financing. so that the self-employed poor will be empowered to take care for himself and his family. Hence, poverty could be alleviated. 15. Similar to zakat, the management of awqaf also contributes to socio-economic wellbeing. Traditionally, the charitable purpose of awqaf includes educational institutions, orphanages, roads, graveyards, and religious establishment such as mosques. However, in the modern days, the institution of awqaf is encouraged to make awqaf either cash or estates more productive.  16. Through awqaf, charitable clinics, medical centers, shopping complex and commercial centers can be established. This large social-commercial projects finance by the raising awqaf in a planned manner 
5  are considered as an important instruments to improve socio-economic wellbeing in a sustainable way.    17. Unlike the other commercial sources of funds, the zakat funds would never cause unnecessary burden to the economy since the type of the funds is not commercially claimable, and hence, no excessive social costs will occur. The same also goes to the awqaf sector, where, as a matter of fact, more people are endowed with low cost assets. With this huge potential of zakat and awqaf land, we can expect Islamic social finance a significant drive to economic development.  18. Both zakat and awqaf as Islamic social finance can become a buffer as well as an economic stabilizer. Zakat funds provide a transfer payment to the hardest hit poor and needy people caused by recession. Since zakat is a levy on both income and wealth, the redistribution of wealth will always be functional and operative in an Islamic economy due to wealth zakat irrespective of the phase of business cycle.  19. Transfer payments to needy people will continue when the economy faces further recession. Due to its simple and certain collection and also religious obligations than just an involuntary tool of fetching wealth, zakat is always available in good time (peak) and bad time (recession). 20. On the macroeconomic level, proportional zakat linked with income acts as an automatic stabilizer. When personal disposable income decreases due to recession, obligatory zakat also decreases. They do not have to pay the same proportional amount as before, thereby providing an automatic relief for income earners.  21. On the contrary, when aggregate personal disposable income increases (boom period), more zakat is collected and more amount remains at the disposal of government to allocate as transfer payments. Thus zakat enables the distributive allocation works independently and help stabilize the extreme business cycles. As for 
6  awqaf, since the principal of awqaf will always increase from time to time, due to return of productive activities and new awqaf collection, awqaf could act as shock absorber of economic shocks.  Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 22. Despite the potential, we also realize that in order to manage zakat and awqaf efficiently and prudently so that poverty alleviation and socio-economic wellbeing can be materialized, the regulatory framework of this sector has to be improved. To this end, Bank Indonesia jointly together with Islamic Research and Training Institute-Islamic Development Bank (IRTI-IDB) and Baznas has established International Working Group on Zakat Core Principles in 2014.  23. Alhamdulillah, the Core Principles initiative has been finalized and launched in the World Humanitarian Summit of United Nations in Istanbul on May 23rd, 2016. The Core Principles serve as the main reference to further elaboration of Zakat regulations. Meanwhile, the development of Awqaf Core Principles has also been underway, following the success of Zakat Core Principles. 24. Realizing the potential of this Islamic social sector, Bank Indonesia puts greater attention to enhance zakat and awqaf system nationally and internationally. The Islamic economic and finance development program has put as one of the strategic objectives of Bank Indonesia Strategic Function 2024 and enhance inter-institutions cooperation and coordination programs including the development of inclusive finance and MSME, as well as Islamic economics and finance. Bank Indonesia has set a vision of Indonesia to become a center of Islamic Finance Center in the region.     
7  Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  [Closing] 25. Relating to the Journal that we are trying to develop, this conference serves as the platform to communicate and to elaborate the topics compiled in the Journal. We wish the journal can play a role as one of main compiler of repository knowledge in the area of Islamic economics and finance.  26. Up to this point, Alhamdulillah, we have an honor to facilitate important discussion attended by prominent scholars, representatives of several embassies, colleagues from governmental insitutions, researchers, and academicians on integrating Islamic commercial and social finance to strengthen financial system stability, which is a timely topic nowadays. 27. In this special moment, I am pleased to inform you that this Conference is conducted concurrently with “Indonesia Sharia Economic Festival (ISEF) 2016” which choose “Leading Roles in the Development of Islamic Economic and Finance to Achieve the Prosperity of the Nations” as the theme of the conference. This Festival will be held here in Surabaya, 25-30 October, 2016.  28. Allow me to conclude my speech by expressing my appreciation and sincere gratitude to all speakers and participants for the willingness to join this special event. I also would like to wish you all a productive discussion and deliberation in this important event. I am confident that supported by all participants in this room, we can achieve significant outcomes that are beneficial to promote development in the area of Islamic commercial and social finance.  29. Finally, I am delighted to officially open “International Seminar and the 2nd Journal of Islamic Monetary Economics and Finance Call for Papers”, please enjoy the discussion and the rest of the session at this second biggest Metropolitan city in Indonesia and also known as “City 
8  of Heroes”, due to the importance of the Battle of Surabaya in galvanizing Indonesian and international support for Indonesian independence during the Indonesian national revolution.   Thank you very much. Wassalamu’alaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh.            Surabaya, 27 October 2016     Agus D.W. Martowardojo Governor of Bank Indonesia 
Peter Praet: Interview in Die ZeitInterview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, inDie Zeit, conducted by Ms Lisa Nienhaus and Mr Mark Schieritz on 12 December, and publishedon 14 December 2016.*   *   *Mr Praet, you are a member of the Executive Board of the ECB and thus part of an internationalelite that is really hated by the new right-wing political movements. Do you feel threatened bythat?Peter Praet: No, but I am worried. As a European institution, we look at how much people trustus. People like the euro, but the latest Eurobarometer survey shows that trust in the Europeaninstitutions has strongly declined in recent years. This is true for the whole of Europe as well asfor national institutions, not only for the ECB. But for us too.No wonder, when savers no longer get any interest!That is not the reason. In recent years, i.e. during the period of low interest rates, the approvalratings have not changed significantly. The strong downturn came in 2008 as a result of thefinancial crisis. That is when trust plummeted. The reasons were, above all, economic. Before2008 we, and most economists, predicted that the euro area would carry on growingcontinuously. But then came the recession following the financial crisis and we never reachedthe predicted economic strength. Shortly afterwards came the sovereign debt crisis, the secondrecession and the rescue programmes with their cutbacks. So expectations were raised muchtoo high and could not be fulfilled. That is a great disappointment for many people.So everything is the fault of the financial crisis. The ECB itself has nothing to do with it?Central banks didn’t see the crisis coming at an early stage either. In the years before thefinancial crisis, credit growth was very high, not only in Europe, benefiting from relatively lowinterest rates in some countries. We gave several warnings at the time about the excessiveliquidity in the markets. When the crisis then erupted, people realised that Europe was notproperly prepared for a situation like this.What was missing?The toolkit was insufficient to respond to critical developments. There was no common bankingsupervision, there were no institutions for the stabilisation or resolution of banks, and there wereno macroprudential instruments. That increased the effects of the crisis. Central banks have justone instrument to achieve price stability – the interest rate. It is difficult to counter a complexsituation with this instrument alone. However, we have made good progress in stabilising thefoundations of Monetary Union.The European elites did that too. But the people are clearly not happy with that. Ultimately, itcomes down to the euro, without which there would be no problems. Was the euro itself amistake?No. The crisis only illustrated that the euro had been created within an incomplete institutionalframework. However, we should not forget what we owe to the euro. Before Monetary Unionthere were repeated economic shocks owing to strong fluctuations in exchange rates. Thatcreated trade barriers. In addition, you must always consider the alternative. Take Germany, forexample: without the euro, the currency would have risen very strongly in value during thefinancial crisis. For a country that exports a lot, that is a problem. I rather doubt that the countrywould have been better off than it is now – and it is likely that interest rates would have been 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
pushed down very strongly in this case too.At present everyone is saying that the elites have lived too long in their filter bubbles and did notnotice the rise in populism. Does that apply to you too? Do you live in the ECB bubble?For us, diversity in opinions and views is an important basis for good decisions. On the ECB’sGoverning Council, we have the 19 governors of the national central banks who are there in apersonal capacity and not as representatives of their countries. That enriches the debate and ourperspective on the world. And, conversely, they are also able to explain our decisions in theircountries. We ourselves regularly go to the European Parliament, and occasionally nationalparliaments.For example, Mario Draghi spoke at the German Bundestag a few weeks ago.And you?I try to exchange views with different people as often as I can. For example, I’ve been to eventsfor German small and medium-sized enterprises, and I take part in a lot of panels. Just recently Imet the President of the Bavarian building societies, among others, in this way. Both sides learnfrom such events. The Germans are critical, but they are always polite, I find. Most peopleunderstand me better after such events. But usually they still don’t think that what we are doing isgood.Do you sometimes meet tough critics? For example, members of Alternative for Germany(AfD), a party that came into being quite specifically as a protest against the euro rescue policy?We are open to dialogue with our critics. And we also engage in such dialogue on a regularbasis, not least in the European Parliament.At the moment, interest rates are rising all around the world. Only the ECB is resisting the trendand is leaving interest rates low. Are you losing touch?The picture is not at all as uniform as you describe. In the United States, for example, theeconomic recovery is far more advanced than in the euro area, unemployment is lower and therate of inflation is higher. That is why the US economy can cope with higher interest rates. Wehave not got that far yet.Why not? Unemployment is falling in Europe too, and there is growth – and the oil price is rising.It is true that the recovery is firming. However, the speed is still moderate and inflation is stillsome distance from a sustainable path back to the target value. That is why we have decided toextend our government bond purchase programme until the end of next year. We have, however,reduced the scale of the monthly purchases by €20 billion as of April.Is that the beginning of the exit from the trillion euro programme?No. We want to continue the level of monetary policy support that we have been administering tothe European economy so far.So, what would have to happen for you to be prepared to exit?It would have to be apparent that there was a sustained convergence in the rate of inflationtowards our objective of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.That can change quickly. In the financial markets it is expected that the US economy will receivea boost because Donald Trump wants to reduce taxes and increase public spending. Europewould also profit from that if we could export more. 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
There are signs of a looser fiscal policy in the United States in future, which is expected to lead tohigher growth rates. But that alone will not be enough. The important thing is to make theeconomy more productive. Another outstanding question is protectionism, which would of coursebe damaging, including for Europe. Trump is not President yet. We do not know exactly what heis planning, and we should therefore be cautious.So you want to continue flooding the world with money. You have already purchased bonds forover a trillion euro. At the end of the programme planned so far, it will be €2.3 trillion.We are not flooding anyone. People only ever talk about the billions of additional central bankmoney that we are making available. But hardly anyone mentions the fact that money and creditgrowth are fairly moderate. Our measures are thus aimed at stimulating this weak money andcredit growth.How can that be explained to someone who is not a central banker?Both central banks and banks can create money through lending to the economy. If the banksare only doing so hesitantly, we can make financing conditions more attractive and so createincentives for more generous lending. As long as the overall money supply is not growing veryquickly, that is not a cause for concern and does not lead to excessive inflationary pressures.That means you are doing everything right, but no one understands?I didn’t say that, but when interest rates reach zero, monetary policy becomes very complicatedto explain. The central banks have not exhausted their options, but they have to resort tounconventional means, such as the purchase of government bonds.Here in Frankfurt, property prices have risen by 20% in one year. That is not very hard tounderstand. Is that the next crisis in the making?We follow developments in the financial markets very closely. In some regions we are indeedseeing a strong rise in property prices, but it is still not a Europe-wide phenomenon. Moreover,such a boom is only really dangerous when it is financed on credit. However, the issuance ofbuilding loans is only growing very slowly.In the event of a crisis, are you capable at all of responding in time? After all, countries like Italyare so highly indebted that they might not be able to cope with higher interest rates.I can take this worry off your shoulders. When the time for higher interest rates comes, then wewill increase interest rates. The countries would also be able to cope with that. Many of themhave used the period of lower interest rates to extend the maturities of their loans. When interestrates rise, that will not therefore lead immediately to a significant rise in the cost of servicing thedebt. That does not mean that high debt levels are not a problem, but they do not restrict theECB’s room for manoeuvre.Italy is already causing us concern today. The big problem is the ailing banks. The newGovernment is considering State aid. Does that make sense?The European rules permit that. Even Germany put public money into the banks at the height ofthe crisis. At that time, Italy did not. In my view, much more important than the question of wherethe money comes from is that there is a clear-out in the banking sector. There are too manybanks in Italy and they are not profitable enough. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
William C Dudley: The US economic outlook and the implications formonetary policyRemarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal ReserveBank of New York, at the ABNY (Association for a Better New York) Breakfast, New York City, 5December 2016.*   *   *Jason Bram, Andrew Haughwout, Joseph Tracy and Luis Uranga assisted in preparing theseremarks.It is a great pleasure to be here and have the opportunity to talk about the U.S. economic outlook. I want to thank the Association for a Better New York (ABNY) for sponsoring today’s event.  Thisis an excellent venue to speak about what we can do to improve our country’s economicperformance.  As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those ofthe Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.The U.S. economy—supported by solid gains in household spending—has expanded at amoderate rate in 2016.  Job gains have been sturdy, and we have seen some firming in wagegrowth as the labor market has continued to tighten.  Moreover, as the effects of earlier declinesin energy prices have dissipated, the overall inflation rate has begun to move up closer to our 2percent objective.  As a consequence, economic conditions are not far from the FederalReserve’s dual mandate of maximum sustainable employment and price stability.  And, I expectthat we will make further progress toward these goals in 2017.  So, from a cyclical perspective,the economy is in reasonably good shape.Over the longer term, however, the U.S. economy faces significant challenges.  On the positiveside, economic expansions don’t die of old age, and there appear to be few imbalances in theeconomy that could lead to the current expansion ending.  But, in order for this to remain thecase, it is important that fiscal policy and monetary policy are well aligned going forward.It is also important that the United States retains sufficient fiscal capacity so that fiscal policy cansupport the economy when the next cyclical downturn does occur.  If fiscal policy can play agreater role in promoting macroeconomic stability, it would likely reduce the need for monetaryauthorities to take extraordinary actions to support economic activity.There are other structural issues worth noting.  In particular, productivity growth has beenanemic over the past few years, while income inequality has increased and income mobilityremains low.  As a consequence, the gains in living standards generated by the current businessexpansion have been modest compared to previous expansions, and these gains have not beenwidely shared.  Much more could be done both locally and nationally to increase the economy’spotential to perform better for a broader array of our citizens.The outlook for growth and inflationThe U.S. economy has been expanding at a moderate rate.  Growth has averaged about 1.8percent this year and seems likely to continue at or slightly above this pace in 2017.  The maindriver of growth in 2016 has been the consumer, as real personal consumption expenditureshave increased at a 2.9 percent annual rate during the first three quarters.  This solidconsumption growth has been supported by sturdy job gains and rising nominal wages.  Payrollgains have averaged about 180,000 per month this year.  While this is down somewhat from2015’s monthly pace of nearly 230,000, it is still considerably higher than the 75,000–110,000monthly pace consistent with the likely long-term growth in the labor force.  And wage gains,while still relatively muted, have begun to rise more rapidly as the labor market has continued to 1 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
tighten.Another positive factor for the economy is that household finances generally are in good shape. The household saving rate is 5.9 percent, which is a bit higher than one would expect based onhistorical relationships between household net worth and disposable income.  And, after a longperiod of deleveraging, household debt has been growing, but very slowly.  Over the last fourquarters, household debt has risen by 2.4 percent.  This slow pace, combined with lowborrowing rates and an improving labor market, has pushed down the ratio of household debtservice to income close to its lowest level since at least 1980.  This suggests that householdshave the financial capacity to sustain their spending.In contrast to consumer spending, many other areas of the economy have been considerablysofter.  Residential investment, after experiencing strong gains in 2015 and in the first quarter of2016, fell during the past two quarters.  However, increases in single-family housing starts andpermits in October suggest that we are likely to see a reversal of this trend in the fourth quarterand into next year.Business fixed investment has also been weak for some time.  Part of this weakness reflects thecollapse in oil and gas drilling activity following the plunge in crude oil prices during the secondhalf of 2014.  This adjustment now appears to be over, as oil and gas prices have recoveredsomewhat.  But, even outside of this area, business fixed investment has been disappointing. Several factors may be at play here—including earlier uncertainty surrounding the presidentialelection outcome and the fact that capacity utilization rates remain unusually low at this point inthe economic business cycle.  While the election uncertainty has been resolved, I would expectbusiness fixed investment to only rise slowly in the year ahead. In contrast, the trade sector has performed surprisingly well in 2016.  This sector had to contendwith headwinds created by weak growth in final demand by our major foreign trading partners, aswell as the impact of earlier dollar strength on the nation’s export competitiveness.  However, I’mnot sure that I would take much signal from this performance.  The improvement in trade seemsto have been driven mainly by weakness in imports, particularly for capital goods, and by someone-off factors, such as the surge in soybean exports last quarter—both of which are unlikely tocontinue.With respect to inflation, we are making progress in pushing toward our 2 percent objective.  Inparticular, headline inflation has risen this year as the earlier declines in energy prices havedropped out of the year-over-year figures.  And, core inflation has remained broadly steady,running at 1.7 percent over the past year—as measured by the personal consumptionexpenditures deflator that excludes food and energy.  This stability is noteworthy, because onemight have anticipated that lower energy prices and a firmer dollar would have pushed coreinflation a bit lower.  Also, household inflation expectations—which at times in 2015 appeared tobe at risk of becoming unanchored to the downside—have been broadly stable.  The University ofMichigan long-term inflation expectations measure has generally remained in the 2.5-2.8 percentrange of recent years.  In addition, the New York Fed’s Survey of Consumer Expectationsmeasure of 3-year median inflation expectations has stabilized in 2016 in a range of 2.5-2.8percent, after declining modestly over the course of 2014 and 2015.Implications for monetary policyIf the economy grows at a pace slightly above its sustainable long-term rate, as I expect, thelabor market should gradually tighten further, and the resulting pressure on resources shouldhelp push inflation toward our 2 percent objective over the next year or two.  Assuming theeconomy stays on this trajectory, I would favor making monetary policy somewhat lessaccommodative over time by gradually pushing up the level of short-term interest rates.Following this year’s election, we have seen relatively large movements in financial asset prices.  2 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
In particular, the stock market has firmed, bond yields have risen and the dollar has appreciated. On balance, it appears that financial market conditions have tightened modestly.  My personalinterpretation of these developments is that market participants now anticipate that fiscal policywill turn more expansionary and that the FOMC will likely respond by tightening monetary policy abit more quickly than previously anticipated.  Assuming this expectation is realized, the recentmodest tightening in financial market conditions seems broadly appropriate. Let me emphasize here that I do not view the recent shift in financial market conditions as onethat should prompt great concern.  It is important to distinguish between a tightening of financialconditions that is driven by an increase in risk aversion from one that is driven by a greaterlikelihood of stronger near-term aggregate demand and less downside risk to the growth outlook.We experienced the former at the beginning of 2016, while the latter reflects current expectationsof greater fiscal policy stimulus.Obviously, there is still considerable uncertainty about how fiscal policy will evolve over the nextfew years.  At this juncture, it is premature to reach firm conclusions about what will likely occur. As we get greater clarity over the coming year, I will update my assessment of the economicoutlook and, with that, my views about the appropriate stance of monetary policy.Monetary and fiscal policy in a low-rate environmentI also would like to highlight the limitations of monetary policy.  One important factor contributingto such limits is that the real short-term interest rate consistent over the longer run with a neutralmonetary policy stance appears to be very low, and is expected to remain so for some time. This has been helping to keep real inflation-adjusted interest rates lower than they have beenhistorically.  In part, this reflects anemic productivity growth as well as the slowing of labor forcegrowth due to the aging of the population.  An implication of this environment is that there willlikely be less scope than there has been historically for the Federal Reserve to cut interest rateswhen needed in the face of an economic downturn.  All else equal, this means a greater risk forshort-term interest rates to be pinned at their effective lower bound and for inflation expectationsto become unanchored to the downside.  Although forward guidance and large scale assetpurchase programs have expanded the ways in which the Federal Reserve can provideadditional accommodation, these unconventional monetary policy tools also have their ownlimits.  These limits suggest that fiscal policy may need to play a greater role in stabilizing theeconomy than has been the case in past decades.What I have in mind here is putting in place stronger, more robust automatic fiscal stabilizers thatwould provide income support during economic downturns.  By reducing fluctuations indisposable incomes, these types of fiscal actions would stabilize aggregate demand, therebylimiting the risk of monetary policy getting pinned at the zero lower bound for an extended periodand the need for extraordinary monetary policy measures. I favor automatic, rather than discretionary, fiscal actions because they would typically go intoeffect more quickly and would be better anticipated.  Expectations matter greatly in affectingeconomic behavior.  For example, if the economy were to weaken, the anticipation that strongfiscal stabilizers would kick in to support incomes should lead workers to be less fearful aboutlosing their jobs, and businesses to be less concerned that demand for their products might fallprecipitously.  This, in turn, would make workers more confident that they could sustain theirspending, and would make businesses more confident that they could keep workers on theirpayrolls. What type of fiscal stabilizers would be most effective?  I would turn first to those that Congresshas implemented on a discretionary basis during past economic downturns, such as extensionsof unemployment compensation and cuts in payroll taxes.  For example, when theunemployment rate climbs, extensions of the duration of eligibility for unemploymentcompensation could be triggered automatically, helping to stabilize household income.  Similarly, 3 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
when the unemployment rate breaches certain thresholds, payroll tax cuts could be triggered,helping to support the disposable income of workers facing reductions in hours.  Payroll tax cutsalso have the advantage of skewing more toward low- and moderate-income workers, whotypically have a higher propensity to consume out of current income.Obviously, it is up to the incoming Administration and Congress to decide on the appropriatefiscal measures.  But, the point that I want to highlight is that robust automatic fiscal stabilizerswould complement monetary policy, and take some pressure off of the Federal Reserve toundertake extraordinary measures in situations where there is little scope for cutting short-terminterest rates.  This approach might also be superior to other proposals—such as raising theFederal Reserve’s inflation objective—that are designed to reduce the risk of monetary policybeing trapped at the zero lower bound. For such fiscal actions to be sustainable over time, it is important that the United States retainsufficient fiscal capacity.  This would also ensure that automatic fiscal stabilizers are viewed asfully credible.  On this score, while significant progress has been made in recent years instabilizing the country’s fiscal situation, circumstances are likely to grow more challenging in theyears ahead.  There are three areas that I would highlight.  First, the earnings that FederalReserve returns to the U.S. Treasury Department each year are likely to fall in the future, asrising short-term interest rates narrow the gap between what the Federal Reserve pays on itsliabilities—primarily currency and bank reserves—and what it earns on its portfolio of Treasuriesand agency mortgage-backed securities.  In recent years, the Federal Reserve’s remittances tothe Treasury have averaged about $90 billion per year, far above the $20–30 billion average priorto the Great Recession.  Although the precise trajectory of future reimbursements is highlyuncertain, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projects that Federal Reserve payments tothe Treasury will drop from around 0.6 percent of GDP in fiscal 2016 to 0.3 percent of GDP by2026.Second, the Treasury’s debt-service costs will likely grow as interest rates rise and the amountof outstanding debt held by the public continues to increase.  While net outstanding Treasurydebt held by the public has risen to $14.2 trillion from $4.8 trillion over the past decade, annualdebt-service costs have only increased very modestly.  Looking ahead, the CBO’s baselineprojection is that debt-service costs will rise from 1.4 percent of GDP in fiscal 2016 to 2.6percent of GDP in 2026.Third, the retirement of the baby boom generation will put significant upward pressure on SocialSecurity and Medicare expenditures.  Although the trend in Medicare expenditures has flattenedout in recent years as healthcare inflation has moderated and utilization growth has slowed, theCBO nevertheless projects that such expenditures will rise from 3.2 percent of GDP in 2016 toabout 4.0 percent of GDP in 2026.  Consequently, significant pressures on the federal budget arestill very much in train.  It will be important that fiscal policy be managed so it retains the capacityto be used for macroeconomic stabilization.Structural challengesWhile we have made steady progress over the past year toward our twin goals of maximumsustainable employment and price stability, significant challenges remain for the economy thatlay largely beyond the scope of monetary policy.  The three I would highlight are the sharpslowdown in labor productivity growth, the increase in income inequality and the low rate ofincome mobility.I draw attention to the slowdown in productivity growth for two reasons.  First, productivityultimately drives living standards and how people assess their economic well-being.  Second,beyond ensuring a stable macroeconomic and financial environment, monetary policy can dolittle to improve productivity growth. 4 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
Annual productivity growth has averaged only 0.7 percent during the past five years, near thelowest 5-year pace since the early 1980s.  There are a number of competing explanations for theslowdown.  These include weak capital investment, a flattening out of educational attainment bynew labor market entrants, less new business formation, understatement of qualityimprovements and, hence, output, and fewer ground-breaking innovations.  I suspect that all ofthese factors play a role.What public policy can do to address this issue is to ensure that the economy operates closer tothe frontier of what is achievable.  For example, more efforts to improve job skills would provebeneficial—through retraining and apprentice programs, and better alignment of education andtraining with business needs.  Also, encouraging small business start-ups would help—byremoving barriers for entrepreneurs to establish new businesses, and by creating more start-upincubator programs.  I also suspect that well-targeted infrastructure spending would beadvantageous if it addresses logistical bottlenecks and enables people to commute to areas withgood job opportunities.  For example, in the New York City metropolitan region, mass transit isold, slow and crowded.  As a New Jersey resident, I’m still waiting for that second set of railtunnels into New York City that should have been built years ago. While higher productivity growth could support better living standards, the benefits for low- andmiddle-income households depend, in part, on how those gains are distributed betweenbusiness and labor, and on how labor income is distributed across the workforce.  Moreover,income distribution shouldn’t be viewed as a static concept.  It is important that people are able tomove upward in income through their careers, regardless of their starting point.Over the past several decades, three developments have been discouraging.  First, the share oflabor income relative to business income has fallen.  Since 1970, the labor share of GDP in theUnited States has declined about 5 percentage points.  Similar declines are evident in mostdeveloped and emerging market economies.  Second, the distribution of labor income hasbecome more skewed.  Since 1970, the top 1 percent of households in the income distributionhas more than doubled its share of the nation’s income.  Third, despite the notion of theAmerican dream, income mobility in the United States remains relatively low compared to manyother countries.  Also, the potential for income mobility is not evenly distributed. Research hasshown that where you are born and raised in the United States still has significant implications foryour future prospects.  As a country, we need to address these issues.  With respect to the labor share of income,maintaining the U.S. economy at full employment should help.  As the unemployment rate hasfallen over the past two years, the labor share of income has moved up almost 1.5 percentagepoints.  Supporting maximum sustainable employment is part of the Fed’s dual mandate, so wecan play an important role here. With respect to the rising concentration of income and the low level of income mobility, I thinkconsiderable improvements are also achievable.  Income distribution can be influenced by taxpolicy and by educational opportunities.  Income mobility can be influenced by local policies oneducation and housing.  As Raj Chetty’s pathbreaking work makes clear, income mobilitydepends on where one is born and lives.  This suggests quite strongly that improved access togood education, childcare and affordable housing would help.As I noted in a recent speech, an important aspect of a city’s vitality is the ability of its residentsto develop the skills necessary to be successful and achieve their dreams. A big asset for NewYork City is its access to affordable education.  Each year, tens of thousands of low-to-moderate-income New Yorkers send their children to one of the city’s specialized high schools. When it comes time for college, many of these same students have access to the CityUniversity of New York (CUNY) and State University of New York (SUNY) systems.  A recenthighly regarded study assessed how much of an opportunity children born to less advantaged1 5 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
families in different parts of the United States have of moving up in the world.  New York Cityranked 10th out of the 50 largest U.S. metro areas.  This is a better than average performance,but I think New York City should aspire to do even better.To conclude, while the near-term outlook for the U.S. economy is reasonably good, there isconsiderable work to do over the longer term to improve our nation’s productive capacity andfoster an environment in which the gains are spread more evenly.  Monetary policy is limited inwhat it can do to address these broader structural issues.  However, monetary policy will do itspart to ensure the macroeconomic and financial stability that can help in achieving progress inthese areas.  Moreover, even with respect to macroeconomic stability, monetary policy could usean assist from fiscal policy.  It is important that monetary policy and fiscal policy work togetherand not at cross purposes to be able to bolster the economy when it needs support. Thank you for your kind attention.  I would be happy to take a few questions.See New York City’s Return from the Brink, Remarks at the Lotos Club, October 19, 2016.Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline and Emmanuel Saez. “Where is the Land of Opportunity? TheGeography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 129, No. 4,2014.212 6 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
1  “Central Bank Independence Revisited in the Era  of Unconventional Monetary Policy” Speech by  Professor John (Iannis) Mourmouras  Deputy Governor, Bank of Greece Former Finance Minister at the SEACEN1 - OMFIF Joint Policy Summit entitled “Financial stability in an uncertain global environment”*2  Sasana Kijang, Bank Negara Malaysia Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia Wednesday, 23 November 2016  Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a great honour for me to be back to this part of the world. It’s certainly warmer over here! I would like to thank the organisers for inviting me to give a speech at this Joint Policy Summit on a topic that I have been revisiting lately, that of central bank independence. My earlier research on the subject goes back 20 plus years.  My speech today revolves one single important question: if and how the concept of an independent central bank has been challenged, or perhaps even undermined, in an era of unconventional monetary policies, including their own exit strategies.  Quite a few examples come to mind, especially looking at the latest developments. US President-elect Donald Trump criticised Fed Chair Janet Yellen for the Fed’s policy of low interest rates. In particular, the Fed has been accused of bias by President-elect Trump. British Prime Minister Theresa May came openly against the Bank of England’s policy under Governor Mark Carney saying that low interest rates deprive savers of interest income. Also, Germany’s “five wise men” (Council of Economic Experts) and German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble criticised ECB President Mario Draghi for his negative interest rate policy. Against this background, the ultimate question is quite straightforward: is central bank independence sufficient for price stability when the tail risk of deflation is visible and unconventional monetary policies last too long? Opinions differ on this and I will give you my own view on this question in a minute, but before that let me make my view clear that                                                            1 The South East Asian Central Banks Research and Training Centre. * Disclaimer: Views expressed in this speech are personal views and do not necessarily reflect those of the institutions I am affiliated with. 
2  central bank independence is a necessary condition for price stability both in terms of mitigating a political business cycle, but also in terms of reducing the inflationary bias inherent in monetary policy.  Central bank independence: theory The intellectual roots of central bank independence (or CBI) can be traced back to the rational expectations revolution, pioneered by the Chicago School in the 1970s. Rational expectations played a vital role in breaking the intellectual deadlock in the effort to address the stagflation phenomenon of the 1970s. With regard to monetary policy, seminal work by Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Barro and Gordon (1983) showed that under discretionary monetary policy the interaction of rational private agents with an equally rational government optimising a non-linear loss function whose arguments are deviations of inflation and output from socially desired target-levels, generates a Nash equilibrium involving an inflation bias whose size increases with the degree of output-gap aversion and which does not entail any sustainable output gains.  To address the problem of inflation bias, monetary policy should be conducted under a technology of credible commitment to low future inflation rates so that private inflation expectations are anchored to equally low levels. Initially, this commitment took the form of intermediate policy targets, such as targets for money supply growth, introduced in the early 1980s by the Reagan and Thatcher governments in the US and the UK respectively; or exchange rate targets implemented, among others, by European countries in the context of the European Monetary System. Intermediate targets were successful in lowering inflation in major industrialised economies, thus introducing the Great Moderation era. However, the instability of money demand and the opaqueness of money supply targets rendered the latter’s implementation operationally difficult (see Mourmouras and Arghyrou, 2000). On the other hand, exchange rate targets rarely stood the test of time, thus preserving questions of credibility, as demonstrated by the literature on currency crises (see Obstfeld, 1996).  CBI, along with the introduction of inflation targeting, was largely the profession’s response to the shortcomings of intermediate targets. Specifically, delegating monetary policy to an independent central bank, with a formal mandate to achieve price stability and granting discretion in the choice of instruments necessary to meet this objective, reduces the inflation-bias problem as a result of the central banker’s objective function including an inflation-aversion parameter higher than the government’s. Theoretically, this inflation gain may come at the cost of higher output volatility (see Rogoff, 1995). Empirical evidence, however, (see 
3  e.g. Alesina and Summers, 1993 and Cuckierman, 2008) suggests that CBI may operate as free-lunch, in the sense that it involves an obvious gain without causing an equally obvious loss. Empirical measures of central bank independence are found to be negatively correlated with the first and second moment of inflation, showing little, if any, correlation with output variability. Furthermore, CBI can be beneficial in ensuring sustainable public debt dynamics, as theoretically shown by Mourmouras and Su (1995) in a dynamic game set-up. As a result of its theoretical and empirical advantages, CBI was widely adopted (particularly in the 1990s) in major industrialised economies and beyond. The form of independence, however, varies between instrument (economic) and goal (political) independence (see Fischer, 1995). Under the former, the operational goals of the central bank are exogenously determined, either by legislation or by another official body such as the finance ministry. Under instrument independence, the central bank is free to choose without external interference the means (the policy instruments) best suited to meet its given goals: the Bank of England is an example of this form of independence. Under goal independence, the central bank chooses independently both the goals of its policy, as well as the instruments best suited to meet its self-selected goal: the ECB is an example of this type of independence.  Delegating monetary policy to an independent central bank raises important questions of democratic checks and balances, i.e. questions of transparency and accountability. Accountability, in turn, is related to at least two dimensions. First, the type of central bank independence: the closer we move towards the independence goal, the higher the need for transparency and accountability. The second dimension is the number of goals set for the independent central bank. Perhaps non-intuitively, accountability declines with the number of policy goals, as given a set of policy instruments, increasing the number of goals results in trade-offs between goals. As the welfare ordering of policy outcomes under trade-offs is intrinsically more difficult than performance-ordering under a single policy objective, the scope for accountability increases when the central bank focuses on one policy objective. This accountability enhancement, combined with the theoretical and empirical advantages of inflation-averse monetary policy, resulted in the majority of the countries adopting central bank independence to define price stability as the overriding objective of monetary policy. The ECB is a characteristic example of this trend. On the other hand, the Fed, whose dual mandate includes price stability and maximum employment (plus moderate long-term interest rates), is a notable exception.    
4  Monetary policy in the post-crisis period  The global financial crisis of 2008/2009 and the ensuing European sovereign debt crisis have fundamentally changed the operational framework of independent central banks. These changes relate to three levels. The first is methodological: We now have an appreciation of the potential real economic costs of financial crises that we previously lacked. This has motivated the development of a niche literature introducing a banking sector into DSGE models, thus allowing for financial crises (see e.g. Gertler et al., 2012 and Boissay et al., 2013). This literature promises to enhance the information available to policy-makers designing and implementing monetary policy.  The second change is that central banks have been given new macro-prudential tasks, such as the supervision of systemic banks in the EMU, conducted by the ECB since 2014. On this frontier, central banks don’t know if they have failed until is too late. The costs of confusion and policy conflicts with multiple objectives may be too high, damaging the credibility of the central bank. And I refer to both types of costs: the costs of taking measures to avoid bank failures or the costs of doing nothing.   The third change is the situation on the ground: Rather than preventing excessive inflation, price stability in the post-crisis era is about preventing deflation. Under low inflation, central banks largely lose the main policy instrument of conventional (standard) monetary policy, namely targeting short-run interest rates through open market operations, as short-term rates are restricted by the zero lower bound limit. As a result, all major central banks have employed non-standard monetary policy tools in recent years. These include the provision of emergency liquidity and credit support to banks and other financial institutions, extending the definition of assets accepted as eligible collateral when providing financial institutions loans on a short- or medium-term basis; and introducing quantitative easing (QE) programmes in the context of which central banks have been buying from the private sector sovereign bonds, corporate bonds and other corporate assets.  Let me quickly remind you of the ECB’s monetary policy stance over the last nine years as a response to the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, leading to negative interest rates and entering practically unchartered territory.    
5  Table 1. ECB’s non-standard measures Year Non-standard measures Oct-Dec 2008 ECB cuts the base interest rate from 4.25% to 2.50%, provides US dollar liquidity through foreign exchange swaps, expands the list of assets eligible as collateral in Eurosystem funding operations, introduces the 6-month longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) and decides the main refinancing operations to be carried out through a fixed-rate tender procedure with full allotment. 2009  ECB cuts the base interest rate from 2.50% to 1.00%, and introduces the first Covered Bond Purchase Programme (CBPP1). 2010 ECB activates the Securities Markets Programme (SMP). 2011 The ECB launches the second Covered Bond Purchase Programme (CBPP2) and introduces the 3-year LTROs. 2012 The ECB announces the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs). 2013 The ECB cuts the base interest rate to 0.25% and introduces forward guidance.  2014 The ECB cuts the base interest rate to 0.05% and the deposit facility rate to -0.20%, bringing it for the first time in negative territory and introduces the Targeted Longer-Term Refinancing Operations (TLTRO) with a 4-year maturity. 2015 ECB introduces the expanded Asset Purchase Programme (APP) and cuts the deposit facility rate to -0.30%. 2016 ECB accelerates the expanded Asset Purchase Programme (APP) and cuts the Main Refinancing Operations (MRO) rate to 0.00% and the deposit facility rate to -0.40%.  Indeed, the 10 largest central banks now own assets totaling $21.4 trillion, accounting for 29% of the world economy, up by 10% from end-2015, double what it was in mid-September 2008 and almost half the value of all debt in Bloomberg’s global bond index (as shown in Chart 1)!    
6  Chart 1. The combined assets of the 10 largest central banks  Finally, almost 75% of the world’s central bank assets are controlled by policy-makers in four regions: China, the US, Japan and the eurozone. The following six – that is, the central banks of England, Brazil, Switzerland, Saudi Arabia, India and Russia – each account for an average of 2.5%. The remaining 107 central banks tracked by Bloomberg, mostly with IMF data, hold less than 13% (see Chart 2).  Chart 2. Central banks’ combined assets   
7  Chart 3. Stock of assets purchased by the four major central banks as a percentage of national GDP  Source: Bank of Greece, European Central Bank, Fed, Bank of England and Bank of Japan. Note: The ECB’s purchased assets in the context of the SMP, CBPP1, 2 & 3, ABS and PSPP.  As a result, central bank balance sheets expanded considerably: since 2008 the Fed’s balance sheet has more than doubled; the Bank of England’s balance sheet trebled; while the ECB’s balance sheet has also expanded considerably, particularly since the introduction of the ECB’s QE programme in 2015.  QE programmes are designed to prevent deflation mainly through three distinct channels (see Demertzis and Wolff, 2016). First, the interest rate channel: this operates through lowering long-term interest rates to improve investment conditions and disincentivise savings. Second, the portfolio rebalancing channel: this operates through the purchase of relatively low-risk assets of long-term maturity, thus incentivising investors to take long positions in higher-risk (and thus higher expected return) assets. Third, the exchange rate channel, which as its name suggests works through a demand-boosting weaker domestic currency. The degree of success of QE programmes is under active research investigation Existing evidence, however, suggests that they have been successful in preventing large-scale deflation conditions, with the announcement effect of QE programmes being stronger than the effects of actual implementation (see e.g. Demertzis and Wolff, 2016 and Altavilla et al., 2015).   Challenges for central bank independence in the low-inflation period   The legacy of the great financial crisis of 2008 and the low inflation conditions that have since been observed bring new challenges for central bank independence. These challenges fall into two categories. First, the instruments’ independence of central banks has 
8  been put into question by external parties. Second, even if the instruments’ independence is not formally challenged, it may be effectively compromised as a result of the changed conditions. The two kinds of challenges are obviously interconnected. A formally independent central bank facing effective constraints in the conduct of its policy may find it harder to deliver on its mandate and may subsequently face calls for restricted independence. On the other hand, a central bank whose independence is under threat may be constrained in its policy (instruments) choices. All in all, current circumstances pose challenges for the successful regime of monetary dominance paradigm established in recent years.  External challenges to the instrument’s independence mainly stem from political pressure. In the US, for example, proposals have been tabled to subject the monetary policy of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to unlimited congressional policy audits; adopt a specific equation in setting monetary policy and require from the FOMC to justify, through congressional hearings and investigations, deviations from the policy dictated by that equation; and use the Fed as a source of finance to monetize specific government initiatives (see Fischer, 2015). In the euro-area, on the other hand, the QE programme has been challenged both for being too expansive, as well as for being too limited. Similar criticism has been voiced regarding the effects of monetary policy in the UK.  My own verdict is that the challenge should not be in the very concept of independence, but rather in the current economic policy mix: loose monetary policy plus tight fiscal policy. By keeping interest rates in negative territory for too long, the redistribution effects of monetary policy and the perceived degree of success of meeting the mandated objectives become more pronounced.  Starting with the former, low interest rates redistribute wealth from savers to borrowers; and result in higher asset prices. Reduced real returns on savings have caused reactions from circles representing the savers’ constituency, both within and across countries, a point particularly relevant within the EMU; and as the distribution of asset holdings is highly uneven among sections of the population, the benefits of QE programmes may also be seen to be uneven. On the other hand, CBI independence may be questioned as long as recovery in major economies remains fragile; or is perceived as not achieving equally good performance across the board of its extended set responsibilities including, for example, financial stability.  The independence of central banks may be scrutinised due to concerns as to whether a central bank with an extended mandate of objectives can operate transparently and with an 
9  appropriate degree of accountability in the context of a democratic political and economic system. All in all, an independent central bank that is subject to democratic accountability needs broader support from the public. Clearly, with persistent negative rates you are bound sooner or later to lose major parts of the broad constituency that you need as an independent central banker. Central banks have resisted challenges to their independence, pointing to the fact that political pressure onto monetary policy, mainly stemming from the fact that political cycles are shorter than the cycles faced by monetary policy design and implementation, introduces into macro-performance exactly the kind of pressure CBI was initially meant to address. For example, in the US, despite low inflation, survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations remain in the area of 2% (see Fischer, 2015). In the euro-area, the ECB’s decision to extend its QE programme has been taken in full independence, with a view to achieving the medium-term price stability objective within an environment of decentralised national fiscal and structural policies (see Cœuré, 2015). Similar clear statements of intent have been recently expressed by the Governor of the Bank of England in the wake of questions raised at high political level regarding the present course of UK monetary policy. Central banks’ opposition to calls for formally restricting their independence does not ensure that monetary policy may not face effective restrictions in its choice of monetary policy instruments. This risk mainly comes from the interaction of monetary policy with other policies, namely fiscal, structural and financial. Separate authorities charged with the conduct of these policies may be formally independent, they are, however, also interdependent. The risk raised by such interdependence is that if one independent policy authority does not take appropriate action to meet its mandated objectives, the remaining independent authorities may be obliged to over-react in a persistent manner in order to meet their own objectives. To provide an example, a direct way of identifying such a policy interdependence failure is in the field of nominal demand: e.g. in the eurozone, nominal demand in Q2/2016 was only 7% higher than in Q2/2008 (real domestic demand was 1% lower than it had been in the abovementioned periods), but much lower than the potential increase in its trend rate (roughly at 24% cumulatively, assuming a trend rate of real growth of 1% and a target inflation rate of 2%). Compare this number (7%) with the one for the US 23% of nominal demand growth during the same period. In brief, this may result in a regime of “weak dominance” of other policies over monetary policy, effectively destabilising the regime of monetary dominance that CBI is meant to establish. Another example of such potential weak dominance relates to 
10  the expansion of the balance-sheets of central banks in the context of QE programmes. This expansion may increase as a result of imperfections in the response of other policies to negative economic shocks. Such imperfections might pre-commit future monetary policy to lower than optimal for business cycle management interest rates, to prevent the central bank from registering large losses on its balance sheet caused by increased interest rates. This may have an important second round effect, as a low-interest rate bias in monetary policy could potentially render public budgets constraints less binding, causing a deficit bias in fiscal policy, threating price stability as explained by the fiscal theory of the price level.  It follows, therefore, that the ability of central banks to exercise optimally their instruments independence and deliver their mandated objectives crucially depends on policy co-ordination between monetary policy and other policies, namely financial, fiscal and structural (see Cœuré, 2015). The importance of such co-ordination cannot be understated in the present conditions. The financial crisis of 2008/2009 has left a legacy of debt overhang and bank undercapitalisation, hindering the ability of banking systems to finance the real economy. To the extent that these undercapitalisation problems are not resolved satisfactorily, monetary authorities may need to take extra steps to increase liquidity (such as, for example, the LTRO programmes), thus creating a regime of financial-policy dominance over monetary policy. Fiscal policy may also be subject to the same financial dominance: If bank undercapitalisation problems result into direct or indirect banking support programmes (through, for example, the establishment of bad banks), fiscal space is reduced; and the ability of fiscal policy to operate as a shock absorber declines, placing even greater pressure on monetary policy to operate as such. European Banking Union (EBU), with the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) at the heart of its operation, was designed precisely to offer a governance framework to separate fiscal and banking risks, so that the framework of monetary dominance is preserved in the euro-area, reverse the process of financial fragmentation observed following the global financial crisis and the European debt crisis; and restore the smooth operation of the transmission channels of the single monetary policy.  Similar arguments apply to the field of structural policy. As suggested by the theory of optimum currency areas, limited flexibility in the goods, services and labour markets, restricts the ability of the economy to adjust towards its natural output following economic shocks, thereby increasing the pressure on fiscal and monetary policies to offset to operate as shock absorbers. This pressure is particularly strong under negative shocks, due to downward rigidities in prices and wages. Limited flexibility may therefore result into a structural-
11  dominance regime, resulting into sub-optimal, fiscal and monetary over-reactions in the event of shocks. In the context of the eurozone in particular, the problem of shock stabilisation takes an extra dimension, given that second-best fiscal responses may not be available at national level, due to the existence of rules restricting national fiscal policies, not to mention market constraints following the increase in government bond yields at the height of the European debt crisis. This has led to calls to revise fiscal rules, allowing greater fiscal discretion at national level. These calls have been partially endorsed following the revision of the Stability and Growth Pact, which compared to its original version now places greater emphasis on the stock rather than flow of fiscal liabilities; and has shifted the emphasis of the rules’ application from the short- to the medium-term.    Concluding remarks  In closing, it is true that during the Great Moderation period, central bank independence proved a highly-successful institutional innovation, primarily responsible for delivering the highly-valued public good of price stability. This policy objective, and the independence of central bank in its pursuit, should be maintained in the current period of low inflation, posing multiple challenges for central bank independence.  Having said that, the lessons from the destabilising effect of financial crises cannot be ignored. Without any doubt, the information set under which central banks operate should be enhanced to consider risks to financial stability. Whether, however, central banks should be primarily responsible for ensuring financial stability is less clear - the jury on this question is still out. Some may call it independence, others may view it as autonomy; some may want to think of it as a misnomer, others may view it as something deeper in the end which affects a central bank’s operational independence. However, on the balance of existing theory and empirical evidence, I maintain that an independent central bank focused on price stability, along with structural adjustments, appropriate and sustainable fiscal policies and an enhanced technology ensuring macro-prudential stability offer the most promising path for restoring normal growth conditions and the creation of jobs, which is the ultimate objective. Independent central banks can exercise optimal policies towards delivering their mandated objectives only when they are well-coordinated with other policies, including fiscal and structural ones. Thank you very much for your attention!  
12         
13  REFERENCES  Altavilla C., Carboni G., Motto R. (2015). Asset purchases programmes and financial markets: lessons from the euro area. ECB Working Paper Series No 1864, European Central Bank.  Barro, R, Gordon, D. (1983).Rules, Discretion, and Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, pp. 101-22.  Beetsma, R. and Guiliodori, M. (2010). The macroeconomic costs and benefits of the EMU and other monetary unions: An overview of recent research. Journal of Economic Literature, 48, pp. 603-641.  Boissay F., Collard F., Smets F. (2013). Booms and Systemic Banking Crises. ECB Working Paper Series No 1514, European Central Bank.  Cœuré, B. (2015). Lamfalussy was right – independence and interdependence in a monetary union. Speech at the Lamfalussy Lecture Conference, organised by the Magyar Nemzeti Bank (the central bank of Hungary), Budapest, 2 February 2015.  Cuckierman A. (2008). Central Bank Independence and Transparency: Evolution and Effectiveness. European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 24, pp. 722-736.  De Grauwe, P., Yeumei, J. (2015). Quantitative Easing in the Eurozone. It’s possible without fiscal transfers. CESifo Area Conference on Money, Macro and International Finance, 20-21 January 2015. Demertzis M., Wolff W. (2016). The effectiveness of the European Central Bank’s Asset Purchase Programme. Bruegel Policy Contribution 2016/10.  Dotsey M., Ireland P., (1996). The welfare cost of inflation in general equilibrium. Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 37, pp. 29-47. Driffill J., Mizon, G.E., and A. Ulph (1990). Costs of Inflation. Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 2, pp. 1013-1066. Fischer, S. (1995). Modern Approaches to Central Banking. NBER Working Paper Series 5064. Cambridge, National Bureau of Economic Research.  Gertler, M., Kiyotaki N., and A. Queralto (2012). Financial Crises, Bank Risk Exposure and Government Financial Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 59, pp. 517-534. Kydland, F.E, Prescott, E.C. (1977). Rules rather than discretion: The inconsistency of optimal plans. The Journal of Political Economy, 85, pp. 473-492.  Leeper, E. (1991). Equilibria under “active” and “passive” monetary and fiscal policies. Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 27, pp. 129-147.  
14  Mourmouras, I. and M.G. Arghyrou (2000), Monetary Policy at the European Periphery: Greek Experience and Lessons for EU Candidates, Berlin, Germany and New York, USA: Springer-Verlag. Mourmouras I. and D. Su (1999). Central Bank independence, policy reforms and the credibility of public debt stabilizations. European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 11, pp. 189-204.  Mourmouras, I. (1994), Towards granting political and economic independence to the Bank of Greece [in Greek], To Vima, Athens Obstfeld, M. (1996). Models of currency crises with self-fulfilling features. European Economic Review vol. 40, pp. 1037-1047  Rogoff, K. (1985). The optimal degree of commitment to an intermediate monetary target. Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 100, pp. 1169-89.  Svensson, L. (1995). Optimal inflation targets, conservative central banks and linear inflation contracts. CEPR Discussion Paper No 1249.  Vujčić, B. (2016). The role of central banks and how to insure their independence. Speech by at the Symposium on “Central Banking in Central and Eastern Europe: Policy Making, Investment and Low Yields”, organized by the Czech National Bank and OMFIF (Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum), Prague, 10 June 2016.  
Cyril Roux: Perspectives on financial regulation in IrelandSpeech by Mr Cyril Roux, Deputy Governor (Financial Regulation) of the Central Bank of Ireland,at the Institute of International and European Affairs (IIEA), Dublin, 1 December 2016.*   *   *It is a great pleasure to be here today at the Institute of International and European Affairs, and I’dlike to thank chairperson Brendan Halligan and director general Tom Arnold for the invitation.The Central Bank has a broad mandate – to safeguard stability and protect consumers – but it’salso one that is easily misunderstood as being all-encompassing. European and national lawsgive us a number of powers that we exercise, while also defining the limits of our role.A core objective of the Central Bank is to be trusted by the public, whose interests we serve. Itbehoves us to explain clearly what we do and what we don’t do. This is why we publish aperformance statement every spring in relation to our financial relation function, come in front ofthe Oireachtas at its discretion, and explain our actions throughout the year.Today, I’d like to explain a little more about our mandate and our work by offering concreteexamples on three areas: residential mortgages, domestic insurance, and Brexit. These arethree areas which may seem somewhat disparate at first, but in fact, all serve to illustrate themanner in which the Bank seeks to fulfil its mandate, as well as the roles the Bank doesn’t play.Let me start with residential mortgages.The Central Bank is the national macroprudential authority for Ireland, meaning it is our role tolimit risk to the financial system as a whole.The mortgage measures, which we introduced in February 2015, are one of the tools by whichwe limit such risk. The measures also demonstrate the importance we attach to the protection ofborrowers.Borrowers should not over-extend themselves and borrow out of line with their income, norshould they risk entering into negative equity by leaving too little room for price reversals. Lendersfor their part should not take excessive credit risk by lending at or beyond the circumstances oftheir consumers, and are required to ensure, under the Consumer Protection Code, that themortgage is affordable for the borrower. That is why we impose the mortgage measures.Although we slightly recalibrated them this month, based on the evidence to date, we regardthem as a permanent fixture of the regulation of domestic credit.The Central Bank will shortly appear before the Oireachtas Finance Committee in public sessionto discuss the Variable Rate Mortgages Bill (2016), which proposes to give the Bank the power tocap variable mortgage rates charged by lenders.Out of respect to the Committee and its deliberations, I don’t intend to make extensive commenton the Bill here, other than to say that the Central Bank will fully explain its reservations about theBill at the Committee hearing. In a nutshell, we believe that the Bill would conflict and interferewith our monetary and prudential mandates, while having counterproductive effects forborrowers.Furthermore, the Central Bank has a prudential regulation and consumer protection mandate, butis not a competition authority, and that is an important distinction. There is a competition authorityin the country, namely the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission, with which theBank engages and exchanges to the fullest extent of our respective mandates. The samedistinction applies at European level, where the European Commission is the competition 1 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
authority while prudential supervision of banks is entrusted to the European Central Bank.Naturally, however, we will work both to the letter and spirit of any law the Oireachtas mayultimately pass.In the meantime, it may be useful to explain precisely what our role is in relation to mortgageinterest rates.Our job is to ensure transparency for borrowers and facilitate switching.This is why, earlier this year, we strengthened our disclosure requirements on lenders.The Central Bank directed lenders to give sufficient notice when they change the interest ratethey charge, to explain in layman’s terms the rationale for such changes, and to facilitate theircustomers who are in a position to switch to a different mortgage or to a different lender.When lenders do not honour these consumer protection obligations, when they fail to point out totheir customers the options open to them, or worse, when they mislead or bring their customersto pay more interest than they should, the Central Bank acts forcefully.And to emphasise that point, the Central Bank has driven all mortgage lenders to review theirmortgage books to ensure that all borrowers who should have been on tracker mortgages are ontracker mortgages, and compensated accordingly if incorrect rates were applied.As part of this programme of work, we have just reprimanded and fined Springboard and orderedit to pay redress for serious failings in its obligations to tracker mortgage customers. The fine of€4.5 million is amongst the largest ever collected by the Central Bank.Other banks will shortly follow suit in offering redress to affected tracker mortgage customers atthe direction of the Central Bank, as part of our wider tracker mortgage examination, which willlead ultimately to all lenders making their borrowers whole.This critical multi-year project is a powerful example of the Central Bank exercising its mandateto protect consumers.Let me now move on to a second case study, that of non-life insurance – typically motor andhome insurance.Whereas for many years’ motor insurance premiums were low and falling, they have risen muchof late.This has led, understandably, to some people asking why the Central Bank, given its financialregulation and consumer protection mandates, is not doing more to cap, or drive down,premiums.But while the questions are understandable, they arise from a misunderstanding of our mandatein a market-based economy where prices are set commercially. In the circumstances, they alsofail to acknowledge that high premiums are driven by the high cost of claims.The Central Bank has no role in setting or capping premiums or renewal rates, as that is strictlyprohibited under EU law. Put simply, regulators cannot intervene on the level of premiums. Aswith the interest rates of mortgages, capping premiums would conflict with our prudentialmandate, mix our role with that of the competition authority, and would likely be counterproductivefor policyholders. Price transparency, on the other hand, is the area of pricing on which the Bankcan intervene, and we do so to the fullest extent. We require insurers to disclose clearly theirpremiums, and to provide renewal rates sufficiently in advance for people to be able to shoparound. 2 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
There have been calls for greater transparency around claims data and the Bank will continue towork with Minister of State, Eoghan Murphy and Department of Finance on this matter. The Bankwill monitor from next spring the public provision of granular claims data by insurers, as requiredby the Solvency II directive. We will publish on foot of these disclosures more detailed aggregateclaims data for all Irish insurers. However, the Bank is a public institution, with a specificmandate, and strict limits set in European law on its ability to collect and publish commerciallysensitive or regulatory data.More generally, our role in relation to protecting consumers in their dealings with insurancecompanies is threefold.First, we monitor continuously and act to ensure the solvency of Irish insurers – so that theyalways have sufficient funds to pay claims in full.Second, we set requirements for insurers to treat consumers fairly.Third, we regulate the large and numerous retail intermediaries sector and root out those whoare failing to meet minimum regulatory standards and shouldn’t be acting as insuranceintermediaries.On the first point, the Central Bank has intervened forcefully in recent years. We oversaw acombined increase of the solvency capital of insurers in this sector by more than €750m in thepast few years. In addition, we have ensured these firms have increased support from theirparent companies and have put in place more extensive reinsurance cover in a number ofcases. As a result, all Irish insurers have remained solvent and open for business, despite theirextensive losses. Their customers have been protected from the loss which failure of theseinsurers would have caused.This in stark contrast to Setanta and Enterprise, which were regulated in Malta and Gibraltarrespectively and who “passported” their services into Ireland without need for any furtherauthorisation from the Central Bank. These insurers subsequently failed, leaving their customerswithout cover. Two more insurers based in Gibraltar have decided to enter the Irish motorinsurance market this month, and people who choose to be covered by these insurers will haveto rely on the prudential supervision conducted by the Gibraltar regulator for the continuedsolvency of their underwriters.On the second point, our consumer protection code and the insurance regulations that weenforce require insurers to provide the correct information when buying an insurance product,and ensure these products are suitable for their consumers. When insurers sell unsuitableproducts, we mandate redress. This has brought Irish insurance consumers €70m in the case ofmis-sold payment protection insurance, and close to €20m for mis-sold credit card insurance.Our customer protection also covers how claims and complaints must be handled. In addition,insurers and brokers must employ sufficiently qualified staff. We have fined two insurancecompanies this year for breach of these consumer requirements, following similar fines inprevious years.Finally, we monitor and root out unsuitable retail intermediaries. We turn away unfit or improperapplicants and revoke intermediaries that run afoul of our rules. We have also issued prohibitionnotices in several cases, so that in total, citizens can avail of the service of insuranceintermediaries in Ireland in the knowledge they are fit for the role, competent and solvent.Mention of passporting brings me neatly to my third case study, on Brexit.Since the UK referendum, there has been a material increase in the number of authorisation 3 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
queries from UK-authorised entities. Many of these engagements have been preliminary innature. But several have moved into the pre-application or application phase, and this is likely tocontinue in the coming months as UK firms prepare for the possibility of a loss of passportingrights into the EU.As the Governor stated to this institute in August the Central Bank is committed to providingtransparency, consistency and predictability with regard to our regulatory and supervisoryresponsibilities.Potential applicants will find the Central Bank to be engaged, efficient, open, and rigorous.In determining an application for authorisation, we follow clear, published rules and processesderived from EU law, and are guided by our mandate to protect consumers. We are mindful ofthe fiduciary role of financial actors, and the need to safeguard deposits, premiums, or clientassets from loss stemming from incompetence, mis-governance or outright failure.In authorising a firm, we will want to be satisfied that we are authorising a business or line ofbusiness that will be run from Ireland and which we will be effectively supervising. We will expectthere to be substantive presence.Outsourcing and insourcing are acceptable – up to a point. One may outsource activities, butone may not outsource responsibility. A firm may not outsource to the extent that it is effectivelyhollowing out its regulated activity.It has been said that the Central Bank does not want to see investment banking or trading inDublin.I want to be clear: we do not have such a position. We have not sought to dissuade any suchentities from seeking authorisation nor are we planning to do so.Such applicants, of course, like any other applicant, can expect a rigorous process where we willexpect to understand clearly the risks inherent in the business and how they are managed andmitigated. We will need to be satisfied that this is done appropriately and well.This is no more and no less than would be expected by any applicant for any type of business.In this regard, it is important to note the collective commitment of supervisors in the EU tosafeguard the integrity and the homogeneity of rules and our determination to avoid regulatoryarbitrage.The Irish financial sector is set to grow, and quite possibly to a significant extent. The CentralBank is committed to meeting the challenge. Our workforce planning for next year reflects theadditional resources needed to deal with applications that will come our way, and we have built incontingency should the need arise.As Governor Lane has indicated, due to an expanded universe of regulated and supervised firms,further resources are necessary, and the Central Bank will staff-up as required.But it’s important to note that the Central Bank no longer has a mandate to promote thedevelopment of financial services in Ireland. We did have such a mandate in the past and it wasjudged that this compromised our authorisation and supervisory stance. There is good reasonthis has been removed from the Act that defines our role. Rather, we have a clear mandate topromote stability and protect consumers.ConclusionResidential mortgages, insurance and Brexit have helped me to illustrate, in different but related1 4 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
ways, the nature of the Central Bank’s work.Our mission – to safeguard stability and protect consumers – is a wide-ranging and critical one.And in my remarks, I’ve tried to give a flavour of our powers under that mandate, and how weexercise them in the people’s interest.We are a public body. And the public is our first priority.At the end of a year such of this, it is important to convey that. Citizens need to feel that publicinstitutions are acting in their interest. More so, public institutions need to demonstrate as much.Part of that process means conveying what we are and what we are not. The Central Bank is themonetary authority, the prudential regulator, the financial consumer protection authority, themacroprudential authority and the resolution authority of Ireland. We are fully committed tofulfilling our wide-ranging duties under these mandates, while recognising that responsibility formany policies that affect the financial conditions facing households and firms lies with theOireachtas and executed by a range of State bodies. We interact, cooperate and collaborate withthe relevant State agencies and a range of national and international bodies, while ensuring weboth confine ourselves to our mandate while fully respecting the individual mandates of eachorganisation.I hope I have given you a useful perspective on the Central Bank and welcome your questions. www.centralbank.ie/press-area/speeches/Pages/Macro-FinancialPerspectives.aspx1 5 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
Jens Weidmann: The future of the European Monetary Union (EMU)and some comments on the German economyKeynote speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairmanof the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Federation ofEnterprises in Belgium, Brussels, 19 December 2016.*   *   *1. IntroductionMs SioenMr TimmermansMr SmetsLadies and gentlemenIt is a special pleasure for me to speak on European issues right here at the heart of Europe.Thank you very much for your kind invitation.Directly opposite the building we are in today, on the other side of Rue Ravenstein, the “Palaisdes Beaux-Arts de Bruxelles” is located, also known as “Bozar". As you all know better than me,it was designed by Victor Horta, one of the leading Art Nouveau architects, and was built as anew kind of cultural centre that would embrace all forms of art and be open to the general public.According to the Bozar website, Horta himself imagined this building as being “immense and yetalmost invisible, overlooking the city and yet buried underground, multiple and yet unified,prestigious and yet open to all". While Horta was referring to the “Palais des Beaux-Arts deBruxelles", the words could equally serve to describe expectations with regard to the EuropeanUnion: "Immense and yet almost invisible, multiple and yet unified, prestigious and yet open toall".However, over the last few years a growing number of voices have been saying that reality andambition have increasingly drifted apart: that the European Union has become too visible, moremultiple than unified, and too open to all. Europe, many feel, has become more and moreassociated with obligation instead of opportunity, with bureaucracy instead of business, withheterogeneity instead of homogeneity.In the following, however, I will argue that now is not the time to throw in the towel, especiallywhere the euro area is concerned. 2. Economic situation and monetary policyLadies and gentlemenAs all of you know, this year has been marked by an unusually large number of political eventswith the potential to elevate uncertainty about the future outlook – notably the decisionby UK voters to leave the European Union, the result of the presidential election in the US and,most recently, the referendum in Italy. These results have also been interpreted as signs of agrowing scepticism about open markets and free trade. And indeed, calls for protectionistmeasures have been heard in many countries lately. 1 / 9BIS central bankers' speeches
It is a fact that worldwide competition presents challenges for individuals and companies alike.And so it is quite understandable that some might feel that globalisation and technical progressare threatening their economic livelihood. More protectionism, however, would be the wronganswer on how to maintain our welfare. The WTO recently announced that it expects globaltrade to grow by only 1.7% in 2016 – which is about 1 PP lower than in 2015 and the lowest ratesince the crisis year of 2009. While for a long time, trade grew twice as fast as GDP, it has nowfallen below the GDP growth rate for the first time in 15 years.I’m convinced that the introduction of trade barriers or other protectionist measures wouldintensify a situation where growth in global trade already appears to be weak. Such impairmentswould therefore have the potential to weaken prosperity and innovation in the countries imposingthese measures. If many were to act in this way, it would also pose a crucial risk for globalgrowth.And all things considered, open markets and free trade of goods and services belong to thefoundations of our welfare – not only in Germany but also in Belgium, for instance. And here inBrussels, the importance of trade and business for welfare and growth is illustrated by theGrand-Place, which UNESCO describes as "a rare example of a square without a church or anyother place of worship, which emphasizes its mercantile and administrative nature". By allowingspecialisation and, therefore, using economies of scale, free trade makes production moreefficient. By increasing competition it lowers the prices of goods and facilitates the spread of newideas and technologies, which leads to more innovation and growth. In this spirit, Germany as thenew G20 presidency will strive to re-iterate the G20’s commitment to maintain open markets andrefrain from additional protectionist measures.But to benefit from the advantages of global competition and exchange, countries need to enabletheir citizens to manage the changes in their economic and social life. This would meanenhancing education, but also improving the flexibility of goods and labour markets. These aretopics to which I will return later in my speech.Looking ahead to the next three years, and assuming that far-reaching protectionist measuresare not adopted in important parts of the world, a moderate expansion of global economic activitycan be expected. That also holds for the euro-area economy, which – given the high politicaluncertainty and the notable shocks that have hit it this year – appears to be more resilient than inthe past.The reduction of the monthly purchase volume under the APP from €80 billion to €60 billion canbe seen as an expression of the Governing Council’s increased confidence in the economicrecovery in the euro area. Additionally, deflation isn’t really an issue any longer. And to be honest,in my view, the risk of deflation has largely been overestimated in the past.This conjunctural picture is in line with the latest Eurosystem staff economic projection, whichshows a rather stable growth rate of 1.6% or 1.7% within the projection horizon. These rates are,in any case, higher than potential output growth and would lead to a gradual closing of the outputgap, further increasing employment and higher wages.The German economy is expected to grow more or less in line with the euro area as a wholewithin the projection horizon. A further decline in unemployment and above-average capacityutilisation means that the robust growth in Germany will be increasingly driven by domesticdemand. This projected economic development shows also that Germany doesn’t need a debt-financed fiscal stimulus package, such as some occasionally call for. While the Germangovernment has indeed increased spending for public infrastructure, this hasn’t led to a fiscaldeficit. Given the expected burden on the budget and the social security system due to thelooming demographic development in Germany, slight public surpluses are absolutelyappropriate in times when interest rates are low and tax revenues are rising.1 2 / 9BIS central bankers' speeches
Last but not least, according to our estimates, spill-over effects from German public spending onother euro-area economies are rather low. So the benefits to the rest of the euro area of such apolicy would be dubious, while it would be neither useful nor necessary for Germany, against thebackground of its benign cyclical position and ageing society.Inflation in the euro area is expected to rise in line with the robust economic growth. TheEurosystem staff projections indicate that the inflation rate will pick up gradually until the end ofthe projection horizon to a level broadly in line with Governing Council’s definition of price stability.In this context, four-fifths of the increase between 2016 and 2017 can be attributed to thedevelopment of energy prices. The dampening effect of the slump in oil prices about a year agois now going to be washed out statistically. In addition to this base effect, OPEC’s decision toreduce their oil production might mark a fundamental change of the organisation’s strategy. Thiscould lead to a faster closing of the gap between oil demand and oil supply, stabilising oil pricesat an elevated level. However, much depends on how other oil producers react. Up to now, it’snot clear if the current level of oil prices will set incentives to resume oil production.  And there is a further reason why inflation is currently so subdued in the euro area. The domesticprice pressure is weak because of the adjustment processes in some euro-area member statesto overcome the biggest economic shock since World War II.While it is right that the only gradual increase in inflation justifies an expansionary monetary policystance in the euro area at the current juncture, reasonable people can disagree about theappropriate degree of monetary accommodation. All the more as monetary policy becomeslooser automatically over the coming months, even without central bank action: when inflationrises as forecasted in our projections, the real interest rate declines. The effects are similar to acentral bank rate cut.And it is also no secret that I’m quite sceptical with regard to Eurosystem government bondpurchases. Although such purchases aren’t prohibited per se and they can loosen the monetarypolicy stance, they are blurring the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy. And this isespecially problematic in a currency union with a single monetary policy and largely autonomouseconomic and fiscal policies.Euro-area central banks are now the largest creditors of their member states. All governmentsultimately pay the same interest rate on the debt in central banks’ balance sheets, regardless ofthe country’s creditworthiness. Currently, as the Eurosystem’s deposit rate is negative, they allreceive money for that part of their debt.What’s more: the larger the part of the debt that central banks withdraw from the market, the lessmarkets will exert their disciplining forces sanctioning unhealthy public finances with higher risk-premia. This is all the more worrisome as the low-interest-rate environment offers few incentivesfor governments to consolidate their budgets. Fiscal policy in the euro area has been loosenedagain noticeably over the past few years. What governments are saving in interest paymentsisn’t being put towards the urgent goal of reducing debt, but instead is being spent to a significantextent. Germany is no exception here, by the way. Of course, this is not only due to diminishedmarket discipline, but also to a lack of rigour in applying the fiscal rules. I will come back to thislater.This fiscal environment could lead to a situation where monetary policy comes under politicalpressure to make high levels of debt sustainable through low interest rates. This, however, couldput price stability at risk.I fear that the danger of fiscal policy becoming too comfortable with thecurrent low-interest-rate environment increases with the time these favourable financingconditions exist.Besides these observations, I never tire of emphasising that the current very expansionarymonetary policy entails additional costs. It is impairing the profitability of banks and life insurance 3 / 9BIS central bankers' speeches
companies, for example. Although both are not targets of a monetary policy geared solely topreserving price stability, central banks cannot afford to ignore this fact if banks’ health problemsendanger the monetary transmission mechanism, for instance.Additionally, low interest rates and unconventional monetary policies could also drive up financialrisk-taking in some financial market segments or the real estate market. I currently see no sign ofexuberance in the real estate market in the euro area as a whole. Yet there’s no denying thatsome national markets are at risk of overheating, and the competent financial stability authoritiesof some euro-area countries like Ireland, the Netherlands and, more recently, Finland haveintroduced macroprudential measures to limit the risk of house price bubbles.Again, even if macroprudential instruments are better targeted to address specific financialstability issues, monetary policy cannot turn a blind eye if rising financial stability risks could getcentral banks into trouble with regard to safeguarding price stability in the future. In any case, it iskey that concerns over financial market volatility or the sustainability of public finances do notlead to a postponement of an exit from the ultra-loose monetary policy, if that’s what it takes toreach our price stability target. Otherwise, monetary policy would be taken hostage by fiscalpolicy or markets.  Ladies and gentlemenIt is the responsibility of member states to make sure that their public finances are able to copewith an increase in interest rates when it happens one day. And it is also the responsibility ofmember states to ensure sufficient growth and economic convergence. Contrary to what somebelieve – or wish – it’s not central banks that can put the economy on a higher growth path.Or to put it metaphorically: it is not enough for a car to have a tank full of “liquidity” if you want tospeed up. Someone still has to rev up the engine. It’s politicians who hold the key to unlockingeconomic growth. That’s why the Governing Council has been tireless in calling for structuralreforms. But while the ambition should be to move into a higher gear with regard to reforms,there are signals that we have already shifted back to a lower gear again. “Going for growth2016", a recent study by the OECD, shows that since 2013 the speed of reforms has sloweddown, especially with regard to measures in the fields of “innovation policy, public sectorefficiency or product and labour market regulation".It is clear that each country has its own economic situation and preferences – meaning there’sno such thing as a “one size fits all” approach. But I am convinced that measures which lead tosound public finances as well as competition-based economic systems with flexible labour andproduct markets would foster growth.Making it easier for new firms to enter the market is one type of reform helping to raisecompetition and innovation. Measures easing the process of setting up a new business and,where necessary, eliminating red tape would boost growth potential, too. As a case in point, letme mention the creation of a common services market and a single digital market in Europe.Studies show that this could yield twice the growth effects unleashed by the creation of thecommon market for goods.   Lowering the barriers that prevent enterprises from exiting the market will likewise foster growth.It would facilitate what Joseph Schumpeter called "creative destruction". OECD researchsuggests that policy-induced exit barriers matter for productivity growth, because fewer exits leadto less scope for productivity spillovers and the misallocation of capital, labour and skills. Itconcludes, for instance, that insolvency regimes should be streamlined.And investing more in skills and education promises to deliver rich rewards, too. This would notonly boost labour productivity, but also reduce the risk of workers losing their jobs. And this, inturn, would in my view be the most effective antidote to the feeling many have of being threatened23,45 4 / 9BIS central bankers' speeches
by globalisation and technological progress.But companies not only stand to gain from higher labour market flexibility: they would also benefitfrom an increased flexibility in their financing options. This is where the Capital Markets Unioncomes in. Because European companies largely rely on bank debt – in relation to GDP, aboutfour times more than in the United States - improving and harmonising regulation could help tomake equity markets a better funding source for enterprises. And a deeper and more integratedEuropean capital market would also improve financial stability, because equity flows are lessprone to sudden stops. Hence, more equity financing makes companies more shock-resistant,thereby supporting growth and jobs.Research has found that private risk sharing through integrated capital markets is a much moreimportant shock absorber than public risk sharing. The integrated equity markets inthe US cushion around 40% of total cyclical fluctuations between federal states.If a negative shock hits an industry or a specific region, then this loss is spread widely beyondthat region. Creditors, on the other hand, are not exposed to losses – except in the event ofinsolvency. In other words: equity is a shock absorber, debt is a shock amplifier.  3. Improving the institutional framework of the EMULadies and gentlemenImplementing economic reforms at the national or European level as a way of strengthening theeuro area is important to improve the cohesion in the euro area, which has undoubtedly sufferedfrom the financial and sovereign debt crises. What’s also crucial, however, is to make theinstitutional setting of EMU more stable and to restore trust, for instance by abiding by the agreedrules. The financial and sovereign debt crises in the euro area bore one major characteristic incommon: both saw a core economic principle being violated: the liability principle. Germaneconomist Walter Eucken, who was one of the founding fathers of Germany’s social marketeconomy, once said very aptly: "Those who reap the benefits must also bear the costs."If banks assume they are too big to fail, they will be tempted to make the most of this implicitinsurance and take on excessive risks, at the expense of society at large. This is exactly whathappened before the financial crisis. This kind of implicit insurance is not altogether unfamiliar tothe framework of EMU, where a single monetary policy exists alongside 19 largely autonomouseconomic and fiscal policies. As the crisis taught us, this set-up potentially exposes EMU tovulnerability. Because at the end of the day, the community may have to foot the bill for unhealthydevelopments in individual member states if it wishes to prevent the stability of the union as awhole from coming under threat.The prospect of being able to spread the consequences of unsustainable policy across the entiremonetary union might weaken the incentives to run sound policies, in particular a healthybudgetary policy. This is why institutional safeguards were put in place before the euro waslaunched: the Stability and Growth Pact, the no bail-out clause, and the ban on monetaryfinancing of governments. Unfortunately, however, these safeguards were unable to preventpublic debt from ballooning in some euro-area countries. The crisis played a role in this, but alsothat the fiscal rules were repeatedly violated and the capital markets didn’t sanction thesebreaches because the no bail-out clause lacked credibility.When doubts about the debt sustainability of some euro-area member states surfaced during thesovereign debt crisis, the urgently-taken rescue measures helped to prevent the crisis fromescalating. But they did so by mutualising fiscal liability on a substantial scale. Economic andfiscal policies, on the other hand, essentially remained a national prerogative, though the fiscal67 5 / 9BIS central bankers' speeches
rules have admittedly been adapted. As a result, the balance between liability and control hasbeen thrown out of kilter.However, striking an even balance between liability and control is crucial for the functioningof EMU. Theoretically, there are two possible ways to restore this balance: deeper integration, ormore individual national responsibility on the part of the member states.The first solution would be to create a fiscal union with centralised decision-making powers.While a fiscal union would not guarantee sound fiscal policymaking, it could certainly mitigate thedeficit bias of individual member states. And interestingly, even for Karl Otto Pöhl, the formerBundesbank President who was a member of the Delors Commission, the “fiscal unionapproach” was the intuitive one: “In a monetary union with irreversibly fixed exchange rates, theweak would become ever weaker and the strong ever stronger. We would thus experience greattensions in the real economy of Europe. For this reason alone, monetary union without thesimultaneous integration in fields like fiscal policy as well as regional and social policy iscompletely inconceivable."But let’s be honest here: recent political developments show that a fiscal union approach is noton the cards: The outcome of the Brexit referendum and maybe at least partly the outcome of theItalian constitutional referendum have laid bare the scepticism about the European project and atendency to reject further integration steps. Furthermore, surveys reveal that many citizens inthe EU doubt whether the existing process of integration is still sustainable. And this is possiblynot unrelated to the fact that the ongoing debate over the right response to the crisis in the euroarea has brought out into the open the persistent differences of opinion in fiscal and economicpolicy matters. This is all the more astonishing because the euro-area countries had actuallyalready established a consensus on the appropriate role of fiscal policy, which is documented inthe Stability and Growth Pact. So building trust in the rules we already have today is paramountbefore we engage in major new integration steps.To cut a long story short: a fiscal union, which would require member states to surrendersubstantial national sovereignty, hardly seems feasible at the moment. And as long as there’s nowillingness to transfer national sovereignty to the European level, there will be no basis formutualising sovereign risks – and that’s why the proposal to establish a European DepositInsurance Scheme (EDIS) isn’t the right institutional response to restore the balance betweenliability and control in the euro area.As long as actions taken at the national level, such as drafting insolvency laws, or very highstocks of government bonds on banks’ balance sheets can have a substantial impact on thehealth of financial institutions, EDIS would allow risks from national decisions to be shifted to theEuropean level. This would send the wrong incentives to banks and investors alike. Themutualisation of risk would not go hand in hand with the necessary mutualisation of control rights– irrespective of the Single Supervisory Mechanism that was put in place.The second way of restoring the balance between liability and control, meanwhile, would be tostrengthen the Maastricht approach based on individual responsibility. This would leaveeconomic and fiscal policy, as well as ultimate liability for public debt, in the hands of theindividual member states. But how could such a decentralised approach work better in futurethan it has done in the past?Only five minutes away from here, you can visit the Magritte museum. René Magritte oncesaid: "I saw the Uffizi Gallery in Florence, it’s not bad but the postcards are better." Whether ornot you would agree with that, it is my impression that the same might be said of the fiscal rules.It is not enough that the fiscal rules of the euro area exist on paper: their principles also have tobe applied in reality.Although the rules were changed after the crisis, the European Commission was granted more 6 / 9BIS central bankers' speeches
flexibility in interpreting them. And it has used this flexibility quite a few times so far – and alwaysto interpret the rules very loosely. In addition, recent statements by the Commission show thather interest in enforcing the rules is further continuing to decline. As a result, the binding force ofthe budgetary rules is weaker than ever before, as we can see, for instance, in the budgetarydevelopments in France, Spain and Portugal.One way of ensuring that the rules are binding would be to install a new and independentauthority, a fiscal council. This institution would not be exposed to the same political conflicts ofinterest as the Commission, which has to assess whether national budgets comply with theStability and Growth Pact and hammer out political compromises between the interests of thedifferent member states. Of course, the European Council ultimately holds the key to thesuccess of any budgetary control. Its determination to enforce the rules and support theCommission in a strict interpretation is all-important."Debt is a two-edged sword. Used wisely and in moderation, it clearly improves welfare. But,when it is used imprudently and in excess, the result can be disaster.” This statement byformer BIS chief economist Stephen Cecchetti and his colleagues Madhusudan Mohanty andFabrizio Zampolli is directed not only at private debt but also at public debt. They show thatexcessively high private and public debt is not only a risk to financial stability but also toeconomic growth. According to their estimations, in the euro area we are already in the dangerzone – at least with regard to corporate debt, at 105% of GDP, but also in terms of public debt, at91%. And so this is one more reason why effective limits for government debt are urgentlyneeded.Binding fiscal rules and an institution that observes their adherence are just one component of aconsistent reform agenda. Additionally, it is important for capital markets to resume their role ofdisciplining national fiscal policy. As for enterprises, more deeply indebted countries ought to payhigher interest rates. This will only happen if the no bail-out clause in the Maastricht Treaty reallyhas teeth. Therefore, it must be possible to restructure public debt without posing major risks tothe financial system.The July edition of the Bundesbank’s Monthly Report describes what needs to be done to makethis possible. There are two reforms I’d like to mention in the following.First, we need to sever the sovereign-bank nexus. A strong inter-linkage between banks andsovereigns increases the probability of a bail-out by other member states and weakensincentives for risk-oriented pricing. And it is precisely this sovereign-bank nexus that contributedto a mutual intensification of the crisis in the euro area, when banks suffered from decliningprices for sovereign bonds in their balance sheets and countries from struggling banks in theirterritory.The European banking union already marks a huge step towards untangling this dangerousembrace. However, to this end, and to complement the banking union, it is also crucial to doaway with the preferential treatment of sovereign debt in banking regulation. This implies thatsimilar to banks’ lending to the private sector sovereign exposures will need to be backed bycapital and also be part of a large exposures regime.A second measure concerns the design of the European Stability Mechanism’s (ESM’s) financialassistance programmes. The ESM is there to provide resources to countries that apply foran ESM financial assistance programme. However, these funds are generally not only used tocover budget deficits, but also to redeem maturing sovereign bonds. By implication, when aprogramme is activated, European taxpayers are, in essence, bailing out the respective country’screditors. If a haircut ends up being the only way to restore a country’s debt sustainability,taxpayers, rather than investors, would shoulder the bill. This does not exactly foster anywillingness on the part of member states to agree to restructure a programme country’s debt.Instead of a truly viable solution being reached, when push comes to shove, a strategy of8 7 / 9BIS central bankers' speeches
muddling through would win the day.That’s why the Bundesbank is proposing to add a clause to the government bonds of euro-areacountries which automatically extends the maturity of bonds by three years if the member statein question applies for ESM assistance. This way, the initial creditors would remain liable, and ifthe government debt really does need to be restructured, that could be done in an orderly fashionwithout jeopardising financial stability.Our proposals would help to sever one direction of the sovereign-bank nexus: banks would bebetter shielded from a deterioration in public finances. The financial crisis showed, however, thatwobbling banks can lead to stumbling sovereigns. To cut this direction of the nexus, financialmarket regulation was already improved substantially. In the euro area, a common restructuringand resolution regime (the Single Resolution Mechanism) and a bank supervision body under theaegis of the ECB (the Single Supervisory Mechanism, SSM) were established.The Single Resolution Mechanism and the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD),which assure the harmonised implementation of the rules throughout all member states,substantially strengthen the principle of individual responsibility in the banking sector, therebyreducing the likelihood of public bail-outs. However, the first line of defence in making a bankresolution less likely is the establishment of higher capital requirements for banks as it wasalready decided in principle by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision almost exactly sixyears ago.That’s why the timely implementation of Basel III is important. This would also reduce regulatoryuncertainty for banks which is in my view a grave burden for them. But I want also reiterate thatfinalising Basel III - i.e. with regard to the design of banks’ internal risk-based models – shouldn’tlead to an additional significant increase in banks’ capital requirements, and the outcome shouldalso be regionally balanced. The fact that Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) for the directlysupervised SSM banks increased after the financial crisis to 12.8% by mid-2016, and that thislevel is well above the unchanged aggregated capital demand of the Supervisory Review andEvaluation Process (SREP) for 2017 of around 10%, can be taken as a sign of an improvedresilience of the European banking sector. 4. ConclusionTo sum up, I am strongly convinced that taking responsibility for national circumstances andpolicy decisions away from the member states would help neither the countries nor the peoplenor the European project. Strengthening individual responsibility appears to be the betterapproach.Ladies and gentlemenTo borrow the words of Victor Horta: I hope that the duration of my speech was neither tooimmense nor my main points invisible to you. Instead, I would be glad if I have given you somefood for thought on how the economy and the institutions of the euro area might be strengthened.Thank you very much.www.wto.org/english/news_e/pres16_e/pr779_e.htmwww.oecd.org/eco/growth/going-for-growth-2016-executive-summary.htmRoland de Bruijn, Henk Kox, Arjan Lejour (2008), “Economic benefits of an integrated European market forservices", Journal of Policy Modeling 30, pp 301–19.1234 8 / 9BIS central bankers' speeches
Copenhagen Economics (2010), The economic impact of a European digital single market, Final Report.Müge Adalet McGowan and Dan Andrews (2016), “Insolvency regimes and productivity growth: a framework foranalysis", OECD Working Paper (2016)33.www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/fpc/fspapers/fs_paper33.pdf, p 6.P Asdrubali, B Sørensen and O Yosha (1996). Channels of Interstate Risk Sharing: US 1963–1990, in QuarterlyJournal of Economics, 111(4), pp 1081–1110.Stephen G Cecchetti, Madhusudan Mohanty and Fabrizio Zampolli (2011), “The real effects of debt", BIS WorkingPapers No. 352.45678 9 / 9BIS central bankers' speeches
Philip R Lane: SMEs and the macro-financial environmentAddress by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Irish Small andMedium Enterprises Association Annual Conference 2016, Royal Dublin Society, Dublin, 11November 2016.*   *   *The views expressed are personal and do not reflect the views of the Eurosystem or GoverningCouncil.  I thank Bernie Mooney, James Carroll, Fergal McCann and Conor O’Toole for theirinputs into this speech.IntroductionGood afternoon. I would like to thank ISME for inviting me to address your annual conference.The theme “Challenging Times – New Opportunities” is certainly timely, especially as Irelandadapts to the implications of Brexit in the coming months and years. The SME sector is central tothe work of the Central Bank.  At the macroeconomic level, the economic performance of Irelandcritically depends on the SME sector.  In relation to our financial stability mandate, the financialhealth of the SME sector is of primary importance.The format of my talk today has four parts. First, I will provide an overview of the analysis of theSME sector that has been undertaken by our economics team in the Central Bank. Second, I willdiscuss the financial environment facing the SME sector.  Third, I will turn to the implications ofBrexit. Fourth, I will offer some reflections on the relevance to the SME sector of the CentralBank’s mandate to safeguard financial stability and protect consumers.The role of the SME sector in the Irish economyThe importance of SMEs to the Irish economy is well known: SMEs account for nearly all activeenterprises and employ about two thirds of the total workforce. The vast majority of these firmshave been created in Ireland and many are run by owner-managers. The SME sector is highlydynamic, with smaller firms having the highest rates of both job creation and job destruction. Thesmallest firms account for nearly half of all net job creation in Ireland, with the largest contributioncoming from young, small, domestically-owned enterprises.An important characteristic of the SME sector is that it is highly interconnected to other sectors inthe economy. The output of SMEs can be sold to one of five broad groups: enterprises in thesame sector, enterprises in other sectors, domestic consumers, export markets and the publicsector. The varying reliance of individual SME firms on these revenue sources (for example, theextent to which a firm is business-facing or consumer-facing), has important implications inrelation to how economic shocks are transmitted to and from the SME sector.While granular data on SME reliance on each of these revenue sources are not available, muchcan be inferred from economy-wide input-output tables. For example, the latest CSO data showthat manufacturing and business services sectors are the most export orientated, whileconstruction and distribution sectors have the highest shares of direct consumer sales.Domestic business-to-business sales are most relevant to agriculture, business services anddistribution sectors. A full understanding of the different sectoral interlinkages is of paramountimportance in identifying the risks facing the SME sector. The experience of the SME sector since 2008 illustrates the importance of understanding thedifferences in inter-sectoral linkages across individual firms within the sector.Between 2008 and 2012, SME employment levels declined by almost a fifth, which is aboutdouble the decline experienced by larger firms during the crisis. While employment fell in nearly1 1 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
all SME sub-sectors, industry and construction were most affected. Most severely, the reversalin the construction sector saw a 50 percent decline in employment. By 2014, employment inlarger firms was just 5 per cent lower than 2008 levels, while still 15 per cent lower for SMEs. There are many factors which determined the magnitude of the economic shock faced bySMEs. One striking example is the difference in experience for those retail firms selling durableand non-durable goods. In the case of durables (such as motors, furniture, hardware andelectrical goods), sales fell by 40 to 50 per cent during the crisis. In contrast, food sales in 2012and 2013 were close to identical to those on the eve of the recession.The recovery in Ireland in recent year has included a substantial contribution from the SMEsector. The share of SMEs reporting increased sales almost doubled between 2013 and 2016,with rising activity levels in all the main business sectors. While we see expansion across allSME size categories (Micro, Small and Medium), the recovery has been weakest for smaller,non-exporting SMEs. We observe similar patterns in the data on firm profitability. Surveys carriedout by the ECB also point to a relatively strong recovery in Ireland: growth in turnover andprofitability has been stronger here than in most other countries in the euro area in recent years.SME investment is also showing signs of recovery. Recent research from the Central Bank ofIreland shows that the share of SMEs investing has increased steadily since 2012, and currentlyabout one third of SMEs are investing, with larger firms, exporters and innovators most likely toinvest. Investment is also strong by European levels – the share of Irish SMEs reportinginvestment increases is among the highest in the euro area.The financing of the SME sectorLet me now turn to the financing environment facing the SME sector.Currently, new investments in the SME sector are primarily funded by retained earnings, withbank financing and leasing together accounting for less than twenty per cent of investmentexpenditure. This is consistent with the post-crisis situation in many advanced economies andreflects a combination of deleveraging factors and still-low investment levels.Even in good times, SMEs face a tougher financing environment compared to larger corporates,due to higher investment risks and limited firm-level information available to providers of debt andequity finance. The legacy of the crisis has further strained this relation: Ireland has among thehighest shares of non-performing SME loans in the EU, with many property-related loanssecured on SME businesses during the boom. However, relative to the peak, the stock ofoutstanding balances in default has declined, with fewer SMEs entering default and more SMEsreturning to performing loan status. More generally, the SME sector has undergone substantialdeleveraging: the stock of loans to SMEs in 2016 is about half that in 2010. Survey evidenceshows that debt-to-turnover ratios are declining and the share of SMEs with no debt isincreasing.While there was a sharp tightening in credit conditions for the SME sector during the crisis, therehas been a significant turnaround over the last three years – rejection rates have been decliningsteadily and are now in line with euro area averages, and new SME lending has been growingstrongly since 2014. Improvements in SME fundamentals, driven by the improving economy,have played a role in these improved acceptance rates for SMEs. While surveys show thataccess to finance is still a high concern for about one third of Irish SMEs, a growing share offirms are reporting that the willingness of banks to provide credit is improving.  Across the euroarea,  an easing in credit conditions has been supported by the accommodative monetary stanceof the ECB, which has been reinforced by the range of non-standard measures  that have beenimplemented since Summer 2014.The composition of lending to the SME sector is also shifting towards a more pro-growthorientation. During the crisis, SMEs were seeking loans to cover the deterioration in trading2 2 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
conditions and support balance sheet restructuring. In 2012, 40 per cent of credit applicationsfrom Micro-SMEs were for “stressed” reasons, which include revenue declines, increased baddebts, or a slowdown in debtor collection. By 2016, this figure had dropped to 13 per cent. Weare also seeing that the share of credit applications for investment purposes is rising while theshare for working capital is declining, which is again likely a symptom of improving outlook andsentiment.One aspect of SME financing that has received much attention is the cost of credit. Indeed, theCentral Bank of Ireland’s SME Market Report has regularly shown that interest rates on smallercompany loans are higher than the euro area average. Furthermore, while rates in othervulnerable countries have declined since 2014, they have remained high in Ireland.Understanding these differentials has been the focus of a research project at the Central Bank.This research shows that macro-financial factors rather than differences in SME characteristicsare the primary explanation for cross-country interest rate differentials. For example, interestrates tend to be higher in countries in which there is a higher share of non-performing loans,unemployment is atypically high, banks are under stress and the banking system is moreconcentrated.  From these results, we can expect that further improvements in the health of theIrish banking system (which in turn may trigger the entry of new lenders) and continuedmacroeconomic improvement will help to narrow cross-country interest rate differentials.  Let me briefly turn to the current Capital Markets Union (CMU) initiative. The aims of CMU are toimprove access to finance for all businesses across Europe including SMEs, increase anddiversify funding sources for the real economy and make capital markets in Europe moreefficient and effective. For SMEs, there are two ways in which CMU could help. First, thedevelopment of deep and liquid securitisation markets for SME loans would improve the ability ofbanks to source financing for new SME lending. Second, if CMU delivers alternative financingsources for enterprises, this can help reduce the dependence of SMEs on banks for creditintermediation. Funding diversification also matters generally for enterprise development when viewed throughthe lens of the enterprise financing lifecycle.  As enterprises grow, their funding requirementschange and develop.  For example, early in the lifecycle, companies rely on informal financing,insider funding or business angel equity. If the firm has adequate scale and growth prospects,they may have access to other private equity such as venture capital or mezzanine finance, andthe largest firms have access to public debt and equity markets. By facilitating the introduction oftargeted policies to improve the supply of alternative financing across the lifecycles of firms, CMUcan contribute positively to the funding environment for SMEs.Other recent interventions in the Irish SME landscape are the Strategic Banking Corporation ofIreland and the Ireland Strategic Investment Fund. The SBCI began “on-lending” through anumber of bank and non-bank partners in March 2015 with the goal of promoting competition inthe SME lending market and reducing the cost of credit for SMEs. The SBCI has made asignificant impact since its launch with over 8500 loans issued, representing €347 million in newlending. We estimate that SBCI lending in 2015 equates to a sizable 9 per cent of total newlending to SMEs. There is also evidence that interest rates on SBCI loans are lower than marketrates. The European Investment Bank also supports SMEs through their funding of the SBCI, whichamounted to €188 million in 2015. Further, between 2011 and 2014, the EIB provided anadditional €550 million in credit lines for SMEs through the Irish retail banks and the SBCI. ISIFhave also been a major player in the SME financing environment and have, to date, invested€355 million in a number of debt and equity SME funds. Such policies should help alleviatefinancing bottlenecks in the SME market.3 3 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
BrexitThe latest ISME surveys show that Brexit is now the biggest concern facing Irish SMEs. TheSME sector is especially exposed to shifts in the Sterling-euro exchange rate, the level ofeconomic activity in the United Kingdom and the prospect of new barriers to trade betweenIreland and the UK.While exporters selling to the UK are most immediately affected, there are additional channels bywhich the exchange rate affects the SME sector. First, in many domestic sectors, the marketshare of domestic firms will be threatened by imports from the UK. Second, many domestically-orientated firms are suppliers to exporters or rely on employees in exporting firms as customers.Third, Sterling depreciation is associated with an increase in cross-border shopping. While these are adverse forces, it is also important to point out that a weaker Sterling maybenefit some SMEs that rely on imported inputs from the UK and that real income gains tohouseholds due to cheaper imports from the UK may in part be recycled into higher spending ondomestically-produced goods and services.Over the longer term, the Irish SME sector will have to adapt to the post-Brexit environment.  Thecurrent uncertainty about the future UK-EU relationship will delay many investment plans.  In turn,as clarity about the post-Brexit world improves, firms will have to develop new strategies torespond to the new configuration.  In response to higher trade barriers between the UK and theEU, some firms may plan to serve UK customers through FDI into the UK, while others maysearch for new export markets.  In the other direction, some UK firms may look to set up affiliatesin Ireland both to serve the Irish market and as a platform for EU-wide trading.  SMEs and the Central BankThe mission statement of the Central Bank is “safeguarding stability, protecting consumers.” The last decade has provided a painful reminder that the SME sector is especially exposed tovolatility in domestic macroeconomic and financial conditions. The current work of the CentralBank is dedicated to improving the resilience of the financial system and mitigating pro-cyclicaldynamics in credit allocation.In relation to resilience, a primary international strategy (implemented through the work of theECB’s Single Supervisory Mechanism) is to improve the capacity of banks to withstand shocksby fortifying capital and liquidity buffers and implementing a more intrusive supervisory model. Inaddition, the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive provides a framework that will make iteasier to restructure or shut down failing banks, with limited recourse to the taxpayer.  As the national macroprudential authority, the Central Bank is also working to reduce the risk ofdestabilising credit cycles.  In addition to the the new mortgage rules, the Central Bank hasadditional macroprudential policy instruments, including the counter-cyclical captial buffer whichcan be raised if there are signs of overheating in the credit system.  The vigorous use of national-level macroprudential policy is essential for small, open economies, given the elevated exposureto external financial shocks.Such measures can play a substantial role in helping to reduce macro-financial volatility.However, it is also important to recognise that small economies will always be more volatile thanlarger, more diversified economies.  Given this reality, decision makers in all sectors (SMEs,large corporates, households, the government) should make financial plans on a prudent basis,with sufficient equity and cash buffers to cope with adverse shocks and due risk assessment ofinvestment and consumption plans. Finally, let me turn to the consumer protection work of the Central Bank, which extends to theSME sector. The Central Bank has consistently recognised the importance of ensuring that 4 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
regulated lenders treat small businesses fairly. A new set of regulations came into effect on 1July 2016 for all lenders that provide SME credit, except for credit unions, which must complyfrom 1 January 2017.  These Regulations provide protections for micro, small and medium-sizedenterprises when they are either applying for or already have credit facilities and also forguarantors of SME credit.  In summary, the Regulations aim to strengthen protection for SMEs,while also facilitating access to credit, by introducing specific requirements that regulated lendersmust comply with such as:   giving SME borrowers transparency around the application process;providing SME borrowers with reasons for declining credit, in writing, that are specific to theirapplication; providing protections for guarantors of SME credit; providing SMEs with the option ofan annual meeting to review their credit facilities; contacting SME borrowers who have been inarrears for 15 working days; warning SME borrowers if they are in danger of being classified asnot co-operating; and providing SME borrowers with the right of appeal.We have produced a Guide for SMEs on these Regulations which is available on our website andI would encourage you all to read this.  ISME were a key stakeholder for us in undertaking thedevelopment of these Regulations and I would like to thank ISME for its very constructiveengagement in this work and its assistance in circulating our Guide to its members. Martina Lawless (2013), “Age or size? Determinants of job creation”.www.centralbank.ie/publications/Documents/02RT13.pdfJames Carroll, Paul Mooney and Conor O’Toole, “Irish SME Investment in Economic Recovery”.www.centralbank.ie/publications/Documents/QB2%202016%20Irish%20SME%20Economic%20Investment%20in%20Economic%20Recovery%20Article.pdfUsing interest rates on non-financial loans under €250,000 as a proxy for SME lending rates.The Guide is available here. The Press Release issued in June 2016 is available here. 41234 5 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
SPEECH  Page 1 of 5 SPEECH BY GOVERNOR LARS ROHDE AT THE ANNUAL MEETING OF THE DANISH BANKERS ASSOCIATION        CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY        Thank you for inviting me to speak. I have these two key messages today: 1. Increased digitisation is good news for customers, banks and society in general. 2. Increased digitisation also makes the sector more vulnerable to destructive hacker attacks, but Danmarks Nationalbank and the sector are continuously working to prevent this.  *** The Danes have gone digital – and very much so. There are more mobile phones than people in Denmark, and nearly all homes are online. In fact, digital readiness is higher in Denmark than anywhere else. [Chart 1] Technological advances have changed the way banks operate. New possibilities have paved the way for a number of initiatives that have made the financial sector more efficient. This benefits the sector, and it benefits the Danes. With increased digitisation, more processes can be automated and customers can increasingly serve themselves. This reduces the need for branches and employees – a trend that has been seen for some years as this chart shows. [Chart 2]      5 December 2016 
  Page 2 of 5 Technology has made digitisation a competitive parameter, which means that all banks are trying to attract customers by offering the best digital products. However, it has also opened the door to increased competition from new actors, who will be able to enter areas that used to be completely dominated by the banks. Competition is good, and there are no indications that we will have less competition in future. In fact, we can expect fiercer competition as a result of the EU's new Payment Services Directive, PSD2, which could be a game changer for the financial sector. PSD2 allows third parties – with the customer's consent – to gain direct access to perform transactions in a customer's bank account. A third party could be e.g. a coffee chain, an airline company or another bank than the one where the customer has a deposit account. The point is that PSD2 allows new actors to offer payment services without providing deposit accounts. Once they have got a foot in the door, they will also be able to offer other services, such as loans, which are actually sources of income for the banks – unlike payment services. The Danish banks have been good at moving with the times and developing their own digital products. Examples are mobile payment solutions, which have become very popular among the Danes. These solutions have helped to prevent foreign actors from gaining significant market shares in Denmark until now. Obviously the limited size of the Danish market also plays a role. Increased digitisation makes heavy demands on the individual banks if they are to keep up with technological advances and remain competitive. That is expensive. Typically it requires substantial investment, and in this respect the size of the bank is a factor. The large banks are better positioned to develop their own digital solutions. Conversely, the small banks rely on collaboration with e.g. a data centre or a larger bank in order to be able to offer the solutions requested by customers. Digital developments may increase the spread between small and large banks, as the large banks can typically benefit from economies of scale. So increased digitisation will contribute further to the downward trend in the number of banks. [Chart 3] 
  Page 3 of 5 *** Increased digitisation also involves a degree of vulnerability. The financial sector relies on complex IT systems. Every day, nearly kr. 600 billion is transferred between accounts via those systems. That is equivalent to more than one quarter of Denmark's gross domestic product. And that makes the Danish financial sector an obvious target of cybercrime. So today we are facing other threats than previously. There are still people like the Olsen Gang [Chart 4], but modern-day threats are radically different and may affect society as a whole. In a historical perspective, cybercrime is a new type of crime, which can be committed from Herning, Hong Kong or anywhere else. We have already witnessed many attacks on financial institutions around the world. The attack on the Bangladeshi central bank made global headlines and was a warning that cyberattacks are becoming increasingly sophisticated. The threat could well be even greater if it comes from organised hacktivism, terrorism or actual state-sponsored attacks. An extensive attack that affects several critical actors or systems in e.g. the payments infrastructure could potentially paralyse the whole sector or significant parts of it for a while. Hence, unauthorised access to financial sector computers could constitute a systemic risk and ultimately threaten financial stability. Even less serious attacks can – if they occur repeatedly – weaken confidence in the financial system. This would be particularly critical if it were to happen at a time when the sector is already struggling – as it was in the autumn of 2008, for example. That is the systemic angle which makes the cyber threat an issue for Danmarks Nationalbank. One of the reasons why there is a systemic risk is that the Danish banks and mortgage banks are closely interconnected via payment and settlement systems handling large values. Moreover, the financial institutions use the same data centres, network service providers, etc. Consequently, it is important that all key links in the chain are very strong. 
  Page 4 of 5 The Danish Financial Supervisory Authority and Danmarks Nationalbank have examined the cyber resilience of 15 of the largest and most important financial sector participants. Although a survey of this type is subject to certain caveats, our conclusion is that, overall, cyber resilience is at a reasonable level – but there is room for improvement. The risk of unauthorised access to or sabotage of important IT systems calls for IT security measures that perhaps received little attention previously. Traditionally focus has been on severed cables, power outages or software errors. We still need to take these factors into account, but cybercrime poses new questions and requires new answers. It is important to remember that attacks to computer systems are not unintentional. There are criminal minds at work, and they are constantly fine-tuning their methods. So the threats are changing all the time. This means that an attack may actually be difficult to detect in time. Our survey shows that the individual sector participants are working with these challenges, but it also shows that the highest levels of security and protection against cyberattacks have generally been achieved by organisations with a cyber strategy which has been approved by the board of directors. In other words, a strategy laid down by top management has helped to ensure focus on these issues throughout the organisation and to target efforts. Interconnectedness and the resultant interdependence between virtually all sector participants mean that information-sharing and collaboration are essential if we are to stem the tide of attacks that will undoubtedly come in the future. First and foremost, I would like to emphasise that collaboration is necessary – especially in situations where there is a potential threat to financial stability. That is why we have established the FSOR – the Financial Sector forum for Operational Resilience. 
  Page 5 of 5 The FSOR is a forum for collaboration between authorities and all key financial sector participants [Chart 5]. Its task is to implement "joint measures to ensure financial sector resilience". The focus is on preventing failures, but also on handling them if they, nevertheless, occur. The ambitious vision for this collaboration is that we should be best in class in Europe when it comes to counter the threat from cybercrime. The first specific initiative was the large-scale test of the financial sector's crisis response plans conducted the week before last. It really put the sector's ability to work together and coordinate efforts in the event of an extensive cyberattack on critical systems to the test. It was an educational experience. We all learned a few lessons and came home with knowledge that we can use in our further efforts. And fortunately it was only a test. But if it becomes necessary, we are ready. It is better to activate the crisis response one time too many than one time too few. One of Danmarks Nationalbank's tasks is to ensure that the Danish economy is robust. An important element of a robust economy is a financial sector with a robust infrastructure. There is more work to do for the whole sector, but focus must be on the efforts made by the individual sector participants. Thank you for your attention. 
Philip R Lane: Ireland's banking sector - overview, developmentsand challengesIntroductory statement by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, before theJoint Oireachtas (National Parliament) Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform,and Taoiseach (Head of Parliament), Dublin, 20 December 2016.*   *   *Chairman, Committee members,Thank you for the opportunity to update you on conditions in the Irish banking sector. I will firstprovide a brief overview of developments in the banking system. I will then discuss some specificchallenges for banks operating in Ireland and the structure of the Irish banking system.Thereafter, I will outline current ECB thinking on the European banking system and supervisorypriorities. I will conclude by turning to some of the other issues that you have invited me todiscuss.Overview of Banking SystemThe Irish banking sector can be partitioned between domestically-focused banks andinternationally-focused banks. The domestic sector continues the process of repair andrecovery. Sustained progress has been made.  Banks operating in Ireland are much bettercapitalised and have more stable funding models, but there remains more to do. Theinternational banking sector is also continuing to evolve.  Having shrunk materially in theaftermath of the crisis, it is starting to expand again and this trend may be reinforced by Brexit. The aggregate total assets of the domestically-focused banks stood at €274 billion in Q3 2016,down 7 percent on the previous year. This contraction reflects the fact that asset disposals andloan redemptions more than offset increases in new lending.The decline in balance sheet size has reduced reliance on market-based funding, which hassignificantly contributed to the increased resilience of the banks to liquidity shocks. The lowinterest rate environment has also helped reduce funding costs, but together with shrinking loanbooks, has a negative overall effect on net interest income. While sovereign bond market yieldsremain compressed at present, the senior unsecured debt issued by Irish banks continues to bemore expensive compared with euro area and European peers.  This is important in the contextof the requirement under the new resolution framework for banks to raise debt that can be ‘bailedin’ (i.e. converted to equity) in the event of failure.At present, the capital instruments of Irish banks are in the top quartile of peer group EU banks interms of market yield, indicating higher relative risk. In this context, although Irish retail bankscontinued to generate profits through the first half of 2016, profits were 6 percent lower than inthe same period in 2015, reflecting the challenging operating environment.We are starting to see some signs of increased competition and a strong desire from the banksto start to grow their loan books once more, both in Ireland and in the UK.  This is welcome,provided lending is prudent, and provides evidence of the continuing return towards normalisationof the domestic banking sector.Non-Performing Loans (NPLs)Irish banks continue to work out non-performing loans and much progress has been made. Indeed, Irish banks are somewhat ahead of European banks in addressing these issues. Inabsolute terms, NPLs have declined by just over €48.5bn or 57 percent since their peak in 2013,now representing 17.3 percent of all loans. Although decreasing – due in large part to a range of 1 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
intensive supervisory actions, progress within institutions, as well as the improving economy –the outstanding numbers remain high both in absolute and relative terms. Retail mortgages arethe largest component of total NPLs, accounting for 57 percent, and are falling more slowly thanother categories, despite the clear momentum in their reduction.  SME/Corporate loansrepresent 17 percent of NPLs, Commercial Real Estate (CRE) loans amount to 22 percent, andconsumer loans account for approximately 3 percent of total NPLs.Financial StrengthIn terms of the ability of the banks to absorb shocks or unexpected losses, all of the retail banksexceed the regulatory capital minima. As banks move towards new (‘fully-loaded’) regulatorycapital requirements, capital ratios on this basis are 15.2 percent on average. The recent EU-wide stress test included two of the domestic retail banks (AIB and BOI), and illustrated thatthese banks would have enough capital over three years to withstand the adverse economicscenario. However, their key capital ratios would have declined to 7.4 and 7.7 percent under thisadverse scenario. The main driver of this outcome was a projected increase in creditimpairments, consistent with recent loss history in Ireland. It is noteworthy that the stress testingassumptions and method were particularly challenging for those banks and countries that hadsuffered the most significant losses during the crisis and were most reliant on interest income.Nonetheless it is a timely reminder that much remains to be done to improve the resilience of thedomestically focused banks operating in Ireland. Financial strength will remain a focus for theCentral Bank together with the ECB in our ongoing engagement with the banks.* * *Main ChallengesAlthough the domestically-active banks in Ireland have continued to recover, significant risksremain on the horizon.  All have relatively concentrated business models, focused primarily onIreland and to some extent the UK.  This makes them especially vulnerable to any shocksaffecting the Irish economy.Legacy issues also remain material.  This is particularly evident with regard to NPLs, but also inthe need for significant investment in IT and data infrastructure, where investment has not beensufficient in recent years. The long-term sustainability of the business models of the banks, and therefore their ability tointermediate effectively, depends on their ability to generate sufficient net income to meetregulatory obligations and support intermediation. To date, there has been a mixed performance: some banks are still contracting, while others are growing slowly in certain areas like consumerlending or fixed-rate mortgages. This is reflected in recurring pre-provision net revenue remainingunsustainably low for some banks. This is driven, in part, by institution-specific challenges; partis also due to aggregate trends as their main customers – households and firms – are inaggregate continuing to pay down debt, which should be welcomed from a financial stabilityperspective.In keeping with our supervisory priorities, it remains critical that banks manage risks prudently,price credit risk sustainably, and remuneration and incentive structures are appropriatelygoverned to support a resilient business model going forward.As I noted earlier, mortgage NPLs constitute the largest share of system-wide NPLs. Since theonset of the crisis, many mortgage holders have had difficulty in repaying their mortgages. Whilethe situation is improving, its resolution is critical, for individual borrowers in distress, banks, andthe system as a whole. The Central Bank has worked hard to ensure that the appropriateprotections are in place for these borrowers who are in difficulty, and ensure that the banks havethe financial and operational capacity to resolve the problems. 2 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
In terms of the progress, we published a report last week which gives an overview of recentdevelopments and the wider issues involved. The latest data show there were 738,506 primarydwelling house (PDH) mortgage accounts in Ireland.  Of these, 56,350 are in greater than 90days past due; and of these in turn, 34,551 are greater than two years past due. Mortgagearrears have now fallen for 13 successive quarters and by 44 percent from peak, with over121,000 mortgage accounts restructured, and 88 percent meeting the terms of their restructuredarrangement.As discussed at this Committee two weeks ago, the scale of mortgage distress means thatmortgage lending is inherently riskier in Ireland than other euro area member states. Aside fromdefault, due to the economic and social policy choices that have been made, the ability to effectloan security is more challenging, and loss given default in Ireland is higher than in many otherEurozone countries.  Longer recovery times are also associated with lower availability of credit,and higher interest rates.The other significant challenge for the domestic banking sector is Brexit. As the Central Bank isalso tasked with assessing the long term resilience of the financial system, we see this as a keyrisk in 2017. The implications of Brexit for the configuration of the Irish and European financialsystem depends on the agreement that will be reached. Should the UK-EU negotiations result inan agreement that retains the single passport for UK-resident entities selling into the EU, the netimpact of Brexit on the structure of the European financial system may be limited.  In otherless favourable scenarios in which UK firms do not retain passporting rights, it is likely thatsignificant migration of financial activity from the UK to the EU will occur.  Depending on theoutcome, the UK’s exit from the EU could have long-term structural consequences for those Irishbanks with a significant presence there. This will become clearer during the next two years, asthe elements of the EU-UK relationship take shape. We will keep this and other risks continuallyunder review and, where relevant, take the necessary risk-mitigating actions in line with ourmandate.* * *Banking UnionThe advent of ‘Banking Union’ and the establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism(SSM) in 2014 materially changed the supervisory landscape.  The ECB took over ultimateresponsibility for the supervision of all banks across the Eurozone and direct supervision of thelargest 120 or so banks, including the five domestically active banks in Ireland (the ‘SignificantInstitutions’).Whilst still in its early years, ECB Banking Supervision is a critical institutional step towardsdeeper integration in the euro area. As is evident from the presence of international banks here,banking does not stop at national borders and therefore a harmonised supervisory approach isnecessary to reduce financial fragmentation and ensure a level playing field across the euroarea.The Central Bank is part of the SSM, both in terms of the day-to-day work and the Bank having aseat at the ECB Supervisory Board, which is responsible for supervision. My colleague heretoday, Ed Sibley, attends the Supervisory Board with our Deputy Governor for FinancialRegulation, Cyril Roux. Staff in the Bank are committed and strive to be influential at every levelto ensure the right supervisory outcomes are delivered for all euro area banks, and particularlythose operating in Ireland.  Staff engage in direct supervision via Joint Supervision Teams (JSTs)and in inspection teams composed of staff from the Central Bank of Ireland, based in Dublin, andECB staff, based in Frankfurt. We also contribute to analytical work on risk assessments andpolicy development. Under the new supervisory architecture, regardless of the jurisdiction, banksoperate under the same methodology, processes, standards and quality assurance that are123 3 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
applied.Both since the crisis, and since the establishment of the SSM in November 2014, we haveconducted 35 inspections of Irish banks supervised by the SSM. These inspections last onaverage 13 weeks. This intensive action, on-going supervision, and supervisory priorities reflectthe risks I have already mentioned: NPLs, business model sustainability, and the quality of riskmanagement in an uncertain world. These are also the key areas for the ECB and euro areabanks more broadly as we move into 2017.In terms of specifics, the ECB is undertaking a thematic review regarding the sustainability ofbank business models.   Following the publication of the ‘ECB Guidance to Banks on NPLs’, theECB will – via its taskforce on NPLs – continue its review of institutions with high levels of NPLsand initiate actions for Joint Supervision Teams to follow-up.  It is noteworthy that the CentralBank of Ireland has been leading this work, which reflects the high level of expertise andcapability we have in the Central Bank in dealing with NPLs.Throughout ECB Banking Supervision, there is a focus on several aspects of banks’ riskmanagement. Various strands of work include assessments of the ability of banks to aggregateand measure their risks effectively, calculate risk weights prudently, and continue to improve ontheir own internal processes for capital, liquidity, and associated risks.  Turning to the second pillar of Banking Union, the Single Resolution Mechanism is now also upand running. The 2016 resolution plans for the Irish Significant Institutions have been completedand endorsed by the Single Resolution Board (SRB) in Brussels. The third pillar – the EuropeanDeposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS) – is less advanced, with the proposals published by theCommission in November 2015 still under discussion at the EU level.* * *Current IssuesCompared with the pre-crisis situation, the domestic banking sector is now slimmed down. Thishas also resulted in a more concentrated banking sector, notwithstanding the decline in lendingvolumes since the start of the crisis.Three of the five retail banks are majority state-owned (Irish and UK), with the State an importantminority shareholder in a fourth. This is atypical compared to most other euro area members.The banking system and more specifically the mortgage market have seen a materialimprovement over recent years. Within our mandate, the Central Bank remains focused andcommitted to putting in place measures to address the fundamental causes of the ongoingissues.As I have noted earlier, once risks have been identified, the JSTs both require firms to takecorrective actions and take supervisory measures to mitigate risks and enhance resilience. Inaddition to these micro-supervisory actions, systemic risks can be addressed through macro-prudential measures taken by the Central Bank. Examples of the former are the range ofsupervisory actions taken on mortgages that I have referred to earlier; examples of the latter arethe borrower-based mortgage measures enacted in 2015, and recently reviewed in November2016.The mortgage measures have helped to ensure that those who buy homes now are betterprepared to manage their mortgage payments in the event of a future downturn in the economy.Following the review, the framework is broadly unchanged, with some limited refinements. The3.5 times ceiling on the loan to income (LTI) ratio remains the anchor of the framework.Requirements for buy-to-let borrowers and the exemptions for negative equity mortgage4 4 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
borrowers from the measures also remain unchanged.Mortgage arrears and how the market is currently functioning are consequences of the crisis,and while a significant part of our work is focused on this, the Bank is also mitigating emergingrisks and enhancing resilience. One example is identifying weaknesses in new lending practicesin some of the retail banks.  Among these weaknesses found during recent supervisory activitywere:a need for better oversight and challenge from boards in relation to the risk appetites ofbanks, which are used to govern and quantify lending decisions across sectors andborrower types;strategies focused on driving increased volumes without sufficient consideration of riskassociated with long-term lending; and the use of league tables to incentivize staff to drive lending volume without consideration ofquality.While these weaknesses are concerns, they have been identified and banks are required toimplement remediation measures.  I would note that the banks are more resilient and thesupervisory regime much more robust compared with the pre-2008 period. Nonetheless, theCentral Bank needs to maintain its vigilance.In line with our risk-based approach to supervision, our engagement with lenders has beenintrusive in relation to the treatment of tracker mortgage borrowers.  Since 2010, we haveidentified and pursued a number of lender-specific issues in relation to transparency forborrowers who opted to switch from their tracker rates or who had the right to revert to a trackerrate at the end of a fixed rate period.  This has resulted in the use of supervisory powers,including the Administrative Sanctions Procedure, redress and compensation schemes for thoseborrowers who suffered detriment or loss.The fair treatment of tracker mortgage borrowers has been a key supervisory and policy focusfor the Central Bank and our consumer protection framework requires all lenders to act in thebest interests of consumers and, in particular, requires lenders to disclose material informationto consumers to enable them to make informed decisions.Put frankly, there are far too many cases where it turns out there was a misapplication. This isabsolutely unacceptable, and it is the reason why we decided that a broader examination oftracker-related issues was warranted and why we are ensuring such a comprehensiveexamination is being undertaken. Let me assure you, the Central Bank will take all necessaryaction to hold regulated firms and individuals to account for failures in relation to trackermortgages. The process we are overseeing is exhaustive but takes time.In conclusion, while the banking sector has undergone considerable restructuring since the onsetof the crisis and has benefited from the wider economic recovery, managing the legacy effects ofthe crisis continues to be a major priority for the Central Bank, cutting across our financialstability, supervisory and consumer protection mandates.  In addition, the major domestic banksnow operate under the common supervisory regime led by the ECB and must comply with theSSM’s regulatory standards, together with the resolution planning policies of the SingleResolution Board.  The further development of European Banking Union has great potential todeliver a fundamentally more stable banking system over the medium term.Thank you.Report available at www.finance.gov.ie/what-we-do/banking-financial-services/publications/reports-research/report-mortgage-arrears-201612 5 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
See "Residential Mortgage Arrears and Repossessions Statistics: Q3 2016" available atwww.centralbank.ie/polstats/stats/mortgagearrears/Documents/2016q3_ie_mortgage_arrears_statistics.pdfSee for example the Central Bank Research Technical Paper ‘The distribution of debt across Euro Areacountries: The role of individual characteristics, institutions and credit conditions’ available atwww.centralbank.ie/publications/Documents/04RT14.pdfwww.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/ecb/pub/pdf/publication_supervisory_priorities_2017.en.pdf234 6 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
    29.11.2016 The challenges of the European resolution framework Closing address of the Conference “Corporate governance and credit institutions’ crises”, Mercantile Law Department, UCM (Madrid) Fernando Restoy Deputy Governor  

  3/10 1 Introduction   Let me begin by thanking the organisers for the invitation to close this conference on corporate governance and credit institutions’ crises staged by the Law Faculty of the Madrid Complutense University. It is always a pleasure to return to the University where I was an undergraduate and a lecturer for several years, even if it is to a different Faculty from mine back then.   The recent financial crisis, like others before it, has been marked by the use by national authorities of sizeable public funds assigned to preventing the bankruptcy of numerous credit institutions in situations of non-viability. To minimise systemic risk and prevent a serious deterioration in financial stability, substantial State aid in the form of capital was granted across the EU from 2008 to 2014. In countries such as Spain, Belgium and United Kingdom, the figures were around 5% of GDP, in Germany and the Netherlands between 2% and 3.5%, while in Greece and Ireland aid was in excess of 20% and 30% of GDP, respectively.   Given the severity and high public cost of the financial crisis, the response by the international authorities has been most resolute. First, solvency requirements have been appreciably strengthened, which will increase the resilience of the financial system and, therefore, reduce the likelihood of similar crises in the future. Further, measures have been set in place to mitigate the effects of banking crises, when they occur, on the public coffers and the economy in general.   As regards solvency requirements, the reform agenda has practically concluded, while awaiting the Basel Committee’s final agreement on the so-called Basel III accord. Today I shall focus on the second objective of the international reform agenda, i.e. on the package of measures aimed at smoothing the management of bank crises while preserving financial stability and minimising the use of public funds.   At the base of the regulatory reform in this area is the work of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) conducted at the behest of the G-20 following the Lehman Brothers debacle. In 2011 the FSB published the Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions, which lay down the principles for ensuring an orderly resolution of banking institutions.   Indeed, the Key Attributes specify the powers and tools the administrative authorities should have to see through the orderly resolution of non-viable banks, ensuring the maintenance of their core functions and their restructuring at the least possible cost to the taxpayer.   The Key Attributes further envisage the availability of recovery and resolution plans for each institution that set out a roadmap ahead of a potential crisis situation.   Lastly, they establish the principle whereby bank shareholders and creditors are those who should bear the bulk of the costs of the crisis. Using the parlance of the profession, the “bail-out” (or rescue of the bank with public funds) disappears and is replaced by the “bail-in” (generation of own funds, capable of absorbing losses, converting debt instruments into capital).  
 4/10   The internationally agreed principles have been passed through to European regulations through the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD). This framework has been completed within the Banking Union with the establishment of the Single Resolution Mechanism, a system comprising a central authority, the Single Resolution Board (SRB) – which adopts the relevant decisions for significant banking institutions – and the national resolution authorities that participate in the SRB and retain direct responsibility for the less significant institutions. This Mechanism has a Single Resolution Fund, endowed with contributions from the industry, that will enable financial support to be afforded to resolution processes.   Despite the undeniable progress that the new resolution framework adopted in Europe entails, its practical implementation is subject to major challenges that I would like to highlight today, drawing on the fact that the BRRD will shortly be revised on the basis of a recently submitted legislative proposal by the European Commission. Accordingly, I shall first refer to the general aspects of the European resolution regulations. Next, I shall look at the loss-absorption requirements for bank creditors, which is one of the central aspects of the regulations. And I will conclude with some brief comments of a more strategic nature.    2 General aspects of the European regulations   The European Union, as reflected in the FSB’s second Peer Review on Resolution Regimes published in 2016, is one of the jurisdictions where the Key Attributes have been most rigorously implemented. Allow me to highlight some of the main features.   First, the regulations consider resolution as an alternative mechanism to ordinary insolvency procedures in the mercantile realm, applicable to banks only in specific circumstances pertaining to the public interest. In particular, resolution shall only be applicable to those banks whose failure may generate risks to financial stability, given that they perform critical functions.   Second, the use of public funds to support vulnerable institutions is severely restricted. The contribution of any form of State aid – except that received in connection with a stress test – is understood to be a symptom of the institution’s non-viability and, therefore, it may precipitate resolution or, where appropriate, the liquidation in mercantile terms of the institution. Once the institution has been declared in resolution, the regulations require a bail-in for creditors. The ensuing assumption of losses must exceed a minimum amount equivalent to 8% of the bank’s liabilities as a prerequisite for attaining access to public funds, which includes the Single Resolution Fund.   Lastly, so as to be able to carry out the bail-in, all institutions liable to be subject to resolution, i.e. those which, given their significance, would not be wound up in the event of insolvency, are required to hold a minimum volume of loss-absorbing instruments in the event of resolution. This is known as the MREL (Minimum Required Eligible Liabilities) requirement.   
  5/10 Accordingly, the European regulations are precisely tailored to the new resolution principles and contain provisions that minimise the likelihood of crises resulting in the disbursement of sizeable public funds. That said, the challenges posed by the practical implementation of these provisions are manifold.   For example, the relative rigidity with which it is stated that receiving public aid generally implies the non-viability of an institution and, therefore, facilitates the activation of the resolution (or, where appropriate, winding-up) process, considerably constrains the supervisor’s management of financial crises. It might be advisable to make this aspect of the regulations more flexible, albeit maintaining, in any event, the subjection of any public support to the prevailing State aid arrangements managed by the European Commission.   Yet the main challenge for the industry and its supervisors stems, to my understanding, from the potential implications of the new resolution framework for banks’ business models and for the structure of the banking sector. Allow me to expand on this.   The demands of the regulations would point, in principle, to a configuration of the financial system that, in simple terms, would comprise two groups of relatively differentiated banks.   On one hand, there would be a group made up of relatively small institutions, which would not perform functions critical to the industry as a whole. In situations of non-viability these institutions would be subject to liquidation under an ordinary insolvency procedure and not resolution, given that the bankruptcy of the institution would be deemed not to generate harmful effects for the stability of the financial system as a whole.   As a result, these institutions would not be obliged to hold minimum loss-absorbing liabilities and nor, naturally, would they have access to the Single Resolution Fund. Hence the insolvency of the institution would precipitate insolvency proceedings whereunder only the holders of deposits covered by the Deposit Guarantee Fund would enjoy protection beyond that provided by the institution’s net worth.   Given the likelihood that, in the future, ordinary insolvency procedures will be applied more frequently than in the past to financial institutions that are not systemic, it may be advisable to consider specific adjustments to mercantile regulations when they are applied to these cases. The formal involvement of the Deposit Guarantee Fund in the management of the insolvency process might be an option worth considering.   On the other hand, there will be a second group of institutions, normally bigger in size, whose potential failure would be considered to be of public importance given the harmful effects for the stability of the financial system that might ensue. This group would, therefore, be liable to pursue resolution processes.   To this end, under the regulations, the resolution plans for these institutions should ensure the continuity of their critical functions under any circumstances. Thus, in general, these plans envisage business reorganisation, restructuring or segregation measures if the institution reaches the point of non-viability and they provide for the availability of a sufficient minimum volume of own funds and eligible liabilities (the aforementioned MREL), that enable losses to be absorbed and the institution’s capital base to be shored up, if necessary.  
 6/10   Indeed, the degree of stringency ultimately adopted in respect of the MREL requirement may determine the relative size of the two groups of banks indicated, i.e. those that may be wound up and those that may be resolved. In particular, demanding MREL requirements that were to entail the need for susceptible banks subject to resolution to issue large volumes of eligible liabilities on the markets might not be assumable by certain types of banks. This might be the case for banks pursuing a traditional retail banking model, funded essentially by capital and through the raising of deposits, and with little tradition of participation in the capital markets.   What is involved is a potentially numerous group of banks, not necessarily very small in size. Consider that, in the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), 70% of significant institutions are not listed on the markets, almost 60% have never issued convertible instruments and almost one-quarter of them do not finance themselves with subordinated debt.   Allow me to focus on this important aspect of the European regulations, namely the MREL, which will foreseeably be subject to discussion in the forthcoming passage of the revised Directive.    3 Loss-absorption requirements (MREL)  The stringency of the MREL requirement will be determined both by the nature of the eligible instruments and the minimum required volume thereof.    Regarding the nature of the eligible instruments, for the MREL to fulfil the objective of providing for the orderly absorption of losses by creditors and the recapitalisation of the bank, the eligible instruments must conceivably be consistent with the seniority of the bank’s liabilities as stipulated in national insolvency regulations, and they must evidence a sufficient degree of stability should the bank undergo serious difficulties.   That would suggest a definition of MREL that essentially includes capital instruments plus debt instruments that have a less privileged status than deposits in the insolvency pecking order. The consideration of wholesale deposits at over one year as eligible, which is not excluded in the European Commission’s proposal, will undoubtedly be much discussed in the legislative proceedings, given the special nature of these instruments and their debatable availability to absorb losses in a resolution process.   Yet at present the seniority of the liabilities as established in the regulations differs from one Member State to another, specifically as regards the status of senior debt in relation to deposits. That hampers the homogeneity of MREL requirements and prevents the development of an integrated market for senior debt convertible into equity in the event of resolution. Accordingly, the European Commission’s recent proposal, which introduces a new category of senior debt instruments, subordinate to deposits, is a step in the right direction.   In any event, the most critical element of the MREL-setting policy is the determination of the minimum volume of eligible liabilities and own funds. Under the current regulations, within 
  7/10 the Banking Union, it is for the Single Resolution Board (SRB) to determine, case by case, this volume for all significant institutions (which are supervised directly by the SSM), as well as for non-significant institutions engaging in cross-border activity or whose supervision has been assumed by the SSM, following consultation with the prudential supervisor.   For the moment, the SRB has publicly voiced its inclination for a stringent approach, ensuring an extensive availability of loss-absorbing instruments on bank balance sheets.   Indeed, by way of indication, it has been advocated that the institution subject to resolution should have loss-absorbing capacity of a volume equivalent to its regulatory capital requirements (the so-called loss-absorption component) and the ability to restore immediately the minimum level required (or recapitalisation component).   However, MREL requirements like those arising from the mechanistic formula indicated may entail very high needs in respect of the issuance of eligible instruments – such as subordinated debt or convertible bonds – for numerous banks, owing to the above-mentioned reasons. Further, these issuance requirements would be concentrated in the same period of time for all the institutions concerned, hampering market take-up.   But, moreover, the cost for banks of issuing these instruments may, in many cases, prove most burdensome. By way of illustration we can consider the following example.   Let us take a bank financed only with capital and deposits and that comfortably meets – e.g. with a surplus of 2 pp – its regulatory capital requirement, which we will place in this example at 10% of its risk-weighted assets (RWAs). If the MREL stands at twice the regulatory capital, i.e. at 20% of RWAs, this bank, whose position would not differ greatly at present from that of a large number of banks with a traditional business model, would need to issue eligible instruments equivalent to 8% of its RWAs in order to meet the requirement set. Assuming, somewhat optimistically at present, that the issuance cost were not greater than the return on equity (ROE), the additional financial expense that compliance with the new MREL requirement would entail would account for almost half the bank’s profit after tax.  This example illustrates that maintaining excessively demanding requirements would exert significant pressure on the profitability of a portion of the banking industry, calling into question the business model of a by no means negligible number of institutions.   Hence, it is worthwhile rigorously adjusting the MREL-setting policy so as to avoid a non-desirable impact on the viability of specific institutions or business models, without of course distorting the rationale behind this requirement.   A reasonable approach would be to adjust the MREL requirement – in both its loss-absorbing and recapitalisation components – so that it takes into consideration at least three factors. First, a balanced assessment of the volume of losses banks will foreseeably post at the time of going into resolution; second, the ensuing change in the level of capital required of banks that have undergone a resolution process, owing to changes in the size of the balance sheet and in its risk profile; and, lastly, the very resolution strategy of the bank in question. 
 8/10   Concerning the first point, the volume of MREL required to absorb the bank’s losses might be adjusted downwards if it is taken into account that, generally, banks are declared to be in resolution when they fail to meet the regulatory requirements and, therefore, before depleting – due to losses – all the capital they hold.   Secondly, the restructuring required in a resolution typically involves an appreciable reduction in the size and in the latent risk of the bank’s balance sheet. It is therefore reasonable to think that regulatory capital subsequent to resolution should be lower than that required beforehand.   Thirdly, the bail-in tool (loss absorption and recapitalisation through the conversion of debt into capital) is only one of the resolution strategies of banks. Resolution plans may envisage measures such as the sale of the business or the creation, through the segregation of certain assets and liabilities, of so-called bridge banks, which perform, after resolution, the bank’s critical functions with a significantly smaller balance sheet. Some of these resolution measures other than a bail-in might be potentially appropriate in the case of commercial banks pursuing a traditional business model. The bank resulting from a resolution process where these strategies are implemented will generally have lower capital requirements than the original institution and, therefore, a lower MREL might be required of it.   I thus believe there is substantial leeway for adjusting MREL requirements on the basis of more accurate assessments of capital needs during the resolution process and, in particular, of the strategies foreseen in each bank’s resolution plans.   4 Transition   In light of the foregoing, even if the minimum volume of the loss-absorbing instruments that banks should have is revised downwards, the new MREL demands may undeniably only be assumed by a large number of banks if they have a sufficiently lengthy transition period to comply with the requirements. This transition period will, moreover, be necessary so that the market should not have to absorb a large number of issues over a limited period of time. Indeed, the European Commission’s recent proposal includes the possibility of setting for each bank a time margin for compliance with the MREL requirement, although this margin would be decided on a case-by-case basis by the resolution authority, i.e. the SRB, in the case of the Banking Union.   Admittedly, setting a relatively long transition period may add complexity to the resolution processes that have to be managed during that period. As stated, current regulations require that resolution funds should only be activated when the institution has absorbed losses for an amount equivalent to 8% of liabilities. Evidently, if the bank did not yet have sufficient loss-absorbing debt instruments because the transition period were not over, the established requirement would only be met if haircuts were imposed on other creditors, such as deposit-holders. While the deposits covered by national guarantee schemes would be excluded from loss-bearing, there is no doubt this step might prove destabilising.   Thus, in the ongoing revision of the Directive, it might be wise to add a flexibility clause in respect of the requirements established for the use of funds external to the banks concerned 
  9/10 in their resolution processes, at least for the duration of the transition period set for the fulfilment of the MREL requirements.   Lastly, before concluding this section, a remark on the need for coordination among the different Banking Union authorities. The current regulations and the European Commission’s proposals for their revision afford the SRB extensive discretion for deciding, case by case, on questions as important as the objective volume of MREL, the nature of the eligible instruments and the transition regime. These decisions interact appreciably with the solvency requirements set by the prudential supervisor and they give shape to a series of regulatory demands that may affect the viability of institutions and the structure of the industry. A fruitful framework of collaboration between the SRB and the SSM is thus needed and, specifically, the criteria the SRB develops to exercise the discretion afforded it by the regulations should be properly discussed with the prudential authority.    5 Final remarks   In conclusion, I have referred in my address to the intense work in all jurisdictions to amend the bank crisis management framework so that it strengthens the capacity available to maintain financial stability without this requiring the massive use of public funds, as occurred in the recent financial crisis. The progress made in Europe has been considerable, having incorporated the most demanding international standards into the regulations.   The new resolution regulations pose most considerable constraints, which are in many cases weightier determining factors than solvency requirements themselves for financial institutions. It is thus necessary to harness the ongoing revision of European legislation and the subsequent re-definition of the policies to be pursued by the resolution authorities so as to fine-tune demands in a way that provides for the orderly adjustment of the industry to the new regime. As earlier discussed, adding flexibility to some requirements and setting transitional arrangements for others may be of help here, while also reinforcing the authorities’ ability to manage crises in the short and medium term.   All told, institutions should be mindful that the new resolution framework will require those banks that exceed a certain size and are liable to generate systemic risk to ensure that their balance sheet structure allows their resolution at the expense, essentially, of their shareholders and creditors. They should, therefore, ensure that their business model is compatible with the issuance of loss-absorbing instruments on the capital markets and that their income statements allow for the remuneration of the supplementary risk that the new resolution regime entails for holders of bank debt.   It thus seems likely that several institutions will face objective difficulties adjusting to the recently established resolution framework. These new regulations, therefore, contribute to reinforcing the perception of excess capacity in the sector and, foreseeably, they will contribute to promoting a change in the industry structure that will correct such excess by means of consolidation processes giving rise to banks more capable of comfortably complying with the new demands. The supervisor’s role essentially consists of setting in 
 10/10  place the means needed for this seemingly inevitable adjustment process to unfold in as orderly a fashion as possible.   
OPTIMIZING POTENTIAL, STRENGTHENING RESILIENCEGOVERNOR’S ADDRESSBANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETINGJAKARTA, NOVEMBER 22nd 2016


Table of ContentsGreetings.............................................................................................................................................1Preface.................................................................................................................................................2Developments in Global Economies.........................................................................................3Developments in Domestic Economy.......................................................................................6Economic Policy Challenges and Direction............................................................................12Economic Potential.........................................................................................................................14Basic Function and Principle of Policy.....................................................................................17Bank Indonesia’s Policy Direction...............................................................................................24Policy Coordination.........................................................................................................................32Bank Indonesia’s Internal Strengthening................................................................................34Economic Prospects........................................................................................................................34Conclusion.........................................................................................................................................36
1Agus D.W. MartowardojoGovernor of Bank IndonesiaGovernor’s AddressBank Indonesia Annual Meeting of 2016Jakarta, 22nd November 2016Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceHis Excellency,•	The	President	of	the	Republic	of	Indonesia,	Head	of	State:	Mr.	Joko	WidodoDistinguished Guests,•	Leaders	of	State	Institutions:	MPR,	DPR,	DPD,	BPK,	the	Supreme	Court,	Constitutional Court, and Judicial Commission•	Cabinet	Ministers	and	Head	of	Government	Agencies•	Commissioner	of	the	National	Police,	Attorney	General,	and	Chairman	of	KPK•	Chairman,	Deputy	Chairman	and	Board	of	Commissioners	of	OJK•	Chairman	and	Board	of	Commissioners	of	LPS	•	Chairman,	Deputy	Chairman	and	Members	of	Commission	XI	of	DPR•	Provincial	Governors	from	throughout	Indonesia•	Former	Governors	of	Bank	Indonesia	•	Members	of	the	Board	of	Governors	of	Bank	Indonesia•	Leaders	of	the	Banking	Industry	and	Non-Bank	Corporations	•	Academicians,	Economists,	and	Leaders	of	National	Media•	Ladies	and	Gentlemen
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 20162Assalamualaikum Wr. Wb.,Greetings to all,Om Swastiastu,Namo Buddhaya,Praise	be	to	Allah	SWT,	God	the	Almighty,	as	it	is	upon	His	blessings	that	we	may	all	gather here today, in a good health, at the “2016 Annual Meeting of Bank Indonesia”.I	am	grateful	and	deeply	honoured	by	the	presence	of	His	Excellency	the	President,	and all other distinguished guests, here at the the “2016 Annual Meeting of Bank Indonesia”.	The	presence	of	His	Excellency	the	President	and	of	distinguished	guests testify to our commitment to create synergy, to develop the national economy,	and	to	strive	towards	equitable	welfare	for	for	the	nation.This	commitment	will	hopefully	encourage	the	optimization	of	the	potentials	and	the resilience of our economy, and to further promote a more efficient, productive and competitive national economy. This	evening,	allow	me	to	present	the	Bank	Indonesia’s	perspectives	on	the	latest	economic condition and the prospects, under the theme “Optimizing Potential, Strengthening Resilience”.	In	our	view,	the	theme	is	relevant	as	response	to	the	unfavourable global economic development, and the positive achievements of the domestic economy.
3Developments in Global EconomiesOur	latest	assessment	concludes	that	the the global economy continues to	weaken,	which	is	followed	by	the	continuation	of	the	low	commodity	prices,	and	the	declining	of	capital	flows	to	emerging	countries.	The	momentum	for	global	economic	recovery	that	we	initially	anticipated	would	begin	this	year	has	yet	to	materialize	and	is	visibly	weakening	in	a	number	of	areas.	We	estimate	global	economic	growth	in	2016	to	be	at	around	3.0%,	which	is	lower	than	in	2015	of	3.2%	(Figure	1).	In	the developed countries, the United States	(US),	which	was	previously	expected	to	be	the	engine	of	global	economic	growth,	has	yet	to	be	solid	in	its	development	up	to	the	First	Half	of	2016.	Recovery	in	Europe	and	Japan	has	also	yet	to	strengthen.	The	Brexit	Referendum	that	led	the	UK	out	of	theEuropean	economic	zone	even	has	the	potential to reduce Europe’s economic prospects in the medium term. Developing countries also need to continue to be monitored. China, as one	of	Indonesia’s	export	destinations,	continues to consolidate and rebalance	its	economy.	We	estimate	that	China’s	economic	growth	in	2016	will	likely	continue	to	be	restrained	despite improvements and a 6.6% growth,	but	this	achievement	is	lower	compared	to	growth	achieved	in	previous	years	of	above	7%	(Figure	2).	Likewise	for	India’s	economic	growth,	which	in	previous	periods	was	fairly impressive, seemed to lose its momentum in the recent periods. Meanwhile,	Brazil	and	Russia’s	performance also needs to continue to be monitored despite the fact that the pressure of a decline has begun to recede. Developments in Global Economiesp)	Bank	Indonesia	ProjectionSource:	World	Economic	Outlook	DatabaseWorld GDPOil & Gas and Non-Oil & Gas Commodity Prices (Right Scale)Figure 1. World GDP and Global Commodity Prices% yoy% yoy6543210-1403020100-10-20-30-402016p20142012201020082006200420022000Source:	National	Bureau	of	Statistics	of	ChinaPrimary IndustrySecondary IndustryTertiary IndustryGDP yoyFigure 2. China’s Economic Growth% ContributionIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIVIVIVIV2012201320142015201698765432108.17.67.67.47.77.57.57.17.27.07.06.96.86.76.76.78.17.97.9
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 20164As in previous years, the global economy,	which	has	yet	to	strengthen,	had an impact on the continuation of	low	global	commodity	prices.	We	estimate	Indonesia’s	non-oil	&	gas	export	commodity	prices	in	2016	will	slighty	be	higher	the	2015	levels.	Meanwhile,	world	oil	prices	continue	to	follow	a	declining	trend	brought	about by the increasing oil supply from OPEC	and	the	US.Positive	expectations	has	begun	to	be	seen	in	coal	and	palm	oil	(CPO),	which	in	recent	months	has	begun	to	increase.	However,	this	price	increase	was	largely	driven	by	reduced	production as opposed to increased demand. The	global	economy,	which	has	not	strengthened, and the anticipation of the	Fed	Fund	Rate’s	hike	once	again	led to lingering high uncertainty in the global financial markets. Market players continue to focus on the uncertainty of the	anticipated	Fed	Fund	Rate’s	hike,	which	up	to	November	2016	continues	to	be	maintained	at	a	level	of	0.25-0.50%.	This	is	in	addition	to	the	impact brought about by geopolitical uncertainties that includes the US presidential	elections.	These	various	uncertainties	subsequently	led	to	the	decline	in	capital	flow	to	the	emerging	markets	and	followed	by	global	fund	outflow	volatility.	(Figure	3).In	our	view,	these	various	global	economic changes in 2016 reinforce indications of structural problems in the global economy. Problems that in	our	view	contributed	to	decline	in	economic productivity in numerous countries	and	subsequently	reduced	the global economy’s potential output, Figure 3. Capital Flow To Emerging MarketsUSD Billion6004002000-200-400-600-800Global financial crisis in 2008Large Scale Capital outflow since 201519951998200120042010200720132016pp)	IIF	Projection	April	2016Source:	Institute	of	International	Finance	(IIF)8765432102006-072008-102011-122013-14Source: World Economic Outlook DatabaseTotal Factor Productivity (TFP)LaborCapitalOutputFigure 4. Emerging Market Potential Output %
5Developments in Global Economies including those of the emerging markets (Figure	4).	 One	structural	problem	of	the	global	economy	that	we	need	to	highlight	and affects emerging markets such as Indonesia, is the diminishing impacts of	the	global	economic	growth	on	the	world	trade.	Data	shows	that	the	relationship	between	world	GDP	with	the	volume	of	world	trade	is	not	as	strong	as	it	was	in	previous	years	(Figure	5).	World	economic	growth	elasticity	towards	world	trade	that	since	early	2000	was	within	the	range	of	around	1.3	has	weakened	and	in	the	last	five	years	elasticity	that	occured	was	only	around	0.9. Various studies have argued that there are a number of factors that led to this	condition.	One	of	these	states	that	this	phenomenon	was	caused	by	the decline in global investment and increased global trade protectionist issues. Moreover, declining Global Value	Chain	(GVC),	which	among	others	was	brought	on	by	a	maturing	process, mastering technology and reshoring process, also further receded the	relationship	between	the	both	elements. Structural	global	issues	subsequently	needs to be further monitored due to its implication on the completion process, which	certainly	cannot	be	carried	out	within	the	short-term.	In	other	words,	we	will	continue	to	face	global	economic	downturn	within	a	longer	timeframe,	which	may	risk	spreading	to	the emerging markets, including Asia. The	global	economic	recovery	up	to	2020	is	expected	to	continue	to	remain	below	4%	(Figure	6).	. 1	The	production	maturing	process	in	a	number	of	major	countries,	such	as	China	and	the	US,	is	a	result	of	technological	mastery	that	allows	for	foreign	input	goods	substitution	by	domestic	input.	Meanwhile,	the	reshoring	process	mainly	occuring	in	the	US	is	driven	by	the	impact	of	increased	manufacturing	sector	labor	costs	outside	of	the	US	and	declining	energy	costs	within	the	US.Source:	World	Economic	Outlook	Database201020122013201420152016201720182019202020115.55.04.54.03.53.0ActualWEO April 2016WEO April 2015WEO October 2016WEO October 2015Figure 6. Projected World GDP% yoy*)	up	to	August	2016Source:	Bloomberg,	CPB,	processed	data2016*20142012201020082006200420022000World GDPWorld Trade VolumeFigure 5. GDP vs World Trade Volume% yoy20151050-5-10-15-20Developments in Global Economies
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 20166Developments in Domestic EconomyAs an open economy, Indonesia’s economy is not immune from the unfavorable global condition. However,	our	national	economy	has	the	flexibility	to	adjust	and	respond	to	the global economic risks. Indonesia’s economy continues to	grow	5.02%	(yoy)	up	to	the	Q3	2016,	which	represents	an	increase	compared	to	that	achieved	in	2015	(Figure	7).	Bank	Indonesia	estimates	Indonesia’s	economic	growth	in	2016	to	be	at	around	5%.	This	amount	is	much	lower	than	our	initial	estimates	submitted	at	the	end	of	2015	of	around	5.2%-5.6%	brought	about	by	the the global economy’s impact that was	actually	much	lower	than	initially	projected.	However,	this	amount	is	still	considered	to	be	impressive	in	comparison	with	the other countries that continued to struggle	to	boost	its	economic	growth	(Figure	8).	Data	shows	that	the	flexibility	of	Indonesia’s economy is mainly driven by domestic demand. Domestic demand	as	of	Q3	2016	continues	to	follow	an	upward	trend	thereby	minimizing	the	impact	of	a	decline	in	the	external	sector’s	performance.	Moreover,	non-food	household	consumption has already registered an	upward	trend	since	2011.	In	line	with	this,	the	role	of	Rupiah	lending	as	a	source of domestic financing is also in an	upward	trend.	 In regional terms, a number of provinces	have	registered	growth	of above 6%, such as the regions of Sulawesi,	Bali,	and	Nusa	Tenggara	(Figure	11).	This	condition	is	driven	by	the positive impact of the economic transition taking hold in these regions, from a previous dependence on raw	commodities	to	value-added	commodities through the construction of	smelters	and	industrialization	of	the agricultural sector. Despite this, a number of provinces Sumatra, Source:	BPS-Statistics	IndonesiaDomestic Demand (Excludes Inventory)Net ExportsFigure 7. Economic Growth Contribution% yoy86420-2-4IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIVIVIVIVIVIVIV20122011201020092013201420152016*)	Q3	2016	Data	Source:	CEIC,	processed	dataBrazilIndiaIndonesia*Malaysia*RussiaThailandVietnam*South AfricaTurkey86420-2-420142015Q2	2016Figure 8. Economic Growth of Peer Countries% yoy
7Kalimantan	and	Papua	continues	to	grow	below	4%	thereby	requiring	continued attention.Inflation also continues to be maintained within	a	low	and	stable	level.	We	project	inflation	for	2016	will	be	in	the	target	range	of	3.0-3.2%,	which	is	lower	than	that	achieved	in	2015	of	3.4%	(Figure	9).	This	low	inflation	is	also	attributed	to the consistency of monetary policy and	coordination	with	the	Government	to control prices of volatile foods and strategic commodities. In spatial terms,	inflation	is	also	low	with	Java,	a	number of areas in Eastern Indonesia and	Lampung	registering	inflation	of	below	3%	(Figure	12).	Meanwhile,	high	inflationary pressure mainly occured in North	Sumatra	and	West	Sumatra	that	registered	rates	of	above	5%.	Two	aspects	at	the	very	least	drove	the	national	economy’s	flexibility	in	response	to	the	global	economic	downturn.	The	first	factor	deals	with	consistency	in	maintaining	economic	stability.	The	outcome of this consistency is reflected Developments in Domestic Economyin	inflation	that	continues	to	be	low	and	stable	(Figure	11),	the	Rupiah’s	exchange	rate that continues to be under control, the	current	account	deficit	(Figure	10)	and 2016 budget deficit that remains to	be	within	a	healthy	level,	as	well	as the banking sector’s resilience and a strong financial system. Apart from these consistency factors, economic stability also attributed to a stable political situation and conducive domestic environment supported by the parliaments and national security institutions. The	preserved	economic	stability	and the controlled economic risks subsequently	provided	the	basis	for	the	businesses to move freely to respond the	existing	conditions.	The	second	factor	deals	with	the	impact of the Government and Bank Indonesia’s countercyclical policies. The	sizeable	fiscal	stimulus,	including	infrastructure spending, supported sectors that are directly related to the government, such as construction *)	up	to	Q3	2016Source:	Bank	IndonesiaFigure 10. Current Account Balance543210-1-2-3-4% PDB200020022004200620102008201220142016*50403020100-10200020022004200620102008201220142016*201612840Figure 9. Inflation and Its Components% yoy% yoy*)	up	to	October	2016Source:	BPS-Statistics	Indonesia,	processed	dataCPI Inflation (Right Scale)CoreGovernment Administered PricesVolatile Food
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 20168Figure 11. 2016 Regional Economic Growth  (Cumulative up to Q3 2016)gPDRB ≤ 0,0%0,0% < gPDRB ≤ 4,0%4,0% < gPDRB ≤ 6,0%6,0% < gPDRB ≤ 8,0%gPDRB > 8,0%Source:	BPS-Statistics	Indonesia,	processed	datainvestment. Government’s deregulation and	debureaucratization	through	a	number of policy packages as part of the structural reform efforts, also positively contributed to enhance business confidence in Indonesia.The	relaxation	of	Bank	Indonesia’s	monetary policy has improved the domestic demand. In the last year, Bank Indonesia has reduced its benchmark	rate	by	up	to	150	bps	and	Minimum	Reserve	Requirement	(GWM)	of	up	to	150	bps.	The	monetary	policy’s	relaxation	is	also	applied	in	Aceh2.9North Sumatera 5.1West Sumatera 5.4Riau Islands4.9Bangka Belitung Islands3.6Jakarta5.7Central Java5.2Banten5.2DI. Yogyakarta5.0Bali6.3West Nusa Tenggara 7.5Bengkulu5.2Lampung5.2Riau2.0Jambi3.7South Sumatera 4.2West Java 5.6West Kalimantan 5.4Central Kalimantan 5.6South Kalimantan 3.8EastKalimantan-0.8East Java 5.6NorthKalimantan 2.5
9synergy	with	macro-prudential	policy	through	relaxation	of	Loan	To	Value	(LTV)	for	property	loan	and	Financing	To	Value	(FTV)	for	property	financing,	as	well	as	increasing	the	GWM-Loan	To	Funding	Ratio	(LFR)	limit	from	a	previous of 78% to 80%.As	a	note,	we	have	reformulated	the monetary policy’s operational framework	by	replacing	interest	rate	policy	from	the	BI	Rate	to	the	BI	7-day	Reverse	Repo	Rate	on	19	August	2016.	This	is	carried	out	to	strengthen	monetary policy transmission effectiveness and promote deepening North Sulawesi6.0North Maluku5.5Maluku5.9Gorontalo6.4Central Sulawesi12.0SoutheastSulawesi6.1South Sulawesi7.4East Nusa Tenggara 5.2West Papua4.3Papua4.9West Sulawesi 5.7Developments in Domestic Economy
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 201610Figure 12. 2016 Regional Inflation (up to October 2016)Inf ≥ 5.0%4.0% ≤ Inf < 5.0%3.0% ≤ Inf < 4.0%Inf < 3.0%Source:	BPS-Statistics	Indonesia,	processed	dataof	the	financial	markets.	We	are	grateful that through the support, coordination, and trust of various parties this policy can be effectively implemented.	BI	7-day	Reverse	Repo	Rate	currently	is	within	the	4.75%	level,	which	in	our	view	is	consistent	with	the	achivement of the inflation target and macroeconomic stability.Amidst the global economic situation that has yet to strengthen, the domestic	economy’s	flexibility	has	been	duly	recognized	by	a	number	Aceh3.7North Sumatra 7.4West Sumatra 6.1Riau Islands3.9Bangka Belitung Islands5Jakarta2.7Central Java2.8Banten3.1DI. Yogyakarta2.7Bali3.6West Nusa Tenggara 2.9Bengkulu5.7Lampung2.9Riau3.9Jambi5South Sumatra 4.2West Java 2.8West Kalimantan 3.6Central Kalimantan 2.2South Kalimantan 4.2EastKalimantan3.1East Java 2.8NorthKalimantan 4.5
11of global ratings agencies. Fitch Ratings,	Moody’s	Investors	Service,	Japan	Credit	Agency,	and	Rating	and Investment Information Inc. maintained the Indonesia’s Investment Grade	Rating	in	2016	due	to	its	ability	to	grow	solidly,	backed	by	the	robust domestic demand. In terms of investment	climate,	we	appreciate	the	government’s efforts in promoting the Indonesia’s Ease of Doing Business ranking from 106 to 91. North Sulawesi0.78North Maluku2.9Maluku2.6Gorontalo2.3Central Sulawesi2.3SoutheastSulawesi4South Sulawesi3.2East Nusa Tenggara 2.9West Papua3.2Papua4.4West Sulawesi 3.1Developments in Domestic Economy
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 201612Economic Policy Challenges and DirectionThe	prospects	for	the	global	economy’s conditions that have yet to recover and some risks in the commodity and the financial markets, will	continue	to	pose	a	challenge	to	our	economy	going	forward.	Challenges	that	we	must	continue	to	strive	to	find	comprehensive solutions to mitigate the impact of global economic conditions on the domestic economy. We	view	global	challenges	as	one	that increasingly needs to be closely monitored so as to ascertain its impact on	the	national	economy	as	we	continue	to	face	various	short-term	and domestic structural challenges that have yet to be resolved and may potentially	slow	the	economic	recovery	process. Short-term	challenges	derive	from	the	effects of the fiscal stimulus that has yet to attract private investment, particularly for	non-construction	investments.	Non-construction	investment	growth	up	to	Q3	2016	remains	low.	Our	assessment	indicates that this condition is related with	business	consolidation	at	the	private sector by enhancing efficiency, both	in	production	activities	as	well	as	in managing loans.The	monetary	policy	easing’s	effects	on the banking sector has not been fairly	transmitted.	The	effects	of	the	decline in policy rates on lending rates was	registered	to	be	smaller	than	the	decline	in	deposit	rates.	The	decline	in	lending rates from the beginning of the year up to September 2016 has only reached	60	bps,	which	is	lower	than	the decline in deposit rates that has already	reached	108	bps	(Figure	13).	The	ongoing	consolidation	by	the	private sector and limited decline in the	lending	rate	subsequently	affected	loan	growth	performance	that	was	not	as	strong	as	expected	before.	The	*)	up	to	September	2016	Source:	Bank	Indonesia161412108642010201120122013201520142016*CreditDeposit%Figure 13. Time Deposit and Lending Rates*)	up	to	September	2016	Source:	Bank	IndonesiaNPL (Right Scale)Credit Growth% yoy%Figure 14. Credit Growth and NPL302520151054.03.53.02.52.01.52010201120122013201520142016*
13banking	sector’s	loan	growth	up	to	Q3	2016	only	arrived	at	6.5%	(yoy),	which	is	substantially	lower	than	that	achieved	in	2015	of	10%	(yoy).	Low	credit	growth	was	also	influenced	by	bank’s	tighter	credit policy in response to increasing NonPerforming	Loan	(NPL)	(Figure	14).In	regional	terms,	the	Kalimantan	region	registered	the	lowest	loan	growth	compared	to	other	regions	and	was	followed	by	the	highest	NPL	(Figure	15).	This	was	caused	by	the performance of the mining and manufacturing	sector	within	this	region	that	has	yet	to	recover.	Slow	loan	growth	in	other	regions	were	caused	by, among others, loan to the trading sector.Meanwhile,	domestic	structural	challenges	were	closely	linked	to	a	number of aspects in the real sector, particularly in terms of supply, and in the financial sector. In terms of the real sector,	we	registered	challenges	linked	with	export	product	composition	that are largely dependent on natural resource products, market structure and	trade	system	that	requires	to	be more efficient, and the role of the manufacturing industry that continues to decline. In terms of the financial sector, the challenges continues to come from unvaried domestic financing structure, unbalanced bank’s funding	structure,	as	well	as	shallow	financial market.Amidst looming uncertainty that affects global conditions, the presence of these cyclical and structural challenges requires	us	to	constantly	strive	to	seek	strategies that simultaneously can optimize	existing	domestic	potential	while	reducing	various	challenges	that continues to surface. In this regard, therefore it becomes relevant that	going	forward	our	policy	will	be	aimed	at	optimizing	various	domestic	potential to reinforce the national economy’s resilience. Economic Policy Challenges and DirectionFigure 15. Regional Credit Growth and NPL  Credit Growth (% yoy)2520151050Source:	Bank	IndonesiaSumatraJavaKalimantanIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIVIV201420152016654321NPL (%)SulampuaBalinusraIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIVIV201420152016
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 201614The	strengthening	and	optimalization	of the domestic potential does not	mean	that	we	retreat	from	the	global	constellation.	This	means	that	we	need	to	improve	and	prepare	ourselves	by	utilizing	the	existing	domestic potential, thereby serving as a firm basis to leverage the domestic economy once the global economy recovers. In	terms	of	the	domestic	sector,	we	need to continue to build a strong national industry so that once the global	economy	recovers	we	will	get	the benefit for our economy. In terms of	the	external	sector,	we	need	to	prepare some leading sectors that are competitive in the global market. Competitiveness that is backed by productivity and not merely in terms of nominal	factors	such	as	the	exchange	rate. Strengthening	and	optimizing	this	domestic	potential	is	subsequently	directed	towards	reinforcing	the	national	economy’s	resilience.	This	potential includes the huge potential sources of domestic financing, as reflected	in	the	results	of	the	Tax	Amnesty program. Optimizing	financing	sources	can	strengthen the economy’s resilience from the aspect of fiscal sustainability, corporate sector’s resilience, and external	sector’s	resilience	in	the	form	of declining dependence on foreign debt.	We	believe	the	economy’s	resilience	will	be	strengthened	with	effective	implementation	of	deregulation policies that can resolve many structural issues. Economic PotentialWe	registered	that	there	are	at	least	3	(three)	economic	potential	that	needs	to	be	optimized	to	support	Indonesia’s	economic	resilience.	The	first	potential	is the high level of trust and strong confidence of the economic agents to the government and policy makers. We	believe	that	the	results	of	the	Tax	Amnesty program is unlikely to be accomplished	without	the	high	level	of trust on the government’s policy direction and Indonesia’s economic prospects. Macroeconomic policy management discipline, including fiscal policy management	with	a	realistic	target	and	medium	to	long-term	vision,	as	well	as monetary policy that is committed to maintain macroeconomic stability in	our	view	serves	as	one	of	the	main	elements for trust and confidence of these economic agents. In addition, the confidence of the economic agents is also driven by the implementation of the government’s structural reform policies.
15confident	that	the	tax	intensification	through	the	benefit	of	a	wider	tax	basis,	will	serve	as	a	solid	ground	for	the	efforts	to	widen	fiscal	space	to	support	economic	growth,	without	jeopardizing	the	sustainability	of	its	prospects.The	third	potential	is	digital	technology	that	has	rapidly	developed.	In	2016,	we	witnessed	that	the	sharing	economy	and digital economy has sharply increased as reflected in Fintech and e-commerce	activities.	This	positive	development	will,	if	it	is	used	properly,	enhance efficiency and support domestic economic activities. These	three	potentials	that	emerge	in	2016	will,	if	it	is	effectively	and	optimally	empowered,	strengthen	and	boost	the	benefits	from	the	existing	domestic	resource potential, specifically human and natural resources.The	sizeable	population	represents	a huge market potential to support domestic demand through household consumption. Moreover, this huge market	potential	will	readily	serve	to	be	the	driver	for	more	sizeable	added	value	if	it	is	subsequently	followed	by	an increase in domestic production activities. The	second	potential	that	has	surfaced	and deserves special note in 2016 is the emergence of ample sources of economic	financing.	We	extend	our	appreciation to the Government for its success to unravel this potential through	the	Tax	Amnesty	program.	Up	to 14 November 2016, this program has successfully	collected	tax	payments	amounting	to	Rp94.8	trillion,	with	repatriated funds amounting to Rp142.7	trillion	and	declared	funds	of	Rp3,773.2	trillion.	The	accomplishment	deserves to be appreciated since the Tax	Amnesty	program	is	the	most	succesfull	program	in	the	world.	We	view	that	this	potential	can	serve	as the solid momentum for the Government	to	accelerate	tax	reforms	in	Indonesia.	The	broadened	tax	base	is	expected	to	be	followed	by	tax	intensification in order to boost the role of	tax	as	the	source	of	development	financing. In	Indonesia,	the	role	of	tax	in	the	development financing only reached 11%	of	GDP	in	2015,	which	is	lower	compared to that achieved by a number of countries in the region such as Singapore and Malaysia that achieved	around	14%	of	GDP.	We	are	Economic Potential
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 201616In	this	context,	the	demographic	bonus that is represented by a larger	number	of	productive-aged	population compared to senior citizens	and	children	will	serve	as	potential from the labor perspective and a large consumer base in line with	the	growth	of	the	middle	class	in	Indonesia.	This	demographic	bonus	will,	if	adequately	managed,	provide	opportunities for Indonesia to become more prosperous.However,	it	should	be	noted	that	the	demographic	bonus	which	will	reach	its	peak	in	the	next	fifteen	years	will	lose its momentum after those period, which	is	in	line	with	the	increasing	dependency level of the population (Figure	16).	As	a	consequence,	we	are	raving	against	the	time	in	utilizing	each	aspect of the potential. We	also	specifically	noted	the	importance	of	women’s	participation	in	economic	development.	The	population	of	women	in	the	world	today comprise of more than a half of	the	world’s	population,	but	their	contribution to the economy is still far below	their	potential.	Many	studies	have	shown	that	the	performance	of	the	economy	will	increase	when	women’s	potential	in	the	labor	market	is	properly	utilized.Efforts	to	increase	women’s	participation in the economy also serves as a challenge for Indonesia. Data	show	that	female	labor	participation compared to male labor in	2016	declined	and	was	lower	than	in	neighboring	countries	(Chart	17).	This	is	a challenging figure since the potential of	Indonesian	women	to	contributing	in	the	economy	is	quite	substantial,	especially in reviving the real sector.  1009080706050403020100Source:	Hayes,	Adrian	and	Diahhadi	Setyonaluri.	2015.	“Taking	Advantage	of	The	Demographic	Dividend	in	Indonesia:	A	Brief	Introduction	to	Theory	and	Practice”.	Jakarta. Policy Memo UNFPA Indonesia. Page 4Figure 16. Dependency Ratio1950197520002025207520502100Old-AgeChildTotal%1.000.900.800.700.600.50201120122013201420152016Figure 17. Ratio of Female to Male Labor ForceRatio to MaleSource:	WEF	-	Global	Competitiveness	ReportIndonesiaThailandPhillipinesMalaysiaVietnam
17The	World	Bank’s	Survey	(2016)	reveals	that the ratio of female business ownership	in	Indonesia	is	higher	compared to the same ratio at a global level, particularly for micro and small businesses.	The	survey	also	found	that	most	of	the	bank	and	non-bank	financial institutions perceives female owned	businesses	as	profitable	(Graph	18).	However,	financing	for	micro	and	small	businesses	operated	by	women	is still limited.Basic Function and Principle of PolicyGoing	forward,	we	need	to	continue	to	promote	economic	growth	so	as	to	avoid the emergence of vicious circle risk.	The	economic	downturn	poses	a risk that may affect corporate and financial sector performance, thereby requiring	efforts	to	strengthen	the	economic	resilience	(Diagram	1).Optimization	of	various	domestic	potential to promote economic resilience should refer to to the three basic function of public policy, namely (I)	stabilization	function,	(II)	allocation	function,	(III)	distribution	function.	These	three	functions	needs	to	be	supported by policy makers through strengthening the regulations. Basic Function and Principle of PolicyDiagram 1. Vicious CircleIncreased RiskWeakened GDP GrowthCapital OutflowDecline in Credit GrowthRupiah’s DepreciationIncreased NPLDeclining Corporate Performance100806040200BankNon-BankProfitableNeutralSource:	World	BankFigure 18. Perception of Female Clients in Indonesia Depositors%24763367
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 201618Within	this	context,	various	policies	that	are aimed at resource allocation can be	utilized	as	instrument	of	economic	stabilization	through	countercyclical	policies and also as a tool to promote equitable	distribution	of	economic	development outcomes. We	support	the	government’s	efforts	to	maintain	a	balance	between	strengthening the role of government spending as a countercyclical policy instrument	with	efforts	to	maintain	fiscal	sustainability.	In	this	context,	we	view	that	efforts	to	increase	the	composition	of	capital	expenditure,	particularly	infrastructure	projects,	should	be	maintained.	This	step	is	needed to preserve economic stability, while	simultaneously	ensuring	the	resource allocation efficiency. In	the	short	term,	infrastructure	projects	will	boost	the	purchasing	power	of	the	society, including the bottom layer group,	as	the	projects	can	absorb	sizeable	amounts	of	labor.	In	line	with	this, vocational education to address labor demands for infrastructure projects	as	well	as	industry,	also	needs	to be reinforced. In the medium to long term,	we	believe	that	the	emphasis	on	infrastructure	spending	will	positively	improve the economy’s efficiency and productivity. In	line	with	the	spirit	to	maintain	stability and promote efficient resource allocation, the spending aiming to strengthen the social safety net policy through the fulfillment of basic needs in health and education also needs to	continue.	This	policy	will	sustain	the	purchasing	power	of	middle	and	lower	layers	of	society.	In	line	with	this,	we	believe	that	strengthening	the	institutions that are responsible for the implementation of the social safety net	program	will	support	government	efforts to provide social protection. The	various	steps	mentioned	above	will	lead	to	improvements	if	it	is	also	coupled	with	the	policy	aiming	to	promote distribution to reduce income gap	and	expand	labor	absorption.	Recently,	the	Gini	Ratio	disparity	indicator	has	already	shown	a	sloping	trend in recent years thereby posing a challenge	for	us	to	reduce	it	to	a	lower	level	(Figure	19).
19In addition to the high level of disparity, the	absorption	of	economic	growth	on	the	work	force	is	still	low.	Data	shows	that the absorption of the economy on	the	work	force	is	declining	(Figure	18).	In	this	regard,	structural	reforms,	particularly to address economic productivity, has become vital to elevate the economy to a higher level which	in	turn	will	absorb	more	work	force.In	line	with	efforts	to	promote	equitable	distribution of economic development outcomes, Bank Indonesia has welcomed	the	Government’s	initiative	to	explore	the	eminent	sectors.	The	diversification of source of economic growth,	both	in	sectoral	as	well	as	spatial	terms,	will	create	a	buffer	for	the	economy.	On	spatial	terms,	regional	development	needs	to	be	harmonized	with	the	characteristic	of	each	region	considering that the region may have diverse	potential	(Diagram	2).On	a	sectoral	basis,	the	promoted	leading sector is the maritime considering the fact that Indonesia is the largest archipelago country in	the	world.	Policy	direction	in	this	sector indeed represents a challenge since the contribution of the non oil &	gas	maritime	subsector’s	remains	insignificant compared to other island nations	(Figure	21).Current	account,	which	in	recent	years	registered	a	deficit,	was	also	contributed by services account deficit, particularly derived from maritime transportation services (Figure	22).	Once	drawn	further,	various factors that led to this deficit can	be	to	two	sizeable	parts,	namely	port infrastructure support and ship industry development that has yet to strengthen. Figure 19. Gini RatioRasio0.450.430.410.390.370.350.330.310.290.270.25200020022004200620082010201220142016Source:	BPS-Statistics	Indonesia7006005004003002001000-100Source:	BPS-Statistics	Indonesia,	processed	dataQ1Q1Q1Q1Q1Q1Q1Q3Q3Q3Q3Q3Q32010201120122013201420152016Figure 20. Labor Force ParticipationThousands of Laborers (Labor Force Participation per 1% GDP)2013-2016average2010-2012averageBasic Function and Principle of Policy
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 201620SUMATRA•	Development	of	maritime	and	shipping	industry•	Optimize	capability	and	plantation	industry	processing	(palm	oil,	rubber,	coffee)•	Strengthening	tin,	coal,	and	petroleum	industries•	Develop	potential	for	the	biomass	industryJAVA•	Enhance	competitiveness	of	the	manufacturing	industry	(automotive,	textile,	and	textile	product,	socks,	food-beverage,	chemical,	agroindustry,	paper)•	Development	of	the	creative	and	handicrafts	industry,	as	well	as	enhance	MSME	competitiveness•	Development	of	big	cities	towards	smart	cityBALINUSRA•	Development	of	the	fisheries	and	poultry	industry•	Strengthening	tourism	infrastructure•	Development	of	the	creative	industry	(including	handicrafts)•	Downstreaming	of	minerals	(copper,	gold,	manganese)KALIMANTAN•	Development	of	the	petrochemical	industry	(petroleum)•	Development	of	the	coal	industry	and	gasification•	Enhance	added	value	for	minerals	and	forestry	products•	Enhance	competitiveness	for	the	palm	oil	industryMaritime and ShippingMiningNotes:Natural and Processed RubberPetroleum or Natural GasCoffee or Cocoa PlantationPalm OIlTextile	Industry	and its ProductsCreative IndustryDiagram 2. Regional Potential
21SULAMPUA•	Development	of	the	fisheries	industry•	Development	of	the	tourism	industry•	Optimize	the	plantation	industry	(coconut,	palm	oil,	cocoa,	coffee)•	Downstreaming	of	minerals	(copper,	nickel,	gold)•	Enhance	competitiveness	of	the	natural	gas	industryThis	regional	potential	map	just	takes	one	example	of	regional	potential	that	can	be	developed	or	enhanced	within	the	context	of	promoting	economic	growth.Coal MiningFood CropsFisheries and  Marine ProductsCoconut PlantationFood and Beverage IndustryAutomotive IndustrySource:	Bank	Indonesia	abstracted	from	Regional	Financial	&	Regional	Research	(KEKR)	of	all	Provincial	Level	Domestic	Representative	OfficesBasic Function and Principle of Policy
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 201622Considering the potential of maritime sector, Bank Indonesia supports the Government’s efforts to strengthen the ship industry on an integrative basis together	with	the	development	of	ports.	The	successful	development	of	the	ship	industry	will	have	an	immense	impact that is mutually beneficial, beginning	with	the	steel	industry,	as	the	raw	material	suppliers	of	ship	machinery	and	equipment,	and	up	to support for the fisheries sector, tourism,	as	well	as	the	maritime	fishing,	cruise, and other maritime transport industries.The	strengthening	of	the	maritime	sector becomes increasingly meaningful if the ship industry and port infrastructure as the enabler can be incorporated	with	an	interconnected	of	the	economic	zone	ecosystem.Other	sectors	that	also	require	attention as it promotes the acceleration of structural reforms involve the application of digital economy.	The	digital	eeconomy	has	grown	tremendously	over	the	last	two	decades.	This	growth	is	reflected	in	the	number	of	internet	users,	which	continues to increase, and the relatively high investment value placed on the telecommunications field, particularly in	Asia	(Figure	23	and	Figure	24).Aside from promoting economic efficiency,	the	rapid	growth	in	the	use of digital technology can also replace the conventional methods of doing	business.	An	example	of	this	is perhaps the current application of digital technology and robotics in	the	advanced	economies,	which	has led to the decline of cheap labor’s competitive advantage in the developing countries.This	condition	in	turn	has	led	to	the	export-led	manufacturing	growth	model in the developing nations to become increasingly irrelevant. Phenomenon such as this needs to be constantly monitored to ensure that we	can	maximize	the	benefits	while	simultaneously	minimize	the	negative	excesses	through	effective	policies.Source:	CEIC,	processed	data30252015105042128IndonesiaPhillipinesJapanFigure 21. Maritime Sector’s Share of GDP% of GDP *)	up	to	Q3	2016Source:	Bank	Indonesia0-2-4-5-8-10-12-142010201120122013201420152016*-9.8-9.8-10.6-12.1-10.0-8.3-4.8Figure 22. Balance of Trade in ServicesUSD Billion
23Meanwhile,	in	line	with	the	reinforcement of the regulatory function, allow	us	to	convey	our	appreciation	to	the	Government	that	has	optimized	the regulatory function through the issuance of 14 deregulation and debureaucratization	policy	packages.	We	believe	that	these	policies	will	reinforce steps to accelerate structural reforms, particularly in terms of micro regulatory aspects, such as regulations on	a	technical	level,	which	can	be	harmonized	and	synergized.To	operate	the	three	basic	public	policy functions mentioned above and reinforce the regulatory function, we	need	to	uphold	the	three	policy	management principles, namely the sustainability principle, consistency principle, and synergy principle.Within	the	context	of	the	first	principal,	a	policy	must	be	directed	towards	a	longer	time	horizon	that	allows	the	economy	to	be	able	to	grow	equitably	and sustainably. In the second principle, a policy needs to be in line with	the	philosophical	foundation	that	serves as a basis so that this policy is consistent across time, across sectors, consistent	across	central-regional	policies,	as	well	as	across	regional	policies.	On	the	third	principle,	synergy	between	policy	makers	both	in	the	central	as	well	as	regional	needs	to	be	carried out so as to ensure mutually beneficial impact on the policy that is implemented.We	believe	that	the	synergy	and	coordination	between	the	policy	makers	will	minimize	the	disruption	of the policy implementation, as well	as	enhance	efficiency	and	effectiveness of economic activities. In	this	regard,	allow	us	to	reiterate	that the various economic policy that is carried out needs to be consistent with	and	supported	by	the	Regional	Government. Figure 23. Number of Internet Users3,0002,5002,0001,5001,00050002009201020112012201320142015Millions of UsersSource:	eMarketerAsia-PacificEuropeNorth AmericaLatin AmericaMiddle East and Africa200020022004200620082010201220144,0003,5003,0002,5002,0001,5001,0005000Figure 24. Investment in TelecomsUSD MillionSource:	World	Development	IndicatorsIndonesiaThailandPhillipinesMalaysiaBasic Function and Principle of Policy
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 201624Improvement	of	the	economy	will	be	achieved	if	the	Regional	Government	can also effectively and efficiently enhance the use of regional transfer fund.	The	utilization	of	Regional	Government funds can fill the gap that has	yet	to	be	utilized	by	the	Central	Government.Synergy	aspects	is	also	related	with	the	need	to	harmonize	policy	between	authorities in formulating interest rates, such as monetary policy rates, deposit rates,	and	government	bond	yields.	The	formulation	of	the	last	two	rates	must	correspond	with	monetary	policy	rates	that is aimed at maintaining conducive macroeconomic conditions, thereby minimizing	risks	of	market	uncertainty	that can potentially lead to distortion once	the	liquidity	adjustment	process	takes place in the economy.Bank Indonesia’s Policy DirectionIn	the	spirit	of	building	synergies,	we	at	Bank	Indonesia	will	also	optimize	the	policy	mix	to	strengthen	economic	stability,	which	subsequently	support	the allocation and distribution functions.In	this	regard,	Bank	Indonesia	will	consistently	direct	the	policy	mix	to	maintain	macroeconomic	stability.	We	perceive	economic	stability	will	play	an	important role in supporting consumer purchasing	power	and	efficient	allocation	of	resources.	We	wil	also	continue to promote financial market and payment system efficiencies so as to provide the solid foundation to boost economic efficiencies and competitiveness.This	policy	direction	will	be	carried	out	by	optimizing	Bank	Indonesia’s	three main policy pillars, namely monetary,	macroprudential,	as	well	as	payment	systems	and	Rupiah	cash management. Monetary policies continues to be focused on efforts towards	maintaining	macroeconomic	stability.	We	will	synergize	monetary	policy	with	macro	prudential	policy	to	maintain financial system stability.Meanwhile,	payment	system	and	Rupiah	cash	management	policy	is	aimed to enhance efficiency in the national economy and provide support for the transmission of monetary and	macro	prudential	policy.	We	will	certainly strengthen these various policies	by	closely	coordinating	with	the	Central	and	Regional	Governments	as	well	as	other	related	authorities	in	order to effective national economic policy. 
25From monetary policy, Bank Indonesia consistently	will	implement	policies	to	maintain	inflation	within	its	target	and	keep the current account deficit at a safe level.To	enhance	the	effectiveness	of	the	policies, monetary policy is supported by strengthening the monetary operations	strategy	and	exchange	rate	policy,	as	well	as	financial	market	deepening. In regards to monetary operations strategy,	we	view	that	the	flexibility	in	the	liquidity	management	for	banks	will	enhance	the	bank’s	ability	to	absorb	temporary	liquidity	shock	thereby	avoiding	excess	interest	rate	fluctuations.For that purpose, Bank Indonesia will	begin	to	introduce	the	Reserve	Requirement	(GWM)	Averaging	system	in	2017.	With	reserves	averaging,	banks	are	required	to	maintain	an	average	of	GWM	within	maintenance	period.	Through	this	relaxation,	we	expect	inter	bank	transactions	will	become	increasingly active, interest rate fluctuation	will	become	manageable,	and	monetary	policy	transmission	will	be strengthened.The	strengthening	of	the	monetary	operations	framework	will	also	be	carried	out	by	optimizing	the	use	of	Government Securities or SBN as a monetary	instrument.	In	line	with	that	mandated by the Bank Indonesia Law	and	State	Treasury	Law,	as	well	as efforts to enhance the bank’s participation in the financial market, Bank	Indonesia	would	gradually	replace the Bank Indonesia Certificate (SBI)	with	the	SBN	as	the	monetary	instrument.Foreign	exchange	management	policy	will	continue	to	pruduently	implemented so as to maintain the stability	of	Rupiah’s	currency	value	with	the	value	of	its	fundamental.To	support	foreign	exchange	policy and the development of the domestic foreign currency market, Bank Indonesia initiated a hedging transaction to Bank Indonesia that covers	foreign	exchange	transactions	denominated	in	USD	and	non-USD.	Other	efforts	that	will	be	pursued	to	reduce the dependence on the US dollar involve bilateral cooperation, particularly	with	countries	within	the	region.	This	bilateral	cooperation	seeks	to promote transaction settlements in the domestic financial market by using local currency in international trade and investment transactions.Bank	Indonesia	will	also	embark	on a number of priority initiatives to accelerate the deepening of the financial markets. First is through Bank Indonesia’s Policy Direction
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 201626the development of money market instruments,	foreign	exchange	markets,	and	strengthening	coordination	with	relevant authorities in order to develop capital market instruments, such as infrastructure bonds. Second is by inreasing financial market participants, particularly through increased use of repo transactions by financial institutions,	banks	and	non-banks.	Third	is	through	the	development	of infrastructure in order to reduce segmentation and strengthen risk mitigation in financial transactions.To	support	these	priority	initiatives,	Bank	Indonesia	will	accelerate	the	follow	up	of	two	strategic	financial	market	deepening	issues	that	require	support from the related authorities. The	first	is	to	align	tax	regulations	governing financial market instruments to support the development of the financial market. Secondly, seek to align financial market development initiatives by implementing prudent financial institution practices.Bank	Indonesia	views	these	two	issues	as strategic as it is not enough for financial institutions to be merely safe and sound, but they must also fairly developed	through	growing	activities	in	the	financial	markets.	Therefore,	we	hope	that	the	commitment	between	the Ministry of Finance and the Financial	Services	Authority	(OJK)	to	share a common vision to develop the financial market under Development Financing Coordination through the Financial	Markets	Forum	(FK-PPK).Macro prudential policy in 2017 will	constantly	be	directed	towards	maintaining the financial system’s resilience. Apart from macro prudential regulations on banking industry, Bank Indonesia	will	strengthen	assessment	and surveillance of financial system participants, not only financial services institutions but also the users of financial services such as corporations.In	this	regard,	Bank	Indonesia	will	strengthen	and	expand	its	macro	prudential surveillance coverage towards	households,	corporations	and	non-financial	corporate	groups.	The	results	of	our	assessment	shows	that	non-financial	corporate’s	weak	performance	can	result	in	potential risks to the financial system, particularly banking. For that purpose, macro prudential surveillance needs to be strengthened in order to be able to identify at an early stage the source of	the	risk	and	the	relationship	of	non-financial	corporate	risk	with	other	participants in the financial system, particularly banking.Risk	monitoring	outside	the	banking	sector has also become increasingly vital	in	line	with	the	development	of	financial	technology	(fintech).	In	this	regard,	Bank	Indonesia	will	scrutinize	the risk potential and risk mitigation 
27from fintech as macro prudential assessment to anticipate the sources of	new	risks	from	fintech	activities.	Therefore,	risks	occured	from	fintech	activities, as an alternative financing for the	public,	will	remain	contain.Moreover,	Bank	Indonesia	will	continue to reinforce macro prudential assessment by using the National	and	Regional	Balance	Sheet	approach to strengthen systemic risk assessment and identify financial system imbalances, as an input to	formulate	policy	options.	This	approach	is	expected	to	reinforce	risk measurement in every element and	interconnected	risk	between	the	financial	system	elements	as	well	as	strengthen vulnerability mapping and sources of regional financial system disruptions.The	issuance	of	UU	PPKSK	serves	as the momentum to enhance the capacity to prevent and handle a financial system crisis. In this regard, Bank	Indonesia	will	strengthen	sensitivity	and	calibrate	early	warning	indicators and policy options under Bank Indonesia’s Crisis Management Protocol in the area of monetary and foreign	exchange,	payment	system,	and macroprudential.Subsequently,	through	the	enhanced	integration of Indonesia’s financial system and to reduce level playing field	disparity	with	other	countries	in	the	region,	Bank	Indonesia	views	a	sense of urgency to promote banking corporate actions to obtain optimal benefit from an integrated financial system.	We	believe	that	this	corporate	action	will	enhance	the	economies	of scale and efficiency of Indonesia’s banks, thereby the banking sector’s intermediary	role	is	expected	to	become	increasingly	optimized	and	boost the national banking industry’s competitiveness.Eventually, through the presence of strategic steps that includes banks corporate	actions,	Bank	Indonesia	will	restructure the operational relationship of	banks	with	Bank	Indonesia,	such	as	in	the	context	of	licensing	in	the	area	of Monetary, Payment Systems and Rupiah	Currency	Management,	as	well	as Macroprudential.As part of efforts to accelerate economic development and shariah financing in Indonesia, to complement the conventional economy, Bank Indonesia	will	launch	the	sharia	economic development and financing blueprint at the end of December 2016.	The	program	is	focused	on	strengthening the Islamic social finance	sector	as	well	as	promotion	of	the shariah financial markets.In terms of strengthening the Islamic social	financial	sector,	which	is	expected	to	strengthen	the	social	safety	net	as	well	as	to	tap	funds	Bank Indonesia’s Policy Direction
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 201628for infrastructure financing, Bank Indonesia	will	focus	on	improving	the role of Islamic Social Finance such	as	through	zakat	and	wakaf	and	pursuing initiatives to establish an Islamic Inclusive Financial Services Board	(IIFSB)	as	part	of	efforts	to	make	Indonesia	as	a	“centre	of	excellence”	for sharia global financial sector.Meanwhile,	in	the	area	of	shariah	financial market deepening, Bank	Indonesia	will	promote	the	implementation	of	the	Sukuk	Linked	Wakaf.	For	that	purpose,	Bank	Indonesia	will	work	together	with	the	Ministry of Finance, Ministry of State Owned	Enterprises,	Badan	Wakaf	Indonesia, and Agrarian Ministry/ National	Land	Agency	to	ensure	the	certification	status	of	existing	wakaf	lands,	thereby	optimizing	its	use.Moreover,	Bank	Indonesia	will	also	conduct further studies on to the issuance	of	sharia-based	government	securites, enhance transaction mechanisms,	as	well	as	complement	other shariah financial market infrastructure.	Bank	Indonesia	will	also	strengthen	its	strategic	alliance	with	ministries and authorities related to the development of the economy and shariah finance under National Shariah Finance Committee.In	line	with	the	Government’s	commitment	to	improve	the	quality	of	growth	through	increasing	level	of	economic participation, Bank Indonesia also placed special emphasis on the development of Micro, Small and Medium-Scale	Enterprises	(MSME).	The	vital	and	relevant	meaning	of	increasing economic participation, is	to	provide	the	opportunity	as	well	as	embrace	a	wider	segment	of	the	community,	which	includes	MSME’s,	to play a more active role in stimulating economic	activity,	toghether	with	the	Government.As	we	all	know,	MSME’s	play	a	vital role in Indonesia’s economic structure,	whereby	approximately	99.9% of business units in Indonesia are MSME’s and absorb nearly 97% of Indonesia’s	labor	(Figure	25).	However,	financial support that is channeled to MSME’s in Indonesia is only amounted to	7.2%	of	GDP,	which	is	the	lowest,	compared to other ASEAN countries such	as	Malaysia,	Thailand,	Korea,	and	Cambodia	(Figure	26).	In	this	regard, Bank Indonesia implemented the MSME development policy through	two	main	approaches,	namely encouraging the banking intermediation role for MSME’s and increases MSME’s economic capacity.
29One	of	Bank	Indonesia’s	efforts	to	enhance banking intermediation to MSME	is	by	requiring	Commercial	Banks to gradually fulfill its target of MSME loan proportion relative to total loan.	This	target	is	10%	in	2016,	15%	in	2017, and 20% in 2018, by constantly taking into consideration prudent principles.In addition to this, Bank Indonesia intends	to	pursue	its	expansion	and deepening of the MSME infrastructure loan program so as to reduce asymmetric information obstacles brought about by disparities between	MSME	capacity	and	the	banking sector’s financing capacity. This	is	carried	out	by,	among	others,	developing a financing scheme for the unbanked people by using the value	chain	financing	(VCF)	concept	approach,	as	well	as	promoting	the	digitalization	of	financial	services	that	facilitates MSME participants to carry out	non-cash	transactions	specifically	for strategic commodities.Meanwhile,	to	enhance	MSME	economic capacity, Bank Indonesia will	strengthen	the	implementation	of	the	program	to	create	new	economy	activities in the region and rural area through the development of leading MSME through the local economy/ Local	Economic	Development	(LED)	approach. In regards to efforts to control prices, particularly volatile food,	Bank	Indonesia	will	promote	to	expand	and	develop	MSME-based	inflation control clusters through the downstream	approach.	This	inflation	control cluster also serves as one of	the	instruments	of	the	Regional	Inflation	Control	Team	(TPID).In addition to this, Bank Indonesia also facilitates means to record MSME financial transaction so as to enhance MSME	management	capacity.	To	intensify	its	support	towards	MSME	development, Bank Indonesia is currently preparing an MSME development blueprint and roadmap Figure 25. Share of Total Employment by Enterprise Size Category87,0 %5,7	%4,0 %3,3 %1009080706050403020100KoreaCambodiaIndonesiaMalaysiaThailandSource:	ADB,	WB	Global	Index	(2014)SME Loan to GDPSME Loan to Total LoanAccount OwnershipFigure 26. SME Financing%Source:	Ministry	of	Cooperatives	and	SMEs	(2014)Micro EnterprisesSmall EnterprisesMedium EnterprisesLarge EnterprisesBank Indonesia’s Policy Direction
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 201630that	will	serve	as	a	guide	for	Bank	Indonesia in its MSME development program and MSME financial access in future.One	of	the	efforts	to	promote	role	of micro and small businesses in the economy, including the disbursement of	micro	credit	(KUR).	Bank	Indonesia	supports	the	channeling	of	the	new	KUR	scheme	that	is	operated	by	the	Government	since	August	2015.	Nevertheless,	we	see	that	there	is	considerable room for improvement to appropriately and accurately make KUR	more	well-targeted.Among	the	few	things	that	require	attention is the tendency of shifting small	business	borrowers	of	commercial	banks, rural banks, cooperatives, and other non banking financial institutions to	the	KUR	program.	This	shifting	may	result	in	the	KUR	goal	to	provide	eased	access to micro finance that have not yet gained the opportunity of financing from	banks	to	be	not	fully	realized.In	addition	to	this,	we	also	noted	the	need	to	pursue	a	more	equitable	KUR	distribution so as not to concentrate only	within	a	number	of	banks,	certain	regions and sectors. In this regard, one also	needs	to	consider	refocusing	KUR	such as on startups and the creative industry	sectors,	as	well	as	Supermicro	KUR	scheme	that	is	targeted	to	female	beneficiaries by using the team approach.Other	policies	required	includes	a	policy	that	minimizes	KUR	to	borrowers	that have already received loans from commercial	banks.	Utilizing	the	Credit	Program	Information	Systems	(SIKP)	also	need	to	be	optimized	so	as	to	minimize	redundancy	in	terms	of	the	disbursement of the Government’s lending program.Furthermore,	to	optimize	the	distribution	of	the	new	KUR	scheme	and	remain	in	line	with	efforts	to	maintain	the stability of the financial system, Bank	Indonesia	views	that	the	planned	reduction	in	the	KUR’s	effective	interest	rate by the Government should be gradual.	This	is	needed	to	minimize	the	impact	on	small	non-KUR	distribution	banks.	Meanwhile,	to	maintain	KUR’s	sustainability	as	well	as	its	quality	in	the long term, a scheme need to be formulated	that	allows	for	KUR	interest	rates	to	be	kept	low,	without	the	need	to	continuously	extend	interest	subsidies.
31In the area of payment system, Bank Indonesia’s	policy	direction	will	be	realized	in	steps	aimed	at	strengthening	the institutional and infrastructure elements of the domestic payment system	as	well	as	promote	financial	inclusion. Implementation of this policy	direction	will	be	grounded	in	the	mission to create a Payment System that is safe, efficient, smooth and reliable, by taking into consideration efforts	to	expand	access	and	consumer	protection, in order to support the stability of the monetary and financial system.In regards to strengthening the institution	and	infrastructure,	we	will	embark on a number of initiatives. First is to implement rules relating to Payment	Transaction	Processing	(PTP)	that applies to all payment services providers	(PJSP),	including	Fintech	the	participant.Second, to promote the development of	a	healthy	Fintech,	we	will	ensure	that	the	FinTech	Office	and	regulatory	sandbox	function	that	was	established	on	14	November	2016	works	effectively	and	productively.	Third,	we	will	also accelerate the establishment of	institutions	that	will	operate	the	management functions of the National Standard of Indonesian Chip Card Specification	(NSICCS)	that	we	are	targeting to be established no later than June 30, 2017.Fourth,	we	will	accelerate	the	National	Payment	Gateway	(NPG),	which	at	this point of time has gone through the concept testing and is in the engagement	process	with	the	main	participants in the industry. Fifth, require	the	providers	of	the	payment	system service to process financial transactions locally, place data locally, and store funds in local banks, using the central bank money, and comply	with	requirement	to	use	the	Rupiah	currency	within	the	territory	of	Republic	of	Indonesia.Meanwhile,	in	regards	to	efforts	to	promote	financial	inclusion,	we	will	continue	to	expand	financial	access	and enhance efficiency by integrating the	non-cash	electronic	ecosystem	within	the	Government’s	program	and	services.	We	will	direct	the	policy’s	strategy	by	expanding	the	Government	to	People	scheme,	namely	non-cash	social assistance that is channeled through a system of Digital Financial Services agents, and development of People to Government, namely the smart city program that, among others, covers retribution and public services payments to the public.In	regards	to	Rupiah	cash	management	(PUR),	we	will	promote	for	a	clean	money policy to distant and furthest areas	through	the	Centralized	Cash	Network	Plan	(CCNP)	masterplan.	In	the	near	term,	we	will	initiate	with	the	printing	of	a	new	series	of	Rupiah	currency for all denominations outright.Bank Indonesia’s Policy Direction
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 201632The	various	policies	that	we	described	above	will	be	supported	by strengthening the role of Bank Indonesia as a strategic partner of the	local	government.	In	this	context,	Bank	Indonesia	will	improve	network	quality	and	capabilities	of	the	Bank	Indonesia	Representative	Office	at	the	provincial	as	well	as	municipal	level, in order to improve the value proposition that it has, particularly in performing their tasks in the field of monetary,	macroprudential,	as	well	as	payment	systems	and	Rupiah	currency	management.To	support	the	role	as	a	strategic	partner	of	Regional	Government,	we	will	constantly	strive	to	improve	the	quality	of	research	so	as	to	produce the formulation of policy recommendations that is more precise and relevant to the area. In regards to the	macroprudential	field,	we	will	drive	for	KPwDN	to	more	actively	continue	to	strengthen	the	Regional	Financial	Surveillance	(RFS)	function	in	order	to understand the regional economy’s strength and vulnerabilities, strengthen the identification and assessment process	towards	financial	imbalances	and systemic risk in the region.In the area of payment systems, Bank	Indonesia	will	strengthen	Rupiah	Currency	Payment	and	Management	System	(SPPUR)	sector’s	onsite	and	off-site	supervision	in	a	comprehensive, directed, and efficient manner. Furthermore, in the field of	Rupiah	cash	management,	Bank	Indonesia	will	strengthen	infrastructure	and	expand	distribution	network	coverage of money in order to provide the	Currency	Fit	For	Circulation	(ULE)	evenly and access remote areas in the	entire	territory	of	the	Republic	of	Indonesia. Policy CoordinationWe	are	fully	aware	that	sharing	a	common	view	and	harmonious	steps	is needed to achieve our common aspirations.	In	line	with	this,	the	various	policies that Bank Indonesia intends to carry	out	will	likely	be	synergized	and	coordinated	with	the	various	policy	makers,	both	in	the	central	as	well	as	in	the regional levels, so as to ensure its effective implementation.We	intend	to	intensify	coordination	that	we	have	effectively	implemented	to date through various forms of coordination	such	as	the	Round	Table	Policy	Dialogue	(RTPD),	BI–Central/Regional	Government	Coordination	Meeting,	Inflation	Control	Team	(TPI),	Regional	Inflation	Control	Team	(TPID),	Financial System Stability Committee (KSSK)	and	Indonesia	Payment	System	Forum	(FSPI).In the area of financial system stability, within	the	context	of	the	PPKSK	Law,	coordination	with	the	Financial	
33Policy CoordinationServices Authority is focused on applying Systemically Important Bank (SIB)	and	short-term	liquidity	loan	coordination	mechanism.	Meanwhile,	coordination	with	the	Indonesia	Deposit	Insurance	Corporation	(LPS)	is focused on the handling of bank solvency issues relating to the sale of Government	Securities	(SBN)	owned	by	the	LPS	to	Bank	Indonesia.Within	the	context	of	international	assessment, Bank Indonesia coordinates	closely	with	the	related	authorities in implementing the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)	that	comprehensively	evaluates	financial sector stability and changes in Indonesia.Internationally,	Bank	Indonesia	will	also	strengthen	coordination	with	the Government to secure national interests and enhance Indonesia’s role in the international arena. Moreover, Bank	Indonesia	will	constantly	support	the Government in its efforts to promote improvement of Indonesia’s Sovereign Credit	Rating	(SCR),	including	ensuring	the creation of a positive image of Indonesia’s economy.In this regard, Bank Indonesia is fully committed to constantly strengthen the role of the Investor Relation	Unit	(IRU)	and	will	continue	to	enhance	coordination	with	the	central and Policy Coordination regional	governments	as	well	as	with	government representatives overseas to ensure the effectiveness of these activities.In regards to improving Indonesia’s role internationally, Bank Indonesia is fully committed to support the holding	of	the	IMF-World	Bank	Annual	Meeting	in	Bali	in	2018	with	the	tag	line	that	was	mutually	agreed	upon	with	the	government,	namely	“Voyage	to Indonesia”. In this regard, Bank Indonesia has prepared a structured and comprehensive program to support	the	IMF-World	Bank	2018	Annual Meeting.Bank Indonesia is also constantly actively involved and support the government to promote cooperation in the area of development financing, including those regarded as international	cooperation.	The	form	of this international cooperation is among others, through the formation of the Islamic Investment Infrastructure Bank	or	World	Islamic	Investment	Bank	(WIIB)	that	can	be	used	to	support	infrastructure	project	financing	in	Indonesia.Subsequently,	support	for	the	government	was	also	extended	within	the	context	of	an	investment	and infrastructure agenda initiative 
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 201634within	the	cooperative	forum	of	the	G-20	Global	Infrastructure	Connectivity	Alliance,	which	is	aimed	at	facilitating	cross-border	infrastructure	development connectivity through the	involvement	of	non-G20	member	states.Bank Indonesia’s Internal StrengtheningFrom an internal perspective, in response to various changes taking place and to provide optimum support towards	Bank	Indonesia’s	contribution,	Bank Indonesia has carried out various efforts to improve internal capacity and capability that is focused on reinforcing the four aspects.First,	improving	the	organization	and	human resources by, among others, forming	two	new	departments,	namely	the Shariah Economics and Finance Department, and the Financial Market Development Department. Moreover, the	Treasury	and	Loan	Operations	Department have been formed that represent as a merger of a number of functions	already	in	existence	in	Bank	Indonesia.Second, strengthening research and	statistics	functions	as	well	as	strengthening the Bank Indonesia Representative	Office	locally	by,	among others, implementing big data technology to support the decision making process, and updating the regional office handbook to support the role of the Bank Indonesia Representative	Office	as	a	strategic	partner	of	the	Regional	Government.	Third,	is	by	strengthening	information	system by applying Information System	–	Enterprise	Architecture	(IS-EA)	and	improving	system	governance.	Fourth, strengthening governance and risk management.In 2017, internal strengthening will	be	aimed	at	supporting	the	implementation	of	policy	mix	and	accelerating	transformation	within	Bank Indonesia. Various strategic program has been planned, which	includes	strengthening	the	implementation of human resources management system, enhance human resources competency in the head office and representative offices, develop special initiatives to anticipate cyber attacks, and begin to implement the	IS-EA	road	map.Economic ProspectsEconomic challenges, domestic potential,	as	well	policy	synergies	that	will	be	implemented	by	the	
35Bank Indonesia’s Internal StrengtheningEconomic ProspectsGovernment	and	Bank	Indonesia	will	likely	characterize	our	economy’s	prospects.	The	global	economy	that	has	yet	to	strengthen	as	well	as	our	efforts to build the domestic economy’s foundation so as to become resilient and	sustainable,	will	likely	affect	economic	growth	achievements	in	the	short-term.	However,	in	the	medium-term,	we	believe	our	economy	will	grow	faster as it is supported by a stronger and better economic structure.In	2017,	we	estimate	economic	growth	to	reach	5.0-5.4%,	supported	mainly	by	domestic	demand.	The	benefits	of	various	potential	that	we	had	previously	revealed	will	affect	private	sector business confidence and appetite. Private sector confidence to revive activities amidst the looming weak	global	economy	will	be	the	determinant for an accelerated economic	growth.	Meanwhile,	inflation	will	remain	within	the	target	range	of	4.0±1%	in	2017,	which	is	in	line	with	Bank Indonesia’s commitment to drive inflation	within	its	target	range.With	these	economic	prospects,	we	estimate that bank credit and deposits growth	in	2017	will	arrive	at	9-11%	and	10-12%	respectively.	Meanwhile,	the	current	account	deficit	is	expected	to	increase	slightly	in	line	with	the	intensification of infrastructure projects,	but	will	remain	within	a	healthy	level	of	below	3%.Through	stronger	resilience,	the	economy	in	2017	will	become	the turning point for a more solid economic	growth.	The	implementation	of	structural	reforms	will	serve	as	the	basis	for	more	solid	economic	growth	in the medium term. Structural reforms that	were	implemented	will	enhance	productivity	thereby	allowing	the	economy	to	grow	to	a	higher	level.	This	higher	growth	and	improved	structure	in	turn	will	enhance	employment	and	prevent	the	economy	from	the	middle-income trap.On	this	basis,	we	project	economic	growth	within	the	2018-2021	period	will	be	on	an	upward	trend	and	arrive	at	5.9-6.3%	in	2021	through	the	support	of	low	and	controlled	inflation.	Meanwhile,	the	current	account	deficit	is	expected	to	be	trend	down	and	remain	within	a	healthy	level	of	below	3%.	We	are	confident	that	the	policy synergy to accelerate economic transformation can bring the economy to	grow	healthier,	inclusive,	as	well	as	sustainable. 
Optimizing Potential, Strengthening ResilienceBank Indonesia’s Annual Meeting 201636ConclusionThese	are	Bank	Indonesia’s	2017	policy	ideas	and	direction	that	we	can	convey	in	this	opportunity.	We	would	like	to	extend	our	appreciation	and	gratitude	to	all Members of Bank Indonesia’s Board of Governors and Employees for their utmost	contribution,	dedication,	and	hard	work	thereby	allowing	Bank	Indonesia	the	opportunity	to	consistently	execute	its	mandate	of	maintaining	Indonesia’s	economic stability.Thank youWassalamualaikum Wr. Wb.Agus D.W. MartowardojoGovernor of Bank Indonesia


SPEECH  SVERIGES RIKSBANK SE-103 37 Stockholm (Brunkebergstorg 11)  Tel. +46 8 787 00 00 Fax +46 8 21 05 31 registratorn@riksbank.se www.riksbank.se  DATE: 7 December 2016 (Correction 12 Dec 2016, Figure 8 has been corrected in this version)  SPEAKER: Deputy Governor Per Jansson  VENUE: Swedbank, Stockholm         1 [20]  Time to scrap the inflation target?* To avoid keeping you on tenterhooks, I shall begin by answering the question in the title of my speech. No, it is not time to scrap the inflation target, in case any of you thought I wanted to. The question is of course rhetorical. The reason I ask the question is that I think it has been the focal point of the recent debate in Sweden, although it is not usually expressed so directly. Following the financial crisis the foundations of monetary policy certainly have been discussed and questioned around the world. But my feeling is that the debate has been driven further in Sweden than in most other countries. Monetary policy in Sweden has often attracted interest from other countries. One reason is that we have often been among the first to implement changes in the monetary policy framework and thus become an interesting object of study. As is well-known, Sweden was one of the very first countries to introduce inflation targeting in the early 1990s, and we have in many respects remained at the front edge since then. For instance, the Riksbank is one of few central banks to publish its own forecast for the policy rate and possibly the only central bank where the minutes state which Board member has said what during the monetary policy meetings.1  Inflation has been low for longer in Sweden than in many other countries In recent years, international interest in Sweden as an object of study has been more due to economic developments here, and to the measures the Riksbank has taken, rather than the changes in the monetary policy framework. Despite the Swedish economy developing relatively well since the global financial crisis 2008-2009 (see Figure 1), inflation began to fall earlier in Sweden than in the rest of the world. This has meant that inflation has undershot the target and been lower than in many other countries for a long time (see Figure 2). This has in turn contributed to the Riksbank considering it necessary to cut its policy rate below zero,                                                                  * I would like to thank Mikael Apel for his help in writing this text, Elizabeth Nilsson for translating it into English, Goran Katinic for help with the slides and Björn Andersson, Gina Bayoumi, Claes Berg, Charlotta Edler, Gabriela Guibourg, Marianne Nessén, Marianne Sterner and Anders Vredin for their valuable comments. 1 Another completely fresh example is the Riksbank’s thoughts on introducing a digital currency (see Skingsley, 2016). 
       2 [20]  which only a few other central banks have done so far.2 The long period of low inflation has also started a debate regarding the grounds for the Riksbank’s monetary policy and the inflation target, which as far as I can tell is more intense than in most other countries. In this sense, too, one can therefore in some ways say that we are pioneers. What I intend to do today is first to say a few words about this debate. Most often, the criticism merely states that the “monetary policy of the Riksbank is wrong”. The reasons for this vary: because a negative policy rate is not healthy, because housing prices are rising, because the krona is too weak or because the economy is already developing well. There is usually no detailed reasoning as to what the consequences would be if the policy was shifted in another direction. In particular, what is often missing, but I argue is crucial, is a discussion on why the advantages of the inflation target should no longer apply and what the consequences would be if the Riksbank abandoned it. After discussing the debate on monetary policy, I intend to conclude by looking ahead and examining the problems and possibilities for monetary policy in the future. Here, I focus in particular on a scenario where monetary policy is not made more expansionary despite a delay in reaching the inflation target. In Sweden, the policy rate has been negative since February 2015. This has not been an uncontroversial policy. The criticism can be divided into two types. These are often expressed simultaneously and are difficult to distinguish from one another, but I think there is a point in trying to keep the arguments separate. One sort of criticism is that a negative policy rate in itself is something unnatural and unhealthy. The other is that a negative policy rate is the wrong policy in the current economic situation. Let me discuss these arguments one at a time. Negative policy rate unnatural and unhealthy in itself? One can dispute whether a negative policy rate is unnatural and unhealthy, but it is certainly very unusual. This applies not only to policy rates but also to nominal interest rates in general. Prior to 2015 we had never had a negative nominal interest rate in Sweden. On the other hand, negative real interest rates, that is, nominal interest rates adjusted for inflation, have occurred now and then. The short-term real interest rate has been more or less constantly negative since 2009. If we look further back in time, negative real interest rates have not been so unusual either (see Figure 3).  Of course one might think it rather unnatural to need to pay to lend money to someone, and to be paid for borrowing. But as it is usually our purchasing power that we are concerned with, it is not really clear, when one thinks about it, why it should be more unnatural to have a negative nominal interest rate than a negative real interest rate. If one lends money, one will in both cases be able to consume less when one regains what one has lent, including interest. In the case of a negative real interest rate, this is because inflation is higher than the interest payment, and one is therefore unable to buy as much for the sum one receives from the borrower. If instead the nominal interest rate is negative, then the negative return is written into                                                                  2 Danmarks Nationalbank, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan and the Swiss National Bank also have negative policy rates (a list of central banks’ policy rates can be found at centralbanksnews.info). It is worth noting that almost a quarter of global GDP is currently produced in countries where the policy rate is negative. 
       3 [20]  the contract from the start, so to say, and perhaps this is what many feel goes against normal social and economic conventions. But regarded solely in terms of purchasing power, a negative nominal interest rate is not anything very special, in any case no more special than a negative real interest rate. General interest rates low but not negative Moreover, the fact that the repo rate is negative does not mean that general interest rates in Sweden are negative. The repo rate is a very special short-term rate that only the Riksbank's monetary policy counterparties encounter, including the major Swedish banks. When the repo rate is negative, the banks pay interest to the Riksbank, as the banking system as a whole has a liquidity surplus that must be deposited in the Riksbank. The short-term interbank rates, that is interest on loans between the banks, and some government rates have followed the repo rate down below zero. However, the banks have not introduced negative deposit rates for households and most companies. Only a few economic agents, primarily other financial institutions, large companies and some municipalities, have experienced a negative deposit rate, and these can in some cases also borrow at a negative interest rate. Companies have been forced to expend a certain amount of resources on avoiding negative return on their funds, but they appear to have succeeded relatively well in this. Cutting the repo rate below zero has thus in total contributed to pushing down interest rates, but has not meant that interest rates have become negative for the general public. Good profitability among the banks and few signs of a decline in demand Another fear has been that negative interest rates reduce the banks’ profitability, which could lead to higher lending rates and a lower supply of credit. The reason for this is said to be that the banks’ deposit margin, that is, the difference between the interest on deposits and lending, would decline because it is difficult to cut the deposit rate below zero. However, Swedish banks’ profitability has been good in recent years, especially in relation to banks in the euro area (see Figure 4). The negative repo rate has contributed to making their extensive market funding less expensive, at the same time as lending volumes have increased. In low interest rate environments there is also a tendency for income from fees and commission to rise, as the demand for the banks’ asset management increases as more people want to invest in for example funds. Nor does it appear to have been too difficult or expensive to adapt IT systems to manage negative interest rates. The Riksbank's overall assessment is that the negative interest rates have had little or perhaps even a positive effect on the banks’ profitability.3 As negative nominal interest rates are a new phenomenon, it is nevertheless natural that they are met with scepticism and give rise to various psychological reactions. One fear along these lines has been that the negative policy rate would be perceived as a crisis signal that would increase uncertainty among economic agents. I believe that reactions of this kind should be taken seriously. That there are such reactions is one reason why I am taking up this question here today. However, there are so far few signs of declining demand resulting from concern among households and companies. On the contrary, domestic demand has been the most important driving force behind                                                                  3 For a more detailed review, see the article “How do low and negative interest rates affect banks’ profitability?” in the Monetary Policy Report April 2016. The Riksbank's conclusions in this field are shared by Turk (2016).  
       4 [20]  the improved economic activity in Sweden. In addition, sentiment in the household and corporate sectors is good, according to various confidence indicators (see Figure 5). It is also worth noting in this context that there is a fairly intensive international discussion on whether negative policy rates should be included in the central banks’ normal arsenal going forward, as a weapon that could be used if special needs arise. One advocate of this is Ben Bernanke, former chairman of the Federal Reserve.4 He argues that negative policy rates have many advantages in relation to raising the inflation target, which is also discussed as a means of creating greater room for manoeuvre in future recessions. It is worth noting that this international discussion exists, as a contrast to the picture often painted in the Swedish debate – that negative policy rates are an isolated and strange invention of the Riksbank and a few other central banks. Negative policy rate wrong policy in current economic situation? The second form of criticism, as I mentioned earlier, is that a negative interest rate is the wrong policy in the current economic situation. One reflection one can make here is that the criticism really concerns the repo rate being too low, not specifically that it is negative. Low global interest rates are not due to monetary policy There are reasons to begin reflecting on why interest rates are so low. One important observation is that there has been a downward trend in real interest rates around the world for a couple of decades now (see Figure 6). It is not entirely clear why this has happened and why global real interest rates are currently so low, but in general terms it is due to the willingness to save long being greater than the willingness to invest. Another significant factor is that trend growth has deteriorated in many countries following the financial crisis. It is important to realise that global interest rates today are low because of factors that are unrelated to monetary policy. And global real interest rates are an important determinant for long-term real interest rates in individual countries. Monetary policy has to continuously relate to this long-term real interest rate. To put it simply, if monetary policy gives rise to interest rates below the long-term real interest rate, then the policy is expansionary. Correspondingly, monetary policy is tight if interest rates exceed the long-term real interest rate. However, monetary policy can neither influence nor deviate in the long run from the long-term real interest rate.5  These aspects are important, for instance with regard to the discussions about various possible negative side-effects of the very expansionary monetary policy. One argument is that the low interest rate constitutes a danger to pensions as the return on pension savings becomes so low. But with regard to pensions, it is the long-term return that is important. This means it is the long-term real interest rate that is the most relevant variable. The solution to the problem is thus not that central banks should raise their policy rates, much less that the Riksbank should do so single-handedly. To make interest rates persistently higher, one needs to implement                                                                  4 Bernanke (2016). Rogoff (2016) reasons similarly. 5 See, for instance, Rachel and Smith (2015) for a more detailed discussion and quantitative estimates of the global real equilibrium rate. 
       5 [20]  structural measures that push up the long-term real interest rate. This is unfortunately not so easy to do.    With reasonable estimates of the long-term real interest rate, the Riksbank's monetary policy has in recent years been clearly expansionary. The reasons why the Riksbank has conducted this policy are that inflation has undershot the target for a long time and that long-term inflation expectations have fallen to worryingly low levels. Around the turn of the year 2014-15 the situation was particularly serious. Expectations of inflation five years ahead had fallen some way below the target and there was a tendency towards acceleration in the decline (see Figure 7). The Riksbank therefore assessed it was necessary to conduct a very expansionary policy to safeguard confidence in the inflation target. Good reasons to preserve confidence in the inflation target  There are good reasons for safeguarding this confidence. When economic agents have a collective picture of how prices will develop in the future, it becomes easier to plan for the long term. The inflation target contributes to coordinating expectations in the economy and thereby lays the foundations for smoothly-functioning price-setting and wage formation. As I see it, the good wage formation system that we have today is perhaps the greatest achievement of inflation targeting. During the 1970s and 1980s, wage formation was a constant source of disruption in the Swedish economy. It caused considerable uncertainty for many companies. One was forced to manage the cost problem and poorer competitiveness through recurring devaluations of the krona. The situation was generally untenable and eventually led to an extensive economic crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. An important insight here is that a credible inflation target can give rise to a beneficial self-reinforcing cycle. If expectations are in line with the inflation target, and if price-setting and wage formation adapt to these expectations, actual price developments will then also become consistent with the inflation target. On the other hand, if expectations were to become stuck at a level that is too low, one instead has a negative self-reinforcing effect, which means that the central bank has to struggle much harder to attain the inflation target. This underlines the significance of taking resolute action particularly when more long-term inflation expectations begin to deviate fairly substantially from the target level. There are also good reasons why the target is 2 per cent and not lower. Perhaps the most important is that there should be sufficient scope to cut the policy rate in the future if inflation becomes low or economic activity wanes. A lower inflation target would mean reaching the policy rate's lower bound more often and for longer. This is why there is currently an international discussion on whether the central banks’ inflation targets should be raised.6 A somewhat paradoxical observation here is that many of those in the Swedish debate who are critical of negative policy rates are also critical of higher inflation targets, and often even advocate lower inflation targets. But with an unchanged or lower inflation target, it becomes even more important that the policy rate can be cut below zero.  A further reason that I believe should not be underestimated is that wage formation can deteriorate when average inflation is too low. The reason is that in practice it has proved difficult to lower nominal wages. If inflation is low and nominal wages cannot                                                                  6 See, for example, Blanchard et al. (2010), Ball (2014) and Rosengren (2015). 
       6 [20]  be lowered, it becomes difficult to adjust real wages between individuals at a company and between different sectors. This can ultimately bring about both higher unemployment and poorer productivity growth in the economy. These problems can be mitigated if there is a certain underlying inflation rate in the economy. Underestimating the significance of monetary policy and exchange rate developments One problem when criticizing monetary policy with reference to the current economic situation is that one does not take into account the fact that the current strong Swedish economy is of course to a large degree due to the monetary policy that has been conducted. It is a little like taking medicine in connection with an illness and when cured drawing the conclusion that it was unnecessary to take the medicine.  On this point I feel that the events of spring 2015 are a good illustration. The ECB had announced in January that it intended to buy securities over slightly more than a year to come for the equivalent of SEK 10,000 billion (around 2.5 times the size of Swedish GDP). This is indeed a very substantial monetary policy intervention. Within the course of just a few weeks the krona exchange rate appreciated significantly against the euro, from almost 9.65 krona per euro to just over 9.10. This was in itself a large appreciation of almost 6 per cent, but the real danger lay in the fact that it could have been much worse. During 2014 and up to spring 2015 the US dollar and the British pound sterling had appreciated by between 15 and 25 per cent against the euro. There was agreement on the market that differences in monetary policy were decisive for the different development paths of these currencies and the Swedish krona against the euro. If the Swedish krona had in this situation so to speak appreciated level with the dollar and sterling, the total appreciation would have been around 30 per cent. This would have meant a very serious deterioration in the competitiveness of the Swedish export industry and would have entirely changed the playing field for the Swedish economy (see Figure 8). Under such circumstances there would certainly not have been any growth in the vicinity of 4 per cent in 2015. My own impression is that the risk the Swedish economy was exposed to at this stage is severely underestimated by many commentators. They appear to assume that the strong performance in 2015 would have happened more or less regardless of monetary policy and the krona exchange rate. The fact that the Riksbank in February reacted by introducing a negative repo rate and beginning to buy government bonds is not considered to have played any major role. Although it is possible that the outcome would not have been quite as bad as I have outlined above, I think that it is extremely misguided to assume that monetary policy was more or less insignificant. There is also good reason for a reminder of a circumstance that tends to be forgotten. The current debate sometimes gives the impression that the Swedish economy has for some time been in a situation of almost overheating. But the fact is that we fairly recently, according to most empirical estimates, once again attained a level of resource utilisation that can be described as normal. Thus, although such estimates are uncertain, the Swedish economy appears to have been producing below, rather than above, its long-term capacity for several years following the financial crisis. 
       7 [20]  Confidence in the inflation target unimportant or possible to maintain with a different policy?  One thing that is rarely done, but I think is of utmost importance, is to spell out the practical consequences of this criticism. It is of course easy to agree that if the Riksbank had not needed to defend confidence in the inflation target, then monetary policy would not have needed to be so expansionary and the repo rate would perhaps not have needed to be negative. One may therefore draw the conclusion that those who say that monetary policy is wrong are arguing one of the following: Either that confidence in the inflation target is not so important, or at least less important than other things, or that the Riksbank should have been able to conduct a less expansionary policy while still being able to safeguard confidence in the inflation target. The criticism is rarely clear with regard to which of the statements it is based on, but my interpretation is that most of it is based on the first claim – that it is not so important to maintain confidence in the inflation target. Unfortunately, this rarely develops into any more detailed reasoning. Typically, the criticism tends to stop at monetary policy having been inappropriate, while reflections on the merits of a credible inflation target – and in particular on why the advantages of the current target should no longer apply – are almost always lacking. Essentially the criticism concerns whether or not to have an inflation target  When thinking about it, this criticism is in fact quite remarkable. What it actually says is that even if confidence in the inflation target is beginning to fail quite clearly, the Riksbank should not do what it can to maintain it. In this sense, one can argue that the discussion is essentially about whether or not to have an inflation target, and perhaps even about whether or not to pursue an inflation-targeting policy at all, although it is rarely expressed in this way. I can only think of one earlier parallel. It was as long ago as the second half of 1994, after the Riksbank had decided to introduce an inflation target, but before it came into force in 1995. The reason for the delay between the decision in January 1993 and the target coming into force was to give the inflationary impulse that arose when the krona was allowed to float in November 1992 time to wane. During summer 1994, inflation and inflation expectations began to rise.7 Most analysts’ forecasts pointed to inflation overshooting the target by a broad margin, and various indicators showed that the long-term expected inflation rate, which had never been close to 2 per cent, was now above 4 per cent. The inflation-targeting policy was thus faced with its first real challenge and the Riksbank began to raise the repo rate. Despite this being an entirely logical measure in the prevailing situation, it was met with strong criticism from some parts of society. A number of members of the largely politically-appointed General Council of the Riksbank, which was then the body that made the monetary policy decisions, entered reservations against the decision. Some even considered that this interest-rate and monetary policy was leading Sweden into “economic suicide”.8 The most important measure, they said, should be to achieve a                                                                  7 See Bäckström (2003) for a description of the situation at that time. 8 See LO (1994). It should be added that LO fairly soon afterwards came out in support of the inflation target and has supported it ever since.  
       8 [20]  lower real interest rate. The criticism lived on for quite a long time, but it was probably quite essential to demonstrate at that time that the inflation target was taken seriously. This was until now the only time I can remember that the Riksbank was urged not to do its best to maintain confidence in the inflation target. The criticism then was largely due to the inflation-targeting policy being so new – as I said, the inflation target had not yet even come into force. It is less easy today, after twenty years of positive economic developments, in which the inflation target has been a cornerstone, to see why the Riksbank is being urged to lower its ambitions. Perhaps it is because developments have been so positive for so long that one feels the existence of a credible nominal anchor is no longer as important. If so, I am convinced that this is a mistake. Difficult to see reasonable alternatives to the policy conducted But what about developments in household debt and housing prices? Don't they give a reason for changing monetary policy? The Riksbank has previously used the repo rate to try to subdue the upturn in debt and housing prices. But this was on a fairly modest scale and – above all – during a period when confidence in the inflation target appeared firmly rooted.9 In recent years, on the other hand, there have been signs that this confidence has begun to be undermined, which has changed conditions rather drastically. It has no longer been possible to do both; the Riksbank has been forced to choose.  I think it has been an absolute necessity in this case to prioritise confidence in the inflation target. It is not just because this is the Riksbank's main task. In my opinion, it is rather obvious that the problems on the housing market are deeper than the currently low interest rate. Housing prices and household debt have risen in parallel and almost constantly for twenty years, and during this time the interest rate has been both relatively high and very low (see Figure 9). Another observation that underlines the claim that the interest rate does not play the leading role is that developments in housing prices in Germany have been quite different from those in Sweden, despite a rather similar monetary policy (see Figure 10). As I see it, it is not reasonable given this to advocate that the Riksbank shall sacrifice its main task – to maintain confidence in the inflation target – to perhaps attain some easing with regard to housing prices and debt, which would in any case only be temporary unless other measures were taken. If we are to attain a long-term sustainable development in the Swedish economy there is no way around managing the risks in the housing and credit markets with targeted measures in housing policy, taxation policy and macroprudential policy. Anything else would be a very strange and ultimately untenable allocation of roles in economic policy.                                                                  9 See, for example, Jansson (2014). 
       9 [20]  Could confidence in the inflation target have been maintained with a less expansionary policy? As I noted, some analysts would probably argue that it is important to defend the inflation target, but that this could have been done with a less expansionary policy, where the repo rate would not have needed to be cut below zero.  This is a view that I have greater understanding for. However, there are many arguments against it. The expansionary policy conducted by the Riksbank has indeed led to inflation turning upwards and to long-term inflation expectations being once again at or very close to 2 per cent (see Figure 11). But the upturn in inflation has been bumpy and fragile and there are some signs that it has slowed down in recent months. Moreover, the upturn has to a fairly large degree been based on the krona being relatively weak and its sustainability rests on the assumption that the krona will not appreciate too rapidly going forward. It is very probable that developments would have looked quite different with a higher repo rate. And in this context the significance of a repo rate that is only half a percentage point higher should not be underestimated. It is not particularly difficult to imagine a scenario where the krona in such a case would have strengthened, possibly quite significantly, economic activity would have slowed down and inflation and inflation expectations would have turned downwards. This relates to a different type of criticism that argues that the negative interest rate has not had any effect or even been counter-productive. The grounds for this criticism appear to be that inflation has not attained the target despite the repo rate being negative. This is of course true, but the question one should ask is how things would have looked if the Riksbank had not cut the rate as much as it did. Of course we can never know for certain, but it is difficult to see any convincing reasons why inflation would have been the same as it is now, or even higher, if the repo rate had stayed at zero. And in this context the risks of a very strong krona appreciation that needed to be dealt with during the spring of 2015 should be recalled. Unclear arguments regarding exchange rate and welfare   Before I continue, I would like to say something about one type of criticism that has been common recently. It appears to be based on the idea that the exchange rate can be regarded as a measure of welfare and argues that “Swedes have become poorer” when the krona is weak, and vice versa. As the Riksbank's expansionary monetary policy is assumed to be an important explanation for the weak krona, the Riksbank is thus considered to contribute to this increased poverty. This is then taken as justification for saying that monetary policy is wrong. I have some difficulty in understanding this linking of the exchange rate to welfare. A weak krona does tend to increase the prices of goods we import. But imported goods are included in the representative consumption basket that inflation is measured by. And the problem today is not that inflation is high, rather the reverse. It is thus not the case that the weak krona significantly erodes our daily consumption. For the man on the street a weak krona is most noticeable because it becomes more expensive to travel abroad. This is of course unfortunate, but it nevertheless seems fairly far-fetched to compare this with reduced welfare or increased poverty. The other side of the coin is of course that Swedish companies find it easier to export and 
       10 [20]  are able to increase their employment. A more established measure of welfare is GDP or GDP per capita, or consumption or consumption per capita. Negative policy rates no panacea  Before I go on, let me note in conclusion that the negative repo rate has on the whole had the expected effects. It has most probably contributed to inflation being higher than it would have been otherwise and the fears of what might happen when the repo rate passed the zero mark have so far not been realised.  Having said this, I would like to point out that I do not see negative policy rates as a panacea for the problems monetary policy has faced in recent years, in an environment where the global real interest rate is very low. There is an international discussion, mostly on an academic level, about monetary policy becoming more effective if the central banks’ policy rates were to be made very negative – that is, if the lower bound could in principle be eliminated entirely.10 But personally I do not regard this as a practically implementable solution. Negative policy rates are already regarded with scepticism and it is easy to imagine how opinion would be if they were cut so far that the general public’s deposit rates also passed beyond the zero mark – or, even worse, if one with various electronic money solutions were to force people to “pay to save”.11 I definitely believe that there is scope to cut the repo rate somewhat further if necessary. But one cannot ignore the fact that this scope is limited. It is of course also possible to make further purchases of securities, but even there it is reasonable to assume that the positive effects will wane sooner or later and the complications will gradually increase.  I would like to emphasise, to avoid any misunderstanding, that I still count on inflation developing in line with the Riksbank's forecast and attaining 2 per cent safely within the current forecast period. But it is nevertheless important and necessary to seriously consider and evaluate alternative scenarios. It may take longer to attain the target... The idea behind the recent policy has been to avoid the exchange rate appreciating too rapidly and in this way to hold inflation up until economic activity takes over as the driving force. Thus, the plan has not been to try to permanently battle against fundamentals.12 This has so far worked relatively well, but we are now beginning to approach the critical stage where economic activity is supposed to take over the baton. One cannot escape the fact that inflation outcomes have been somewhat worrying recently. It is now mostly the CPI that is showing a clear upturn. The more underlying rate of inflation measured by the CPIF excluding energy prices has over the year developed more or less sideways, or even shown a tendency to decline slightly. The inflation outcomes in coming months will be very important.                                                                  10 See, for example, Goodfriend (2016). 11 For a more detailed discussion of the problem of very negative policy rates, see Alsterlind et al (2015) and Nessén (2016). 12 However, for my own part I am not convinced that fundamentals currently need to lead to a significant krona appreciation in real terms, see the minutes of the Riksbank's monetary policy meetings in September and October. 
       11 [20]  The conditions for economic activity to soon take over as the main driving force behind inflation nevertheless look good, given the positive development we are seeing in the real economy. But there are also reasons to consider the possibility that the baton changeover might not go as smoothly as we hope and believe. One reason for this could be that economic activity in Sweden as such does not continue developing as favourably as we are presently assuming it will. Another reason could be that the forces currently holding back inflation in Sweden and other countries are stronger and more persistent than expected – that the inflation propensity has fallen, at least temporarily.    The first step will then probably be to make monetary policy more expansionary. But as I noted, the room for manoeuvre is becoming more limited. It is not possible to quantify exactly when it has been exhausted, but somewhere there is a limit. We cannot rule out the possibility that we will sooner or later reach a situation where we assess that it is no longer possible or desirable to make policy even more expansionary. If we were to find ourselves in such a situation – and I emphasise if – then the consequence could be that we will have to accept that it will take longer than desirable to attain the inflation target.  I would like to emphasise that in such a hypothetical case it would not be a question of “giving up the inflation target”. The advantages of an inflation target of 2 per cent that I have just described would of course still apply and we would continue to do our best to attain it. The difference would be that we open up for the possibility that it could take longer than we previously assumed, without making monetary policy more expansionary. ... but the aim of the policy would not change  If we were to find ourselves in such a situation it would not mean that we were suddenly to start conducting a completely different policy and begin raising the repo rate, for instance. There would still be reasons to conduct a policy that is as expansionary as possible, to avoid taking longer than necessary to attain the target. However, one consequence would be that the Riksbank's communication became very important. The damage in a situation where monetary policy can no longer be made more expansionary, despite inflation being expected to undershoot the target for quite a long time, will be much less if the general public can be convinced that the target has not been abandoned, that it is merely a question of taking longer than normal to attain it. Clarifying this would be a difficult but hopefully not impossible task.  Here it is important to realise that inflation can be controlled by the central bank in the long run. Inflation is ultimately, as is often put, a monetary phenomenon and determined by how expansionary monetary policy is on average (see Figure 12). Digitalisation, globalisation and other structural changes can push down inflation during certain periods of time, and these periods can very well be quite long. However, the effects of structural changes on inflation do not last for ever. In the long run, it is monetary policy that determine the rate of inflation in the economy and “rational” long-term inflation expectations should therefore still be in line with the central bank's target for price stability. If the public makes this presumption, the negative consequences of taking longer to attain the inflation target will be much less serious.  
       12 [20]  Concluding comments Let me round off. My purpose here has been to do two things. Firstly, I have tried to put the recent debate on monetary policy into perspective. I have discussed the criticism raised against our policy in general and against the negative repo rate in particular. As I hope I have made clear, there are some gaps in the criticism.  I noted earlier that the main argument is often merely that monetary policy for various reasons is wrong. What I feel is often missing is a discussion of why the advantages of the inflation target should no longer apply and what the consequences would be if the Riksbank abandoned it.  It is no new phenomenon that the debate fails to answer important questions. In the mid-1990s, when the inflation-targeting regime was relatively new, Lars E.O. Svensson, who was then scientific adviser to the Riksbank and later a member of the Executive Board, argued that the debate often lacked structure. At the Swedish Economics Associations’ proceedings in February 1996 he called for each debater to answer the following questions explicitly or implicitly: (i) Do you apply the same inflation target as the Riksbank, or another inflation target, or any other target? (ii) Do you make the same forecast as the Riksbank or do you make a different assessment? (iii) Do you know of a better way of attaining the target?13 These questions appear as relevant today as they were twenty years ago. Secondly, I have discussed how one should view a situation where it takes longer for inflation to attain the target, despite the Riksbank doing everything it can to avoid this happening. This is not a situation we expect to find ourselves in, but there is nevertheless reason to seriously consider and examine it. If such a situation were to arise, it would very important to clearly communicate that the inflation target has not been abandoned, to prevent long-term inflation expectations from falling excessively. As the central bank determines inflation in the long run – inflation is a monetary phenomenon – there are also good reasons for expectations of long-term inflation to remain in line with the target. This is important to maintain a smoothly-functioning price-setting and wage formation, but also for monetary policy to be able to counteract future economic downturns. Communicating this is a difficult but hopefully not impossible task.  References Alsterlind, Jan, Armelius, Hanna, Forsman, David, Jönsson, Björn and Wretman, Anna-Lena (2015), ”How far can the repo rate be cut?”, Economic Commentary, no. 11, Sveriges Riksbank. Ball, Laurence M. (2014), “The case for a long-run inflation target of four percent,” IMF Working Paper, WP/14/92, International Monetary Fund.                                                                   13 Ekonomisk Debatt (1996). 
       13 [20]  Bernanke, Ben S. (2016), “Modifying the Fed’s policy framework: Does a higher inflation target beat negative interest rates?”, blog post, Brookings, 13 September. Blanchard, Olivier, Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni and Mauro, Paolo (2010), “Rethinking macro policy”, IMF Staff Position Note SPN/10/03, International Monetary Fund. Bäckström, Urban (2003), ”1990-talets väg till prisstabilitet” (the 1990s route to price stability), Chapter 6 in Jonung, Lars (ed.), På jakt efter ett nytt ankare – från fast kronkurs till inflationsmål (Looking for a new anchor. From a fixed exchange rate to an inflation target), SNS Förlag. Ekonomisk Debatt (1996), ”Riksbanken och penningpolitiken” (the Riksbank and monetary policy), Proceedings at the Swedish Economics Association 21 February 1996, no. 4. Jansson, Per (2014), ”Swedish monetary policy after the financial crisis – myths and facts”, speech at SvD Bank Summit, 3 December, Sveriges Riksbank. Goodfriend, Marvin (2016), ”The case for unencumbering interest rate policy at the zero bound”, essay presented at the conference “Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 25-27 August. LO (1994), ”Sverige har råd!” (Sweden can afford it), information paper, the Swedish Trade Union Confederation. Nessén, Marianne (2016), Discussion of ”The case for unencumbering interest rate policy at the zero bound” by Marvin Goodfriend”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 25-27 August. Rachel, Lukasz and Thomas D. Smith (2015), “Secular drivers of the global real interest rate”, Staff Working Paper No. 571, Bank of England. Rogoff, Kenneth (2016), “It would be wrong to abandon the policy of negative rates”, Financial Times, 11 October. Rosengren, Eric S. (2015), “Changing economic relationships: Implications for monetary policy and simple monetary policy rules”, speech on 16 April, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. Skingsley, Cecilia (2016), “Should the Riksbank issue e-krona?”, speech at the FinTech conference in Stockholm, 16 November, Sveriges Riksbank. Turk, Rima A. (2016), “Negative interest rates: How big a challenge for large Danish and Swedish banks?”, IMF Working Paper WP/16/198, International Monetary Fund.   
       14 [20]  Figure 1. Good GDP development in Sweden after financial crisis  Index, 2007 Q4=100  Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Eurostat, Office for National Statistics and Statistics Sweden Figure 2. Inflation fell early in Sweden Annual percentage change  Note. The CPI for the US and the HICP for others. Sources: The Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat and Statistics Sweden.   
       15 [20]   Figure 3. Negative real interest rate not unusual Per cent   Note. The real interest rate is calculated using series for the nominal interest rate and inflation/inflation expectations. For the nominal interest rates, annual data from historical monetary statistics is used for the period 1900-1918, while the Riksbank's discount rate is used for the period 1919-1983 and after that the rate on a three-month treasury bill is used. For inflation/inflation expectations, annual data from historical monetary statistics is used for the period 1900-1918, the cost-of-living index/CPI from Statistics Sweden is used for 1919-1979 and after that inflation expectations in the household sector for one year ahead, as calculated by the National Institute of Economic Research.  Sources: National Institute of Economic Research, Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank   -40-30-20-10010203040-40-30-20-10010203040190019191939195919791999Real short-term interest rateNominal short-term interest rate
       16 [20]  Figure 4. Good profitability in Swedish banks Return on equity, rolling four quarters, per cent Note. Unweighted mean value. The red line refers to a selection of major European banks. Sources: The banks’ interim reports and SNL Financial Figure 5. Positive sentiment in household and corporate sectors Index, mean = 100, standard deviation = 10  Source: National Institute of Economic Research   
       17 [20]   Figure 6. Downward trend in global real interest rates Per cent   Note. 10-year yield on real government bonds in Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States. Swedish real interest rates are zero coupon yields interpolated from bond prices using the Nelson-Siegel method. Sources: The Bank of England, the Federal Reserve, Thomson Reuters and the Riksbank Figure 7. Problematic inflation conditions, especially 2014-2015 Annual percentage change Inflation   Inflation expectations   Note. Inflation expectations refer to mean value for money market participants. Sources: Statistics Sweden and TNS Sifo Prospera  -4-20246-4-2024685909500051015United KingdomUSASweden-10123-1012310111213141516CPIF excluding energyCPIF0.00.51.01.52.02.53.00.00.51.01.52.02.53.0101112131415165 years ahead2 years ahead1 year ahead
       18 [20]  Figure 8. Serious situation in spring 2015 Exchange rates  Unit labour costs   Note. The ECB communicated its decision to purchase securities on 22 January 2015 and initiated purchases on 9 March 2015. Exchange rates, index, 1 January 2014 = 100. Unit labour costs in manufacturing industry, euro, index, 2011 = 100. The blue square indicates the effect of the krona appreciating by 30 per cent against the euro. Sources: The ECB, Macrobond and Conference Board Figure 9. Rising trend in housing prices and debts for 20 years despite varying repo rate  Index 2000 Q1 = 100  Note. Housing prices have been converted from nominal to real terms by using the CPIF. Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank   758595105115758595105115Jan-14Jul-14Jan-15Jul-15Jan-16Jul-16EURGBPEURUSDEURSEK9010011012013014090100110120130140050709111315GermanyUSASweden
       19 [20]   Figure 10. Much slower increase in housing prices in Germany despite roughly the same development in policy rates  Index, 2005 Q1 = 100 and per cent respectively Housing prices   Short-term interest rates   Sources: The BIS and the OECD Figure 11. Long-term inflation expectations close to target once again Per cent  Note. Inflation expectations according to money market participants. Source: TNS Sifo Prospera   8010012014016018020080100120140160180200050709111315GermanySweden-10123456-10123456050709111315GermanySweden
       20 [20]   Figure 12. Monetary policy determines long-term inflation – inflation is a “monetary phenomenon” Annual percentage change   Note. Money supply refers to M3 and inflation refers to CPI. The squares show averages for different decades. Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank   1900s1910s1920s1930s1940s1950s1960s1970s1980s1990s2000s2010s-6-4-202468101214-202468101214InflationGrowth in money supply
Jens Weidmann: United in diversity – on the responsibility ofcountries and regions in the monetary unionSpeech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of theBoard of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, upon receiving the &quot;Medal formeritorious service to Bavaria in a united Europe&quot;, Frankfurt am Main, 5 December 2016.*   *   *1 Introductory remarksDear Minster of State Dr MerkLadies and gentlemenThank you very much for the words of praise, and I am pleased and honoured to be the recipientof the “Medal for meritorious service to Bavaria in a unified Europe".I was not expecting this at all, quite honestly: that I would be honoured “for meritorious service toBavaria". But we are, after all, talking about “Bavaria in a unified Europe".I am therefore taking this distinction as (moral) support for my advocacy of a stable monetaryunion – a monetary union in which actions and accountability are aligned – a monetary union inwhich rules are observed and agreements are kept. Keeping promises is crucial to ensuringpublic acceptance of monetary union.My stability-oriented stance in monetary policy issues could well have been a factor, and youmight be expecting me to sound a note or two of caution regarding current ECB policy.However, the Governing Council has a fundamentally sensible agreement in place not to makeany public pronouncements about current monetary policy in the week leading up to a monetarypolicy meeting. And since a monetary policy meeting is coming up this week, I shall refrain frommaking any comment about this subject in my speech. But me say this much about fundamentalconsiderations regarding the role of monetary policy:The idea that central banks can use cheap money to fight the causes of the financial andsovereign debt crisis, fears about globalisation or the upsurge in populism, is dangerous. Thecentral bank constantly stepping into the breach for elected politicians or even going so far as toattempt to influence democratic processes would lead to a politicisation that could jeopardise itsindependence.The fact that accommodative monetary policy buys time for politicians is, at best, a side effect,but it must not become the objective of monetary policy decisions. And how a given monetarypolicy stance is maintained must depend entirely on what is required to safeguard price stability.My fellow ECB Governing Council members would probably say much the same thing.The accommodative monetary policy can make fiscal consolidation, as well as reforms, appearless urgent. I am thinking here of institutional reforms to make the euro area more stable. Andthis is precisely what I wish to talk briefly about today.2 Assessment of the Italian referendumIn this context, this must, of course, include an initial, provisional assessment of the implicationsof the Italian referendum. As you know, a majority of Italian voters rejected constitutional reform inyesterday’s referendum. 1 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
There is cause for concern that reforms in Italy will stall once again. And this would be a troublingdevelopment, not just for Italy. For years now, Italy has been plagued by anaemic growth, veryhigh government debt and piles of bad debt on banks’ balance sheets.To quote the Italian finance minister, a “No” would not the end of the world; however, it is now allthe more important for Italy’s political class to send convincing signals that it is willing to tacklethe root causes of its economic woes. 3 The institutional architecture of the monetary union and the need for reformsMinister of State Dr Merk,You have invited us all to attend the award ceremony here at the Prinz-Carl Palace, whichhouses the offices of Bavaria’s prime minister and is regarded as one of Munich’s most beautifulbuildings.It is all the more noteworthy that this building’s architect, Karl von Fischer, was all of 21 years oldand still a student when he received the commission to design this building. However, the patron,a French clergyman named Pierre de Salabert, found Fischer’s blueprint too complex – andpossibly too expensive – forcing the architect to scale back his design. What was built was themain section with a representative facade and a shortened wing branching off to the left.Ladies and gentlemen, why am I telling you this story, which I’m sure you know already?Well, the reason is that it somehow reminds me of the construction of European economic andmonetary union. And I’m not saying that the architects of monetary union were novices. But itdoes appear that it was impossible to give the builders more comprehensive blueprints, which iswhy the monetary union was initially built with only one wing: the single currency. The secondwing – a single fiscal and economic policy – was intentionally left out.This has left us with a single monetary policy in the euro area but largely autonomous nationalfiscal and economic policies.Now, the architects were very well aware that this edifice has a decisive weakness: The risk ofaccumulating excessive debt is greater in such a monetary union than in countries that have theirown currencies.One reason is that the member states of a monetary union of this design are not borrowing intheir own currency. They therefore cannot meet their payment obligations by simply printingmoney – a solution which, for stability-oriented central bankers, is generally a non-starteranyway.Another is that there are greater incentives to borrow in a monetary union because anyconsequences of relying increasingly on capital market funding can be passed on to the othermember states.And that was why the member states pledged to maintain sound public finances, introducedupper limits for annual budget deficits and public debt levels, and agreed to a “no bail-out clause”that would prevent one member state from assuming liability for the debts of another. They alsoprohibited central banks from printing money to help cash-strapped euro-area governmentsThis was designed to ensure that member states are liable for their own debts and cannot passthem on to other members of the Community. At the end of the day, people will behave in aresponsible manner only if they take responsibility for their own actions.  Or, to put it slightly morebluntly: each member state must “pay its own way".All this is ultimately intended to protect the single monetary policy from coming under pressure to 2 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
inflate away excessive levels of government debt through monetisation. The founding fathers ofthe monetary union were well aware that there would be a loud cry for monetary policy action ifthe soundness of public finances should be at risk at any time.The debt crisis in the euro area showed us that the Maastricht framework was unable to preventsovereign debt crises and had also failed to effectively counteract other unsound economicdevelopments such as a severe loss of international competitiveness and excessive currentaccount deficits.During the crisis, as you are well aware, we then set up the much-publicised European rescuepackages during the crisis and took other measures – including through the Eurosystem – inorder to prevent the crisis from escalating. But at the same time, these measures underminedthe principle of individual national responsibility.Although the “no bail-out” rule still applies, in reality, elements of communitised liability have beengaining ground. This upset the balance between actions and accountability because, naturally,the member states were not willing to hand over control.And there are calls for greater joint liability in the euro area, say, in the form of a Europeandeposit insurance scheme or a European unemployment insurance fund, to name but twoexamples.Since member states are evidently still as reluctant to cede sovereignty rights to the Europeanlevel as they were 25 years ago, I think that increasing the communitisation of liability is thewrong route to take. And that is why I am sceptical about calls to build a second wing, so tospeak, on the basis of such initiatives.In a recent article for the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper (FAZ), Horst Seehofer, theBavarian state premier wrote, “Europe is a treaty-based community; you can’t always get whatyou wish". Looking at the proposals for the future development of the euro area, however, it issometimes possible to get exactly the impression that you can.We need to restore the balance between actions and accountability. And, to my mind, the onlyway we can do this is by strengthening individual national responsibility and the decentralisedframework."United in diversity” has been Europe’s motto since 2000, highlighting the fact that Europeanintegration and regional diversity do not have to be a contradiction in terms. And we must notforget that the principle of subsidiarity, which is likewise enshrined in the treaties, also stipulatesthat tasks should be transferred to the European level only if they cannot be performedadequately when responsibility lies at the national or regional level.Strengthening individual national responsibility and the decentralised framework implies restoringthe credibility of the “no bail-out” clause. That was exactly what was lacking in the run-up to thecrisis. The example of Switzerland shows that a credible no bail-out regime for government debtis fundamentally possible. Of course, the no bail-out principle can only function if it is possible, in extreme cases, torestructure sovereign debt without jeopardising the stability of the financial system. TheEuropean rescue measures were motivated not least by the fact that the consequences of adisorderly sovereign insolvency were unpredictable.The fear of a further escalation of the financial crisis led to European taxpayers’ money beingused as the first line of defence. That wasn’t really fair, as it contravened the principle that it is,first and foremost, shareholders and investors who must bear the consequences of theirdecisions. And it goes at least some way to explaining the increasingly critical attitude of some 3 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
members of the public towards our economic and financial system.This is why, a number of years ago, the Bundesbank proposed the automatic extension of bondmaturities where governments are facing funding difficulties.So far, a large part of the funds available to the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) rescue fundhas been used to buy out the holders of expiring government bonds. This means that the originalcreditors are off the hook and European taxpayers are exposed to risk instead. Our proposal ofextending the maturity of existing bonds by three years, say, when a government appliesfor ESM assistance, would keep the burden of responsibility on the original creditors. They couldbe made jointly liable if debt restructuring were to take place at a later date.Incidentally, this would reinforce the disciplining function of the capital markets in response tounsound public finances and would therefore have a preventive effect. The greater the risk of aninsolvency, the higher the premium has to be that potential creditors demand as compensationfor providing further funding.But it would be irresponsible to rely solely on the markets to impose fiscal discipline. This issomething the founders of monetary union also realised, which is why the Stability and GrowthPact also contains rules on debt. But what use are rules when they are interpreted so freely thatalmost any excuse is accepted for exceeding the deficit limits?In response to the European Commission’s recent appeal to the member states for a moreexpansionary fiscal policy, the Eurogroup President Jeroen Dijsselbloem recently stressed that,in the event of a conflict of interest between fiscal expansion and excessive deficits, theCommission has to adhere to the pact.In a sense, the European Commission’s take on the rules brings to mind that famous line fromGoethe’s Faust: “Two souls, alas! are dwelling in my breast". One soul, as it were, is there toguard the treaties, while the other sees itself as a political institution which repeatedly turns notjust one blind eye, but sometimes two.This conflict of aims can only really be resolved if responsibility for monitoring compliance withthe fiscal rules is transferred to an independent agency – a proposal that has the backing of boththe Bundesbank and Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble.Ladies and gentlemenAs I said earlier, the only way the no bail-out principle can work at all is if the financial systemreally is able to cope with debt restructuring. This means ensuring that banks, in particular, haveenough equity capital to be able to sustain losses from a potential debt restructuring withoutjeopardising their own solvency.In international bodies, therefore, we are arguing for risk-appropriate capital backing ofgovernment bonds and a cap on large exposures for lending to public debtors.Incidentally, sovereign nations are not the only public debtors. Federal states and local authoritiesalso borrow money, and in the case of local authorities it is often municipal banks that provide themoney, thereby building up cluster risks.The premise that actions and accountability must go hand in hand applies equally at localgovernment level. In Germany, too, the federal states are not technically liable for debts incurredby their local authorities; however, they do exert substantial influence through federal supervisionand through the municipal revenue-sharing scheme. However, these state-level instruments arenot always used in a targeted, stability-oriented way. Nor is there an Insolvency Code for localauthorities. 4 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
Lenders evidently assume that the respective federal state will cover the debts of an insolventmunicipality. This explains why local authorities can apparently finance themselves even in aprecarious financial situation in the form of excess balance sheet debt, without incurring largerisk premiums.Overall, there are clearly insufficient incentives for municipalities to avoid excessive debt. This isshown not least by the fact that cash advances are often at high levels and sometimes stillincreasing. While hardly any cash advances were recorded in the early 1990s, their level hassince risen sharply and currently stands at over €50 billion, although I should add that Bavarianmunicipalities make scarcely any contribution to this.The steep rise in cash advances has meant that some federal states have had to set up localgovernment debt relief and consolidation programmes.In my opinion, in order to effectively avert the danger of derailing local authority finances, it wouldbe worth thinking about setting municipal cash advances, as a matter of policy, against thescope of the respective federal state as part of the debt brake, and stipulating that, from now on,cash advances can only be taken from a federal state. We made a recommendation to thateffect in our October Monthly Report.Ladies and gentlemenFiscal solidarity is a key prerequisite for a stable currency and a stable monetary union. And thisprerequisite is a responsibility that lies with the member states and their regions.Competitiveness and economic prosperity of the member states are also vital for stability, andagain, it is primarily at the national level that the course is set for this. I emphasise this because itpresents each member state with its own special challenges. And this applies not only to thecountries in crisis, but also to supposed paragons of virtue such as Germany.At all events, the long-term outlook for growth in Germany is not rosy enough to give us cause forcomplacency. Germany is facing major challenges. Most notable among these is demographicchange, but globalisation, digitalisation, the shift to renewable sources of energy, and theintegration of refugees into the labour market should also be mentioned.This makes it all the more important to set the right economic and socio-political course in orderto boost economic momentum and ensure the sustainability of public finances. And let me addthat not all the decisions made in the past few years fulfilled this requirement.4  ConclusionLadies and gentlemenAs the Swiss musicologist Peter Benary once said – and this surely applies to speeches as well– “Every ending is comforting; only infinity is comfortless.” I would like, therefore, to conclude myremarks.In the article for the Frankfurter Allgemeine that I mentioned earlier, Horst Seehofer wrote: “Whenwords of warning come from Bavaria, they are spoken out of loyalty and concern for Europe andnot out of hostility.” I would like to adopt this maxim – replacing “Bavaria” with “the Bundesbank",of course.The Bundesbank is an integral part of the Eurosystem. We are committed to the European ideaand see the advantages of a single currency. However, if we want to preserve the monetaryunion as a union of stability, we must not plot our course in the wrong direction.In this context, any critical comments about the communitisation of liability risks without a1 5 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
corresponding transfer of rights of sovereignty to the European level are not directed againstEurope. Rather, they express the concern that joint liability without joint control could cause long-term harm to the European idea.With this in mind, I thank you warmly once again for awarding me the Bavarian Europe Medal.I read, by the way, that during its more than 200-year history, the Prinz-Carl Palace has beenredesigned, rededicated and rebuilt a number of times, probably putting the building under somestrain.Like the palace, the monetary union is no longer in its original state. It is currently going through atransition period, except that in this case, the architects do not know exactly what it will look likein the future.For me, it is not so important whether there will be annexes, structural alterations or even partialdemolitions; nor are the aesthetics of primary importance. Rather, it is crucial that the outcome isinternally coherent, and that means, above all, that actions and accountability are closelyinterlinked.Thank you very much.Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Local government finances: Development and selected aspects, OctoberMonthly Report, pp 13-36.1 6 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
Vítor Constâncio: Stijn van Nieuwerburgh's contribution tomacroeconomics and financeSpeech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the ceremonymarking the award of the Germán Bernácer Prize for Promoting Economic Research in Europeto Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, Madrid, 16 December 2016.*   *   *I am delighted to be here today to celebrate with you the winner of the 2016 Bernácer Prize: Stijnvan Nieuwerburgh, Professor of Finance at the New York University, Stern School of Business.Stijn is an outstanding scholar, researching at the interface between macroeconomics andfinance, with a focus on the interdependencies between the real economy, asset pricing and thereal estate market. His widely cited studies have been published in the leading internationalacademic journals. Stijn’s intellectual endeavours have significantly broadened our understandingof various aspects of housing markets and financial stability, to name two examples. Hisresearch is of significant relevance to central bank policy. As I will show in a minute, some ofStijn’s innovative research has become a fundamental part of the newly established field ofmacroprudential policy.Macroprudential policy aims to safeguard the stability of the financial system as a whole byincreasing its resilience and resisting the build-up of vulnerabilities that lead to systemic riskmaterialisation. Since the mid-1970s all episodes of banking crises in advanced economies, i.e.,periods of systemic risk materialisation, were associated with housing busts that, of course, hadcostly implications for the macroeconomy.These housing busts were preceded by protractedperiods of systemic risk build-up inherent in ebullient house price cycles or even more broadlydefined financial cycles underpinning the importance of monitoring joint cycles comprising creditand house prices.Stijn van Nieuwerburgh’s research has helped to bring such issues to the fore.To put his contributions into context, note that these issues played no special role inmacroeconomic models until the turn of the century. The Handbook of Macroeconomics,published in 1999, contained no references to housing. It was not entirely absent frommacroeconomic research but rather had a marginal role within the models. It wasn’t until thehousing boom in the first half of 2000 that housing became a focus of macroeconomic studies.Academics began to study the interaction of house prices and collateralised householdborrowing with business cycles or monetary policy. They chose to explore how housing – in itstwin role as a consumption good and as a collateralisable asset – influences asset pricing,portfolio and consumption-saving choices.But let me now give you some concrete examples of Stijn van Nieuwerburgh’s timely andsignificant research. Of the wide range of topics covered in his studies, I shall concentrate onhousing markets and other sources of systemic risk, which are key inputs into macroprudentialpolicy.Let me begin by referring to one of Stijn’s earliest research papers from 2005 on housing as acollateral good, published in the Journal of Finance. In this study, Stijn, together with HannoLustig, describes how housing can affect asset returns and may thus spread to othermarkets. The authors explore the role of housing as a collateral asset in a model of limitedcommitment. When housing collateral is scarce, i.e., the ratio of housing wealth to human capitalwealth is low, their model predicts that households are less keen to take on financial risks, andtherefore demand a higher return for bearing these risks. Using US data, they show that adecrease in housing collateral is followed by higher future stock returns. Stijn and co-author thushighlight an important channel through which housing affects stock returns, namely through its1234 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
role as a collateral asset. This result stresses the relevance of housing market surveillancebecause developments in these markets can have a broader impact on asset markets.With respect to the role of housing as a business cycle driver, a very significant piece of work isStijn’s most recent research, forthcoming in the Journal of Political Economy and jointly writtenwith Jack Favilukis and Sydney Ludvigson. Stijn and co-authors study the impact of changes inhousing collateral constraints as well as foreign capital inflows in a general equilibrium model.Housing provides utility to households but can be used as collateral in debt obligations. Theauthors find that financial market liberalisation, seen as an economy-wide relaxation of collateralconstraints, such as lower down payments, can create a boom in house prices relative tohousing fundamentals. This result has highly relevant policy implications. In fact, macroprudentialpolicy aims to address excessive leverage through capital-based measures affecting banks’balance sheets, but also through borrower-based measures, such as loan-to-value ratios, assuggested by Stijn and co-authors in this paper.They also highlight capital inflows that – alongside lower collateral requirements – have been oneof the distinguishing features of the recent housing boom. With respect to the relative importanceof inflows in explaining house price booms across countries, Stijn, together with Jack Favilukis,David Kohn and Sydney Ludvigson in a paper in 2013, empirically document that these played arather small role in the US. However, they stress that more research is needed on this issueand suggest that capital inflows may have played a more relevant role in the euro area. In fact,capital flowing from productive economies to relatively unproductive economies in combinationwith a relaxation of lending standards might have contributed to the house price booms in Irelandand Spain. From a policy perspective, this emphasises the need to take into account countryspecificities when addressing imbalances in housing markets. Credit standards, but also capitalinflows, differ significantly across countries, as does, therefore, the optimal policy.Let me now turn to systemic risk more generally. Stijn, together with Bryan Kelly and HannoLustig, point to the issue that government guarantees may distort systemic risk indicators. In theAmerican Economic Review this year, they show that pricing in US option markets implied thatthe price of insuring against a US financial sector stock market crash was low, relative to pricesof insurance against individual banks’ stock price falls during the 2007–2009 financial crisis in theUS. Thus, a large amount of tail risk was actually missing from the cost of financial sector crashinsurance during the crisis. In the presence of an implicit or explicit government guarantee,market crash insurance prices may even fall when the guarantee is more likely to be activated.Thus, a fall in crash insurance prices could be mistakenly interpreted as a reduced risk, exactlywhen systemic risk is rising. As anticipation of future government intervention is embedded inmarket prices, these do not reflect the true underlying tail risk thus leading to a mismeasurementof systemic risk, particularly for the methods that use market prices to build indicators ofsystemic risk.Stijn van Nieuwerburgh has made an important contribution to the widely debated topic of safeassets, following the massive fall in its supply in the aftermath of the crisis. The subsequentemergence of the euro area sovereign debt crisis led to government bonds in certain jurisdictionsno longer being considered a safe asset. Stijn, along with Markus Brunnermeier and otherspropose a framework for a safe asset for the euro area. The proposal is to use a syntheticsecurity build with sovereign debt of all countries and tranched, which, if created and accepted bythe market, would provide a safer asset that banks could use to substitute sovereign debt of aparticular country.All the references I made illustrate how good research is the foundation of good policy. That iswhy the ECB dedicates significant resources to research, but also to its exchanges withacademia. Last April, we held our first annual Macroprudential Policy and Research Conferencewhich was, on this occasion, jointly organised with the IMF. In September, we also had our firstannual Research Conference, which brings together senior researchers from a wide range of5678 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
areas. Of course, there have been many other conferences and workshops held at the ECBsince it was founded 18 years ago, but not on this scale. In addition to such events, which fosterexchanges between distinguished scholars and the ECB, each year we give leading academicsan opportunity to gain insights into the policymaking environment of the ECB through our WimDuisenberg Research Fellowship Programme. For younger researchers we have established aSummer Research Graduate Programme enabling graduate scholars close to finishing theirPhD to temporarily join our research department. Further, our Lamfalussy Fellowshipencourages younger researchers to conduct high-quality research into the structure, integrationand performance of the European financial system. But I hasten to add that the ECB, like thecentral banking community in general, relies for most of its research progress on brilliantscholars such as Stijn van Nieuwerburgh.I hope it has become evident from my remarks how timely and seminal Stijn’s intellectualpursuits have been. They mark significant contributions to the new field of macroprudential policyby emphasising the importance of housing markets and shedding light on its driving factors.From a policy perspective, Stijn’s research stresses the importance of borrower-basedmacroprudential measures and the role of capital inflows. This calls for proper co-ordinationacross European countries, which is embedded in European legislation. His academic work isnotably relevant for the review of the EU macroprudential policy framework that is underway,carried out by the European Commission – e.g. in what concerns the extension of the policytoolkit. On that note, I warmly congratulate you, Stijn, on winning the 2016 Germán BernácerPrize for Promoting Economic Research in Europe. I am confident that you will make furtherimportant contributions in the years to come.Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoff, (2009), “This Time is Different, Eight Centuries of Financial Folly”, Princeton,New Jersey: Princeton University Press.Work at the ECB finds evidence that financial cycles, defined as the joint movement of house prices and credit,are the single best predictors of banking crises (see Schüler, Y., P. Hiebert and T. Peltonen, (2016), “Coherentfinancial cycles: Why extending credit can be an asset”, SSRN Working Paper. This analysis builds on workcarried out at the BIS; see Drehmann, M., C. Borio, and K. Tsatsaronis, (2012), “Characterising the financialcycle: Don’t lose sight of the medium term!”, BIS Working Paper No 380.Piazzesi, M. and M. Schneider, (2016), “Housing and Macroeconomics”. Mimeo.Lustig, H. and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, (2005), “Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance, and Risk Premia: AnEmpirical Perspective”, Journal of Finance, 60, 1167–1219.Favilukis, J., S. C. Ludvigson and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, (forthcoming), “The Macroeconomic Effects of HousingWealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing in General Equilibrium”, Journal of Political Economy.Favilukis, J., D. Kohn, S. C. Ludvigson and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, (2013), “International Capital Flows and HousePrices: Theory and Evidence, in Housing and the Financial Crisis”, edited by E.L. Glaeser and T. Sinai, 235–299,Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Kelly, B., H. Lustig and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, (2016), “Too-Systemic-to-Fail: What Option Markets Imply aboutSector-Wide Government Guarantees”, American Economic Review, 106, 1278–1319.See Brunnermeier, M., L. Garicano, P. Lane, M. Pagano, R. Reis, T. Santos, S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and D.Vayanos, (2011), “ESBies: A realistic reform of Europe’s financial architecture”, VoxEU; Brunnermeier, M., L.Garicano, P. Lane, M. Pagano, R. Reis, T. Santos, D. Thesmar, S. Van Nieuwerburgh and D. Vayanos, (2016),“The sovereign-bank diabolic loop and ESBies”, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 106,508–512; Brunnermeier, M., S. Langfield, M. Pagano, R. Reis, S. Van Nieuwerburgh and D. Vayanos,(forthcoming), “ESBies: Safety in the tranches”, Economic Policy.12345678 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Financial technology (FinTech) -transforming financial services in SingaporeSpeech by Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, atthe Launch of LATTICE80, Singapore, 10 November 2016.*   *   *Introduction1   Good morning. Thank you for inviting me to join all of you. Let me begin by congratulatingMarvelstone on the launch of LATTICE80.2   It is the first innovation space in Singapore dedicated to and designed specifically to supportFinTech. LATTICE80 is also the first not-for-profit private sector initiative in this business ofnurturing start-ups.The FinTech Phenomenon3   FinTech – or financial technology – is transforming financial services, both from withinestablished financial institutions and from outside the regulated sector through new, FinTechplayers.4   When FinTechs first came to global prominence, it was tempting to cast this as a battlebetween new, innovative and responsive players and lumbering, flat-footed banks and otherfinancial institutions.5   The real picture is more nuanced, mainly because the incumbents have not been sitting still:Many of them are investing heavily in technology to streamline and optimise entire swathesof operations.For example, several initiatives are underway among banks to tap on distributed ledgertechnology to achieve swift, seamless and secure trade settlement.Several financial institutions have set up in-house FinTech units to replicate the start-upculture.They are also collaborating with and, in some instances, buying over promising FinTechcompanies.6   And not many technology companies aspire to become financial institutions. Complying withregulations, submitting to supervision, and churning out disclosure documents for the markets isnot always an appealing prospect.7   In short, the Goliaths of the financial world have become more nimble-footed, and are bothcompeting with and partnering the Davids.  8   That said, we are still at an early stage of FinTech, globally. It has spurred greater competitionin every segment of the value chain of finance. It is too early to say who the winners will be.9   The traditional financial institutions have the advantage of scale and a reputation amongstcustomers. But those that fail to keep up with technology will see part or all of their businessmodels disrupted. Consumers are cautious about shifting their wallets to new players, but theyare also looking out for services that offer the best value. 10   But many FinTech start-ups will also fail. It is in the nature of innovation that few new ideasand technologies will develop scale, sustain funding and end up as winners in the market. The 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
collapse of many peer-to-peer lending platforms in the US, UK, and China is a reminder that it willnot be plain sailing for FinTech companies.A growing FinTech ecosystem in Singapore11   Singapore’s strategy is not to choose between financial institutions and new FinTech playersbut to provide the conditions for both to innovate, compete, and collaborate. Our aim is to createa FinTech ecosystem where innovation thrives.  This is an ecosystem comprising the innovationcentres of our financial institutions, the mushrooming FinTech start-up scene, our institutes ofresearch and higher learning, the VC/PE community of investors, and connectivity to regionalmarkets.12   We are making good progress:Singapore is home to more than 300 FinTech start-ups, focused on each segment of thevalue chain – from providing consumers more seamless payments services to offeringinstitutions enhanced,   automated fraud monitoring.More than 20 global banks and insurance companies have set up innovation labs andresearch centres in Singapore. Several will be opening their labs next week during theFinTech Festival, to showcase their experiments.MAS is working with the industry to facilitate greater collaboration. For example, MAS isencouraging the development of open APIs among Financial institutions to enable efficientdata sharing.Our A-STAR’s research institutes are partnering financial institutions on data analytics andmobile technology projects. Our universities and polytechnics have also updated theircurriculum and internship programmes to help their students get the hang of FinTech.Venture capital interest is growing, with some of the most active VC investors in AsianFinTech being based here.We have a growing network of co-operation agreements connecting Singapore to otherFinTech centres in Australia, India, Korea and the UK.  Indeed, FinTech offers an effectiveway for players in Singapore – both financial institutions and start-ups – to meet theburgeoning demand for financial services in the wider Asia-Pacific region.Nurturing promising FinTech start-ups13   LATTICE80 is an important addition to this ecosystem for FinTech.14   It offers a conducive physical space dedicated to the infrastructural needs of FinTech start-ups, here in the heart of Singapore’s financial district.  It reduces costs for start-ups, gives themconvenient access to data centre and other services, and even has a nursing room. 15   Let me cite two FinTechs starting up residence here in LATTICE80:Percipient, a local start-up, has successfully developed a customised digital solution for theState Bank of India. Percipient’s big data technology allows for efficient management of thebank’s database of over 500 million accounts, and translating into large potential costsavings.Sparks Systems builds new generation trading platforms for hedge funds, banks, financialinstitutions and other high volume institutional participants in the foreign exchange market.  Itaims is to develop an efficient market place for emerging market FX.16   This innovation village also promotes collaboration and co-creation. Even in an age ofTweets and Snapchats, face-to-face interaction remains a source of new ideas, and a way tosuss out potential partners. 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
R3 LRC, a specialist in distributed ledger research supported by a consortium of more than70 financial institutions, will set up its first physical presence here. R3 Asia Lab will promotethe cross-pollination of ideas between Singapore FinTechs and leading technologists aroundthe world.The Fintech Association Singapore, another resident here, is a cross-industry initiative tofacilitate collaboration among all stakeholders in the FinTech ecosystem.17   There is another feature to this collaboration here, which is to bring start-ups together withventure capital and other investors.tryb is an investor in promising technology start-ups that are building the financialinfrastructure platforms of the future for ASEAN. tryb is currently in the process of raisingUS$100 million in long-term funding.The Marvelstone Group too, has been investing in FinTech start-ups and linking them up withtheir network of business and specialist expertise.Further MAS initiatives to grow VC activity18   MAS is working with the VC industry to grow the funding landscape for start-ups in Singaporeand the region. The role VCs play in stimulating economic dynamism has been a recurringtheme in discussions of the Committee on the Future Economy (CFE). 19   There are two key prongs in MAS’ approach.20   First, MAS is reviewing its regulatory regime for VC managers. Specifically, MAS is looking to significantly simplify and shorten the authorisation process fornew VC managers.Further, to the extent that there are contractual safeguards to provide sufficient protection toa VC’s sophisticated investor base, MAS is also looking to exempt VC managers frombusiness conduct requirements that are currently applied to asset managers in general.MAS will be doing a public consultation on its proposals in January next year, and targets tointroduce changes by July 2017.21   Second, MAS is studying whether existing incentives for funds and fund managers, whichhave been successful in attracting traditional asset managers to set up in Singapore and to growover time, are suitable to anchor VC funds and VC fund managers here too.We recognise that VC funds and fund managers are typically smaller in size and headcountthan traditional asset managers. But they contribute in a different way, by supportingentrepreneurship and innovation in Singapore and the region. We will take this into account in assessing the requirements for VC funds and fundmanagers to qualify for our incentives.Conclusion22   Innovation will drive Singapore’s economic future. It will disrupt existing business models, butit is how consumers get better value, how new firms can scale up and grow internationally, andhow we create quality jobs for our people. 23   This innovation village is part of this ongoing journey. It will, I am sure, nurture a newgeneration of technology entrepreneurs in the FinTech space. I congratulate Marvelstone onceagain for the successful launch of LATTICE80. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Rome Investment Forum 2016                   Fixing and completing the European Economic and Monetary Union: the costs of the unfinished Banking Union      Remarks by Valeria Sannucci Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy                    Rome, 16 December 2016  
Over the last few years, Europe has undertaken numerous reforms in different areas, from fiscal to banking and financial stability, in what has been an ambitious response to the urgent need to resolve the problems that followed the outbreak of the global financial and sovereign debt crises. Several initiatives have been taken to strengthen European banks: from the definition and application of common rules, to the consolidation of truly European authorities. The Banking Union is a vital element of this strengthening process.  The Single Supervisory Mechanism, which was completed in an extraordinarily short period of time, entails very extensive and deep integration of national authorities. While the Monetary Union mostly consisted in the sharing of decision making, the SSM envisages the integration of daily operational processes to be carried out at national and centralized level. The establishment of the SSM, followed by that of the Single Resolution Mechanism, could have been a prelude to a paradigm shift in the level of European integration. However, this has not yet materialized. On the contrary, the Banking Union is still under construction and significant obstacles remain on the path to its completion. Our presence here today therefore provides a timely opportunity to discuss what remains to be done, how to go about it, and ultimately to stress once again how important it is to complete this project, as has been repeatedly highlighted by researchers1 and numerous representatives of the Eurosystem, first and foremost the ECB President. It is important not only for the sake of the Banking Union project in itself, but also for the achievement of the broader European project. It was no accident that the original blueprint for Banking Union rested on three pillars (banking supervision, crisis management, and deposit insurance): each one is an integral part of the financial architecture needed to safeguard the soundness and the stability of any banking system, and to break the vicious circle between banks and sovereigns. This is particularly important in Europe where, in spite of the multiplicity of sovereign states involved, we aim to achieve a single European banking market with European players.  The first pillar of Banking Union, the Single Supervisory Mechanism, avoids misaligned incentives by ensuring that appropriate regulatory and supervisory standards are enforced and, at the same time, levels the playing field for cross-border banking. The second pillar, an 1 Among others, Balassone F., S. Cecchetti, M. Cecioni, M. Cioffi, W. Cornacchia, F. Corneli and G. Semeraro, 2016, ‘Economic governance in the euro area: balancing risk reduction and risk sharing’, Occasional Papers, Banca d’Italia, 344; Goyal R., P. Koeva Brooks, M. Pradhan, T. Tressel, G. Dell'Ariccia, R. Leckow, and C. Pazarbasioglu, 2013, ‘A Banking Union for the Euro Area’, IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/13/01, February; Schoenmaker D. and A. Siegmann, ‘Winners of a European banking union’, 2013, VoxEU, 27 February; Gros D. and D. Schoenmaker, ‘The case for euro deposit insurance’, 2012, VoxEU, 24 September.  2                                                          
incentive-compatible resolution framework, aims at reducing moral hazard; it can also preserve financial stability, so long as adequate provision is made for the eventual use of a public backstop for large and complex financial institutions.2 The third pillar, a common deposit insurance scheme, would lower the probability of systemic stresses by closing off the channels of contagion, i.e. it would provide an effective buffer against a large number of country-specific shocks, thereby lowering the likelihood of bank runs and overall systemic risk.  If the Banking Union were to remain as it is today, the result would neither be compliant with best practices, nor would it have achieved its intended effects. In fact, as Dirk Schoenmaker put it, now that the immediate crisis is past, 'governments have started to shop selectively on the Banking Union list’.3 In this ‘à la carte’ Banking Union, the absence of common deposit insurance increases the risk of contagion, while a blunt implementation of the resolution framework with no public backstop in place would heighten financial stability risks.  As recently noted by the Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy, the lack of a common fiscal backstop ‘reflects the unwillingness of many European countries to consider the possibility that the taxpayers of country A may pay, even temporarily, for the crisis of a bank in country B. According to this view, banks, although now supervised and subject to resolution by European institutions, must ultimately remain a national matter.’ 4 The outcome is that the bank-sovereign nexus, which the Banking Union was designed to counter, persists, within a complex and incomplete framework.  European leaders must therefore not lose sight of the end goal and instead complete the project in a reasonable timeframe. The need to press ahead is made even more urgent by the fact that while the European banking and financial system has demonstrated its resilience, its stability is still at risk. Indeed, risks to Europe’s macro-financial stability have recently intensified. While it is true that the expansionary monetary policy stance in the euro area and in Europe at large is supporting the liquidity of financial markets, curbing tensions on government securities, and 2 Dewatripont M., 2014, ‘European banking: Bailout, bail-in and state aid control’, International Journal of Industrial Organization, vol. 34, issue C, pages 37-43. 3 Schoenmaker D., 2015, ‘Firmer foundations for a stronger European banking union’, Bruegel Working Paper, 2015/13, November. 4 Rossi S., 2016, ‘The Banking Union in the European integration process’, speech at the Conference on European Banking Union and bank/firm relationship, April. 3                                                          
easing bank funding conditions, uncertainties have nevertheless increased following the UK referendum and, though perhaps less so, the Italian referendum. Nor, given recent political events, expected policy changes in the United States, and fragilities in emerging economies, are they likely to be dispelled over the medium term. European banks’ profitability and their business model are under extraordinary pressure, due to sluggish growth, low interest rates and, to a differing extent across countries and banks, excess capacity, large stocks of non-performing loans and difficult-to-value (level 3) assets. Meanwhile, low nominal interest rates are squeezing the profit margins of European insurance companies and pension funds. At a recent hearing of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, the ECB President warned that a lengthy period of low interest rates has created ‘fertile terrain’ for financial-market risks and called on governments to take action against the risks associated with rising debt levels or excessive valuations, which have resulted in significant vulnerabilities in some European real estate markets. While they are more solid today than they were in the pre-crisis period, in the absence of an adequate, proportionate and properly functioning safety net, Europe’s banks are also more exposed than before to substantial risks to their individual stability.   A common EU deposit guarantee scheme is a crucial component of the safety net and should be set up as swiftly as possible. In November 2015, the Commission presented a proposal for a European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS). The idea is to build on the existing national schemes and then gradually move towards a European construction that would be fully in place by 2024. While the introduction of the third pillar is generally accepted in principle, controversy has arisen recently regarding its timing and negotiations are at a standstill due to the opposition of some countries.  Introducing common deposit insurance is not enough, though. In order to bolster public confidence and to ensure that the Banking Union has the capacity to safeguard financial stability in adverse circumstances, we also need a common public backstop covering both resolution and deposit insurance.  Furthermore, it is important to acknowledge that the ability of the new EU resolution framework to counter systemic crises has been somewhat overstated, especially when combined with the European Commission’s approach to competition and State aid. A recent paper by Emilios Avgouleas and Charles Goodhart warns against large-scale, bail-in centred, recapitalizations and illustrates the ‘danger of over-reliance on bail-ins’ by providing a very 4  
insightful description of the risks involved in triggering the bail-in process when risk is not idiosyncratic.5  While the bail-in tool is actually well-designed for addressing the crisis of individual banks, in the event of a systemic crisis its use risks exacerbating the threats to financial stability rather than stabilizing the system. In those circumstances, the possibility of temporary public support, without necessarily involving banks’ creditors, should not only be considered but favoured, to dispel the fear of contagion and prevent the seeds of another crisis from being sown.  Of course, envisaging public support in exceptional circumstances should not undermine efforts to reduce forms of moral hazard that can lead to excessive risk-taking by banks. The risk of imprudent behaviour still has to be contained but it can be tackled in other ways that are more compatible with safeguarding financial stability, along the lines of what happened in the aftermath of the crisis, i.e. by strengthening the prudential framework, adapting the structure of remuneration schemes to reduce incentives for excessive risk-taking, and by making management fully liable in the event of the failure of an institution. At the same time, the burden for taxpayers could be lightened by requiring that public funds be recouped from the banking system at a later stage, when financial stability is no longer at risk  – as envisaged by the ‘Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions’, drawn up by the Financial Stability Board.6   To conclude, while much has been done to reduce risks, we lag behind on risk-sharing measures, which are their natural complement. Even for those already in place, such as the Single Resolution Fund, the path to complete risk mutualization is very long. What are the costs of this unfinished construction? An incomplete Banking Union is a source of risk in itself. If neglected for too long, it will discourage banks’ reorganizations and consolidation processes as the cost of funding and capital remain subject to excessive uncertainty, with likely undesirable effects on banks’ ability to support both investment and consumer spending.  In this transitional phase, when banks are still building up adequate loss-absorbing buffers and Governments are without their traditional tools of intervention, the risks are even greater.  5 Avgouleas E., C.Goodhart, 2016, ‘An anatomy of bank bail-ins – Why the Eurozone needs a fiscal backstop for the banking sector’, European Economy, 2016.2., 5 December. 6 Financial Stability Board, 2011, ‘Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions’, principle 6.5. 5                                                          
We should also remember that completing the Banking Union is a priority per se, and should not be conditional on other interventions. I refer, in particular, to the much debated possible change of prudential treatment for sovereign exposures, which is among the measures called for in order to move forward with the creation of the EDIS. A draft report presented to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliaments (ECON)7 makes the entry into force of the insurance phase of EDIS conditional on reducing risks in the banking sector. In this regard, while recognising that changing the prudential treatment for sovereign exposures could help to break the bank-sovereign nexus, I believe that it should not be considered as a pre-condition for, or an alternative to, the completion of Banking Union.  A clear timeline for deposit insurance, as we had for the Single Supervisory Mechanism and the Single Resolution Mechanism, would help reassure markets as to the soundness of the overall banking framework and the willingness of Member States to pursue the final design of the Union.  In the meantime, the Single Supervisory Mechanism should continue to focus on further strengthening the resilience of the banking sector. However, we should avoid over-calibration and possible inconsistencies between different measures that might impair the ability of European banks to support the real economy.  A path must be identified to guide banks towards adequate levels of capital and loss-absorbing capacity to increase their stability and readiness to withstand adverse market conditions without compromising their capacity to finance the economy and sustain the economic recovery. This is especially true today when banks’ profitability remains low and the recovery in the EU is still struggling to gain momentum. After substantially strengthening capital levels in recent years, EU banks will now be required to increase their loss-absorbing capacity to meet the minimum requirements for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL). In this regard policymakers face a trade-off: on the one hand, large stocks of liabilities that can feasibly and credibly absorb losses in resolutions contribute to the resolvability of banks and to financial stability, while simultaneously protecting taxpayers; on the other hand, the build-up of adequate buffers of loss-absorbing 7 See European Parliament, Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, Working Document on EDIS and Draft Report on the Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU) 806/2014 in order to establish a European Deposit Insurance Scheme (COM(2015)0586 – C8-0371/2015 – 2015/0270(COD)), Rapporteur Esther De Lange. 6                                                          
capacity may be very costly for banks, impair their lending capacity to the real economy, and require time. The review of the legislative framework, starting with the European Commission’s recent proposals, should strike the right balance. In any event, it is indispensable to avoid a needlessly high MREL requirement disproportionate to the effective needs of a resolution.8 **** Let me conclude with two quotations. In a recent speech at the EMU Forum, Peter Praet said ‘Completing the union is sometimes framed in terms of a trade-off between risk sharing and risk reduction […] I believe both routes need to be followed and to move forward in parallel […]. A European Deposit Insurance Scheme would enhance overall depositor confidence … This is the very foundation of insurance: by pooling resources and risks across a larger and more diverse group, the overall shock-absorbing capacity of the system increases. In this sense, risk sharing turns into risk reduction’.9 In a working paper published a few months ago on the economic governance of the euro area, a group of researchers at the Bank of Italy reviewed the measures taken concerning sovereigns and banks since 2010 and concluded that Europe is now at a crossroads: ‘either it finds the strength to return to its roots and embraces a second (and deeper) round of reforms based on enhanced risk sharing, or it risks running into pro-cyclical excesses that may finally tear it apart’.10  This forum may therefore provide a valuable contribution to enhancing the awareness of policymakers about the dramatic, yet possible outcomes of a piecemeal, short-sighted approach to the completion of Banking Union. 8 Bank of Italy, Financial Stability Report No. 2 / 2016, November 2016, p. 36-37. 9 ‘The importance of a genuine banking union for monetary policy’, Vienna, 24 November 2016 10 Balassone et al. 7                                                          
  News conference   Page 1/5    Berne, 15 December 2016 Thomas Jordan Introductory remarks by Thomas Jordan  Ladies and gentlemen It is a pleasure for me to welcome you to the Swiss National Bank’s news conference. I will begin by explaining our monetary policy decision and our assessment of the economic situation. I will then hand over to Fritz Zurbrügg, who will speak about current developments in the area of financial stability and announce the dates for the release of the new 20-franc banknote. After that, Andréa Maechler will review the situation on the financial markets and discuss the impact of negative interest on the money and capital markets. Finally, we will – as ever – be pleased to take your questions. Monetary policy decision Let me begin with our monetary policy decision and the inflation forecast. Our monetary policy remains expansionary and continues to be based on two elements: the negative interest rate and our willingness to intervene in the foreign exchange market. We are leaving interest on sight deposits at the SNB at –0.75% and the target range for the three-month Libor will remain unchanged at between –1.25% and –0.25%. At the same time, we will remain active in the foreign exchange market as necessary, while taking the overall currency situation into consideration. The SNB’s expansionary monetary policy is aimed at stabilising price developments and supporting economic activity. The negative interest rate and our willingness to intervene in the foreign exchange market are intended to make Swiss franc investments less attractive, thereby easing pressure on the currency. The Swiss franc is still significantly overvalued. Compared to September, the new conditional inflation forecast has been revised slightly downwards in the short term. This mainly reflects the fact that inflation in October and 
 Berne, 15 December 2016 Thomas Jordan News conference   Page 2/5   November was somewhat lower than expected. However, our expectations for the medium-term development of inflation remain essentially unchanged. We continue to anticipate an inflation rate of –0.4% for the current year. For 2017, the inflation forecast is down to 0.1%, from 0.2% in the previous quarter. For 2018, we now expect inflation of 0.5%, compared to 0.6% in the third quarter. The conditional inflation forecast is based on the assumption that the three-month Libor remains at –0.75% over the entire forecast horizon. Global economic outlook I would now like to turn to economic developments abroad, as these have a considerable bearing on the inflation and economic outlook in Switzerland. Since the last monetary policy assessment in September, the global economy has developed in line with our expectations. It has continued to recover and capacity utilisation in many countries is improving gradually. This is especially evident in the labour market, where job numbers are on the rise and unemployment is declining. However, global economic growth is moderate and not yet broad-based. International trade and demand for investment in particular continue to be subdued. Inflationary pressure abroad also remains low. Although higher energy prices are currently resulting in a marked increase in inflation, core inflation remains at a low level in a number of countries and central banks are thus maintaining their expansionary monetary policy course. Among advanced economies, the economic cycle has progressed furthest in the US. Third-quarter GDP growth in the US was again significantly above potential. Private consumption was once more the driving force. The situation on the labour market continued to improve as well; the US economy has now almost reached full employment. This is also reflected in more robust real wage growth. Inflation is now close to the target set by the US Federal Reserve. Against this backdrop, the Federal Reserve decided yesterday to raise its key interest rate by 25 basis points. This move is confirmation that – in the Federal Reserve’s view – the world’s largest economy is gradually emerging from a protracted period of crisis. The other major economic areas also recorded favourable economic activity in the third quarter. The euro area and Japan continued to register moderate growth, while in China, growth remained strong thanks to a variety of fiscal measures. In the UK, the economic impact of the Brexit decision has so far proved less pronounced than originally feared. However, the country’s economic performance is still expected to be impaired by this outcome in the coming quarters. Our assessment of international economic developments over the next few quarters has remained largely unchanged since September. The SNB expects the moderate pace of global growth to continue in 2017. It is thus likely that the economic situation will continue to improve, particularly in the euro area, and that inflation will also pick up somewhat.  
 Berne, 15 December 2016 Thomas Jordan News conference   Page 3/5   Our baseline scenario for the global economy is still subject to considerable risks, however. Structural problems in a number of advanced economies – such as a fragile financial system, high public debt and low growth potential – could negatively affect the outlook. Added to this are a multitude of political uncertainties. First, it is unclear what direction economic policy in the US will take following the presidential election. Second, several countries in the euro area have important elections coming up in 2017. And third, exit negotiations between the UK and the EU are likely to be complex and arduous. Swiss economic outlook I shall now turn to the economic outlook for Switzerland. According to an initial quarterly estimate, GDP in Switzerland grew at an annualised rate of 0.2% in the third quarter. This small increase must also be seen in the context of high growth in the second quarter. Year-on-year, GDP rose by 1.3% in the third quarter. Initial quarterly estimates of the national accounts are uncertain by definition. The SNB therefore takes a wide range of additional information into account when assessing the economic situation. Available indicators suggest that there has been a gradual recovery since mid-2015, which continued in the second half of 2016. A key factor here is improved business and household sentiment in the euro area and other advanced economies, which in turn creates a more favourable environment for the Swiss export industry. Overall, the signals from the economic indicators are consistent with our previous GDP growth forecast of around 1.5% for 2016 as a whole. Developments on the labour market support this view. Employment statistics show that the number of jobs in Switzerland grew in the third quarter, too. Up until November, the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate for this year was stable at 3.3%. The outlook for the coming year is cautiously optimistic. Over the course of 2017, export demand looks set to gradually strengthen further. For the export industry, this will mean better capacity utilisation and less pressure on margins. We are also expecting a gradual recovery on the labour market. Various surveys confirm this assessment. Together with our continued expansionary monetary policy, labour market developments should boost domestic demand. Private consumption, too, is likely to once again make a greater contribution to economic growth. Overall, as for 2016, the SNB expects GDP growth for 2017 to be roughly 1.5%.  However, the Swiss economy will also face some major challenges in the coming year. Structural change continues to affect several important industries. Retailing is having to contend with changes both to distribution channels and the spending habits of households. The financial sector will have to push ahead with regulatory adjustments and manage the transition to new business models, while in manufacturing, digitalisation is going to be a particular focus of attention. Our country’s future welfare depends critically on how well we master these challenges. 
 Berne, 15 December 2016 Thomas Jordan News conference   Page 4/5   Exchange rates, interest rates and inflation expectations I will now review changes to monetary conditions since the middle of the year.  The last half year has been shaped by the surprising outcomes of a number of political events. The Brexit decision led to a significant devaluation of the pound sterling and generated upward pressure on safe-haven currencies. Thanks to our willingness to intervene in the foreign exchange market, we were able to cushion the effect of the additional pressure on the Swiss franc, which can often build up in such phases of increased market volatility. Equally, neither the US elections nor the Italian constitutional referendum caused any significant changes in the value of the franc overall. On a trade-weighted basis, the real external value of the franc hardly changed over the course of the year. An analysis of nominal exchange rates since our last assessment in June shows that the franc has appreciated slightly against the euro. Against the dollar, meanwhile, it has depreciated somewhat. One reason for the appreciation of the US dollar against the Swiss franc and most other currencies is the substantial increase in long-term interest rates in the US, particularly following the presidential election. Long-term yields on Swiss Confederation bonds have also risen, but yield increases have been less pronounced here than in the US. The interest rate differential with the US has thus widened. Short-term rates in Switzerland are virtually unchanged, with the yield curve steepening as a result. Inflation expectations in Switzerland remain stable. Most households, companies and financial analysts anticipate that inflation will be slightly positive in the short to medium term. This view is substantiated in the surveys conducted by the SNB’s delegates for regional economic relations. Despite weak inflation in recent years, long-term inflation expectations have changed very little and remain firmly anchored in the range which we equate with price stability. Monetary policy outlook  Ladies and gentlemen, let me summarise my key points. Even in times of turbulence such as those witnessed in the last six months, our monetary policy has proved its worth. The negative interest rate has partially restored the traditional interest rate differential with other currencies and has thus made Swiss franc investments less attractive. During periods of high volatility, our willingness to intervene in the foreign exchange market has a stabilising effect on the exchange rate. The two elements on which our monetary policy is based – the negative interest rate and our willingness to intervene – are both helping to reduce pressure on the Swiss franc. Thus, despite periods of heightened uncertainty over the last few months, the franc has remained quite stable overall. Furthermore, the negative interest rate has led to lower interest on the capital market, which is facilitating corporate financing. In other words, our expansionary monetary policy is effective. The negative interest rate and our willingness to intervene in the foreign exchange market continue to be both necessary and 
 Berne, 15 December 2016 Thomas Jordan News conference   Page 5/5   appropriate. This is because inflation is still very low, production capacity is not yet being fully utilised and the Swiss franc continues to be significantly overvalued. Our monetary policy stabilises price developments and supports economic activity in Switzerland.  Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. It is now my pleasure to give the floor to Fritz Zurbrügg, who will speak about current developments in the area of financial stability. 
                All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 1      Remarks on the launch of the Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures   Mark Carney Chair of the Financial Stability Board Governor of the Bank of England    Delivered at the Tate Modern 14 December 2016   
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 2  2   Welcome  It is my great pleasure to have been invited, in my capacity as Chair of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), to help launch the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures consultative report.  In late 2015, at the request of the G201, the FSB established this private-sector, industry-led Task Force, under the leadership of Michael Bloomberg.  Its mandate was to develop recommendations for voluntary, consistent, comparable, clear and reliable disclosures around climate-related financial risks for companies.  The purpose was to provide the information that investors, lenders, insurers and other stakeholders need to manage these risks, and seize the associated opportunities.  As those of you who’ve had an opportunity to read their report will have seen, the Task Force has achieved a great deal during the year.   So on behalf of shareholders, creditors and citizens, I thank all of the Task Force members for their tremendous efforts, and your companies for making you available for this important work. If you want a job done well, give it to busy people.     Public authorities – like the G20 and the FSB – could identify the problem, but we needed the private-sector to provide the solution.  This is a solution for the market, by the market.    The Task Force members are drawn from the private sector from across advanced and emerging G20 economies, including major companies, large investors, global banks and insurers, all the major accounting firms and credit rating agencies.2  As such, the Task Force represents a true cross-section of those who prepare, demand and use  climate-related financial disclosures.  Let me briefly recap the financial stability imperative to act on climate-related financial risks  From rising sea levels to more severe storms and more intense droughts, climate change is already presenting physical risks                                                        1 The G20 had asked, in its April 2015 Communique, that the FSB “convene public- and private-sector participants to review how the financial sector can take account of climate-related issues”. 2 A full list of Task Force members can be found at: https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/about/#  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 3  3   Since the 1980s the number of registered weather-related loss events has tripled.  Inflation-adjusted insurance losses from these events have increased fivefold since the 1980s to around $50bn over the past decade.3  Insurers are therefore amongst those with the greatest commercial incentives to understand and tackle climate change in the short term. Their response here in London is at the cutting edge of the understanding and management of such risks.  For example, Lloyd’s of London underwriters were the first to use storm records to mesh natural science with finance in order to analyse changing weather patterns. Today Lloyd’s underwriters are required to consider climate change explicitly in their business plans and underwriting models.  The bigger risks and opportunities are still to come for nearly every industry.   Public policy, consumer demand and technological innovation are all driving a shift towards a low carbon economy.  A year ago in Paris, 195 countries committed to limit the rise in global average temperatures to less than 2°C, with 117 countries having now ratified that commitment.  So citizens, consumers, businesses, governments, and international organisations are all taking action. And entrepreneurs are developing disruptive technologies that will create and destroy value.   But which financial institutions are best positioned to gain and which to lose from this transition? Which companies and industries are most, and least, dependent on fossil fuels? Which businesses are most vulnerable to potential damage from rising physical risks? In every case, which firms have the governance, resources and the strategy to manage, and profit from, these major shifts?   At present, the challenge is that investors currently don’t have the information they need to answer to these questions.  This must change if financial markets are going to do what they do best: allocate capital to manage risks and seize new opportunities. Without the necessary information, market adjustments to climate change will be incomplete, late and potentially destabilising.  But with the right information, financial markets can smooth the transition to a 2-degree world.  Risks to financial stability will be reduced if the transition to a low carbon economy begins early and follows a predictable path.                                                          3 See Carney (2016), “Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon – climate change and financial stability”, speech given at Lloyd’s of London, September 2015. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 4  4   Of course, given the uncertainties around climate, not everyone will agree on the timing or the scale of adjustments required to achieve this goal. But the right information will allow optimists and pessimists, sceptics and evangelists, to back their convictions with their capital.  The main obstacle standing in the way of a smooth and timely market-led adjustment has been the absence of quality information on climate-related financial risks and opportunities.  As the Task Force has highlighted, a significant number of climate-disclosure regimes – indeed on some counts around 4004 – already exist. But existing schemes vary in their status, coverage and ambition.  For example, while 80% of Fortune 500 companies participate in one of the existing schemes, it remains the case that only around a third of the top 1,000 US companies produce broadly comparable information on the climate-related financial risks they face.  The Task Force’s report – presented to you today – shows the way forward.  Let me highlight some of its recommendations that will make a major contribution.  The first breakthrough is a disclosure framework that it sufficiently comprehensive for use by all  publicly-listed companies, whatever their sector, across the full set of climate-related financial risks they face.  The recommendations are designed to leverage, rather than replace, existing disclosure regimes.    So the Task Force has set out how firms can comply more effectively with existing disclosure obligations, by disclosing their climate-related financial risks and opportunities in their mainstream financial reports.   In turn, this should ensure that consideration of climate-related financial risk, and opportunities, is properly embedded within, and subject to, firms’ corporate governance and risk management.  Reporting on these risks cannot remain a niche activity.  Decision-useful, actionable information  The disclosure recommendations deliver actionable information that will be useful in decision making.  In particular, they focus on four areas critical to how real-world businesses operate: governance, strategy, risk management, and metrics.                                                          4 See OECD (2015), “Climate Change Disclosure in G20 countries”. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 5  5   The expectation is that qualitative and narrative disclosures will be complemented with quantitative ones as is the case for other disclosures made in financial statements.  These are grouped into the categories of revenues, expenditures, assets and liabilities and capital.  More specifically, all firms, from energy giants through to consumer goods producers, are encouraged to disclose their:  - direct carbon emissions plus those from their energy consumption, in a consistent manner (i.e. scope 1 and 2), complemented by any emission reduction targets that companies may set for themselves.  - these can be supplemented, where judged appropriate, with upstream and downstream (i.e. scope 3) emissions  At the same time, the Task Force has set out sector-specific guidance for those sectors with the biggest carbon footprints and exposures.  This will ensure investors know how much utility companies are investing in low carbon alternatives.  And what progress car manufacturers are making towards fuel efficiency.  Scenario analysis   The recommendations recognise also that static disclosures of current carbon footprints will not be sufficient to reveal a company’s climate-related financial risks and opportunities.  For investors to price financial risks and opportunities correctly, they need to weigh firms’ strategies against plausible public policy developments, technological advances and evolving physical risks and opportunities.  In a ground breaking innovation, the Task Force recommends that companies explore and disclose the potential impacts of climate-related risks and opportunities on their businesses, strategies and financial planning under different potential future scenarios.  A full exploration of transition risks may require consideration of financial risks and opportunities under several scenarios, which firms may develop directly or using commonly available models.  Reflecting the commitments made in Paris, the Task Force recommends that this should include using a 2-degree scenario.  And consistent with the concept enshrined in the Paris Agreement of common but differentiated responsibilities, transition scenarios could take account of different national targets for emissions reduction.  This makes them particularly useful for companies headquartered in emerging economies.  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 6  6   Over time, the Task Force expects to see a greater emphasis on quantitative analyses in scenario-related disclosures, including the underlying assumptions associated with the climate-related scenarios used.  Scope extends to asset owners and managers.  A further important feature is the expectation that, where available, asset managers and owners will make disclosures of the aggregate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions embedded in their investment portfolios.   Achieving broad coverage will take time and obviously depends on adoption by issuers.  Implementation  We are pleased that all Task Force member organisations, companies with market capitalisations of around $1.5 trillion and financial institutions responsible for assets of $20 trillion, have today announced their support for the disclosure recommendations.5    With better disclosure, a market in the transition to a 2-degree world can be built. That market will expose the likely future cost of doing business, of paying for emissions, and of changing processes given both those charges and tighter regulation. And it will help smooth price adjustments as opinions change, rather than concentrating them in a short, dangerous space of time.  Early disclosure rules allowed 20th-century financial markets to grow our economies by pricing risks more accurately. The spread of such standards internationally has helped lift more than a billion people out of poverty. Climate-related disclosures could be as transformative for 21st-century markets.                                                        5 Bloomberg data and Bank calculations using market capitalisation as at 12 December 2016 and assets at end-2015. 
1   3RD ANNUAL KENYA DIASPORA HOMECOMING CONVENTION Catholic University, Nairobi  Remarks by Dr. Patrick Njoroge Governor, Central Bank of Kenya December 14, 2016 As Prepared for Delivery Good afternoon! I am indeed honored to speak before this distinguished diaspora homecoming convention.   I would like to express my thanks to the Kenya Diaspora Alliance for the invitation to participate in this session as a Keynote Speaker. Let me begin by acknowledging the important role of the Kenyan diaspora in economic development mainly through remittances. Diaspora remittances are currently one of the main sources of foreign exchange for the country, amounting to USD1.7 billion in the 12 months to October 2016, up from USD1.4 billion in 2015. Apart from remittances, which are an alternative investment financing channel in key sectors of our economy such as real estate, diaspora entrepreneurs are helping create jobs and stimulate trade.   As you are aware, the Government has been implementing measures to tap the enormous potential of our diaspora’s knowledge and expertise in order to enhance their contribution to economic development. I also understand that diaspora diplomacy has been main-streamed in our foreign policy, thereby providing the necessary framework for dialogue between the Government and diaspora on pertinent issues to the economy.      The theme of this conference – Diaspora Voting and Youth Empowerment – underscores the importance of the diaspora and youth participation in the overall development of our country. Given this theme, and borrowing from my recent experience as a diaspora returnee, I would like to highlight measures that have been put in place to enhance the economic environment, and the economic opportunities that are available to the diaspora.    First, macroeconomic stability remains paramount. The achievement and maintenance of a low and stable inflation facilitates predictability in the economic environment thereby promoting investment and a sustainable growth. Prudent monetary policy has kept inflation within the government target range, and ensured stability in the foreign exchange market. In this regard, the CBK moved decisively in the second half of 2015 to deal with 
2  rising inflation expectations largely due to increases in food prices, and pressures in the foreign exchange market reflecting developments in the global financial markets. As a result, overall inflation declined to stand at 6.7 percent in November 2016 from 8.0 percent in December 2015. However, we are closely monitoring developments in the domestic and global economies which could have implications on the price stability objective. Uncertainties remain with respect to the impact of Brexit, potential resumption of tightening of U.S. monetary policy, and the future U.S. policy following the recent political developments.  Secondly, other measures are being implemented to improve the business environment, including investments in infrastructure such as the Standard Gauge Railway, advancing the use of information technology in doing business, and ensuring security, among others. These initiatives are key to promoting competitiveness in the economy. In addition, the growing youthful and entrepreneurial population is a boon to the business environment. Kenya is ranked the World’s third most reformed country in the World Bank 2017 Doing Business Report. The performance of the economy has remained strong, with growth expected at 6.0 percent in 2016 from 5.6 percent in 2015. On the contrary, growth in the major African economies has been weighed down in 2016 largely due to the slump in commodity prices.  Thirdly, the diversification of the Kenyan economy in terms of export products and external markets is a major source of resilience against adverse external shocks. About 40 percent of Kenya’s exports are to Africa, while the economy is not reliant on commodities. The current account deficit has been narrowing, and is projected at 5.5 percent of GDP in 2016 from 6.8 percent in 2015 and 9.8 percent in 2014. The improvement in the current account balance reflects improved earnings from exports of tea, coffee, and horticulture. Diaspora remittances and receipts from tourism have also been resilient. The CBK foreign exchange reserves, which stand at 4.8 months of import cover, together with the Precautionary Arrangements with the IMF totalling USD1.5 billion continue to provide buffers against short term shocks.   Fourthly, as you may be aware, the banking sector has continued to play a key role in the economy through mobilisation of savings and allocation of the resources to key sectors. The CBK is strengthening the banking sector to ensure greater transparency and stronger governance, and also to promote effective business models and innovation. The Central Bank continues to engage with financial service providers to introduce innovative solutions or products in the market in order to boost financial inclusion and lower the cost of financial services. The CBK is also closely monitoring the impact of the recent 
3  legislation to cap bank interest rates on the economy, while implementing additional measures to lower the cost of credit on a sustainable basis.  Let me now turn to some of the available investment opportunities, which in my view provide the diaspora with an opportunity to participate in the development of our economy. I am happy that these products leverage on mobile financial services thereby making it easier for investors to place their investments. The Treasury Mobile Direct (TMD), which was rolled out in December 2015, offers a channel to access small denomination government securities through the mobile phone. The TMD has improved the efficiency of the existing domestic debt issuance operations, while also increasing retail investors’ participation in the primary auctions for government securities. Additionally, the M-Akiba initiative seeks to increase the public’s participation in government securities through the existing mobile-phone money transfer services, and with a low minimum investment amount of USD30. Plans are underway for the launch of the first M-Akiba infrastructure bond.   Additional investment channels in government securities, including diaspora bonds, are also being considered. In particular, infrastructure bonds are a very popular investment channel, tied to the financing of the Government’s long-term infrastructure projects. These bonds were introduced in February 2009, and their success has signaled the launch of similar bonds by corporates.  The diaspora youth and women also have an opportunity to participate in the Government gender and youth empowerment programs. Currently, 30 percent of all Government procurements are allocated to the youth, women, and persons living with disabilities. The Government has indicated its intentions to expand the opportunities for the youth in procurement through the Access to Government Procurement Opportunities platform.  As I close, I would like to challenge the Kenyan diaspora to take advantage of the improved business environment and the increasing investment opportunities in the country as a way of participating in the macro-management of the economy. Let me once again congratulate the Kenya Diaspora Alliance for organizing this forum.   Thank you! 
Yannis Stournaras: Open and orderly capital movements - doesglobal co-operation matter?Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the OECD High-level policyseminar on "Open and orderly capital movements: does global co-operation matter?", Paris, 25October 2016.*   *   *Thank you for inviting me to participate in this seminar and to share some thoughts on capitalmovements with you. The issue of open and orderly capital movements is particularly topical andone for which an exchange of views among policy makers across various economies isessential. Discussion, communication and debate are, after all, the first steps towardsmultilateral co-operation. It appears to me that the crisis has placed us at a crossroads with regard to many areas ofpolicy-making. Confronted with unprecedented circumstances, we were forced to reassess ourpolicy frameworks in order to better guard our economies against risks. I believe that, for themost part, we have managed to do so collectively and in a spirit of multilateral co-operation, aspirit that, I would suggest, is necessary in our globalised world. Policies with regard to capital movements fall into this category. We are called upon to decidehow to find ways to harness the benefits from global capital flows, so as to avoid slipping backinto protectionism and financial retrenchment, with potentially detrimental effects on globalrecovery. Benefits and risks of financial openness The benefits of free capital movements are well-known: efficient global allocation of resources; reduced cost of capital in capital-scarce countries; greater and more efficient investment; normalisation of consumption fluctuations in response to temporary shocks; international risk-sharing; support for the transfer of technology and managerial knowhow; promotion of financial development and sound macroeconomic policies in recipientcountries. Nevertheless, the extent to which countries can realise these benefits presupposes certainconditions: a developed financial system; sound institutions; prudent macroeconomic policies and sufficient macroprudential supervision;Additionally, the benefits will depend on the level and composition of capital flows. Absence of these conditions raises the risks associated with capital flow liberalisation, especiallyin the event of a negative shock, creating significant challenges for policy makers. 1234 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Managing capital flows In the face of risks, countries have at their disposal a range of policy tools for managing capitalflows: exchange rate flexibility, foreign reserves accumulation, monetary policy action,macroprudential measures and, in some instances, even capital flow management measures. These policies also come with their challenges and can have multilateral spillover effects onglobal economic and financial stability. Policy co-operation is thus an important complementarytool for capital flow management. Multilateral co-operation can mitigate the cross-border effectsof capital flows management measures and can provide economies with a useful framework forgradual capital flow liberalisation in line with their financial and institutional development. It is precisely in this way that the OECD Code of Liberalisation of Capital Movements makes itscontribution. Through the Code, countries are provided guidance on the sequencing ofliberalisation and the appropriateness of policy response to shocks. By fostering transparency,dialogue and accountability, adherence to the Code ensures non-discriminatory treatment ofcountries, provides reassurance to markets as to the scope and duration of measures andcatalyses policy support for reforms and adjustments. Overall, the ever more interconnected international environment makes policy co-operation morenecessary. To illustrate this point, I would like to draw on two examples: First, can coordinationhelp moderate volatility in response to specific shocks, especially those emanating from globalplayers? Second, can it prevent the emergence of global imbalances? Diverging monetary policies One pertinent example of the need for policy co-operation to avert large and volatile capital flowsis in dealing with the effect of divergent monetary policies on global financial markets. It is broadly agreed that the impact of US monetary policy can have global repercussions,influencing exchange rates, risk premia and asset prices and causing valuation effects of USdollar-denominated liabilities. Thus, changes of stance can be associated with significant capitalflows especially to/from emerging market economies. The taper tantrum that affected globalfinancial markets in 2013 is one example. Over the near future, it is widely expected that the US interest rate will be gradually raised, whilethose in the euro area and other advanced economies remain low. This divergence is likely toimpact on global capital flows. Uncertainty about the pace is judged to be a source of volatility infinancial markets. Thus, informal discussions between policy makers, if not closer co-operation,along with clear and coordinated communication and execution of policies, can be a useful toolfor dampening volatility and preventing undue financial market turbulence. Euro area imbalances My second example which supports the case for greater co-operation is the lessons that emergefrom the build-up of structural imbalances in the euro area before the crisis. A corollary of monetary integration is the elimination of exchange rate risk, which reducestransaction costs and increases the elasticity of substitution between financial assets issued bymember states of the monetary union. In the euro area, financial linkages were greatly facilitatedby the introduction of the single currency. A distinct feature of these linkages was the build-up of current account imbalances. Deficitsaccumulated in the periphery were mirrored by a build-up of surpluses in core countries. Thefinancial account counterpart involved significant capital flows from the core to the periphery, withits counterpart in the accumulation of debt – whether public or private. These flows were directed567 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
mainly to non-tradable sectors (public consumption and residential investment). The crisisbrought with it a “sudden stop” to these capital flows, resulting in sharp adjustment, largely indeficit countries. Subsequently, much has been done to address what we now recognise as deficiencies in thedesign of the Economic and Monetary Union – the European Financial Stability Facility andsubsequently the European Stability Mechanism; the banking union and its components. Butmore importantly for imbalances, the surveillance framework of EU Member States has beenstrengthened through new rules and procedures, among them, the Macroeconomic ImbalancesProcedure. In short, co-operation is important also at the regional level. These changes are alsosupporting the reform process in Greece. Conclusions The course and magnitude of global financial flows and our own perceptions of financialopenness are being continually reshaped in the 21st century. A period of relative abundance wasrapidly brought to a halt with the international financial crisis of 2008. Our experience with freecapital flows can help us ensure that in the future we harness their benefits and multilateral co-operation is key to achieving that. (1) See Obstfeld, Maurice. Risk-taking, global diversification, and growth. No. w4093. National Bureau ofEconomic Research, 1992, Van Wincoop, Eric. “How big are potential welfare gains from internationalrisksharing?.” Journal of International Economics 47, no. 1 (1999): 109–135 and Agénor, PierreRichard.“Benefits and costs of international financial integration: theory and facts.” The World Economy 26, no. 8 (2003):1089–1118. (2) See Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar S. Prasad, and Ashley D. Taylor. “Thresholds in the process of internationalfinancial integration.” Journal of International Money and Finance 30, no. 1 (2011): 147–179. (3) See for instance, Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei. “Financialglobalization: A reappraisal.” IMF Staff Papers 56, no. 1 (2009): 8-62 and Prasad, Eswar S., and Raghuram G.Rajan. “A pragmatic approach to capital account liberalization.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 22, no. 3(2008): 149–172. (4) See Rogoff, Mr Kenneth, Mr Eswar Prasad, Mr M. Ayhan Kose, and Shang-Jin Wei. Effects on financialglobalization on developing countries: Some empirical evidence. No. 220. International Monetary Fund, 2004. (5) Ostry, Jonathan D. “Managing Capital Flows: What Tools to Use?.” Asian Development Review 29, no. 1(2012): 82. (6) See Beck, R., Beirne, J., Paternò, F., Peeters, J., Ramos-Tallada, J., Rebillard, C., Reinhardt, D.,Weissenseel, L. and Wörz, J., 2015. The side effects of national financial sector policies: framing the debate onfinancial protectionism. ECB Occasional Paper 166. (7) See Fratzscher Marcel, Marco Lo Duca and Rolad Straub. “A global monetary tsunami? On the spillovers ofUS quantitative easing”. CEPR Discussion paper No 9195, October 2012, Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and HélèneRey. World asset markets and the global financial cycle. No. w21722. National Bureau of Economic Research,2015 and Lim, Jamus Jerome, Sanket Mohapatra, and Marc Stocker. “Tinker, Taper, QE, Bye? The effect ofquantitative easing on financial flows to developing countries.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper6820 (2014). (8) See Lane, Philip R. “Capital Flows in the Euro Area.” Economic papers 497 (2013): 1-54 and Hobza,Alexandr, and Stefan Zeugner. “The ‘imbalanced balance’ and its unravelling: current accounts and bilateralfinancial flows in the euro area.” European Economy, Economic papers 520 (2014): 1-32.812345678 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Ong Chong Tee: Financial integration – a collective effort towardsefficient and resilient marketsSpeech by Mr Ong Chong Tee, Deputy Managing Director (Financial Supervision) of theMonetary Authority of Singapore, at the Launch Event for EU-Asia -Pacific Forum on FinancialRegulation, Singapore, 14 October 2016.*   *   *Mr Olivier Guersent, Director General for Financial Stability, Financial Services and CapitalMarkets Union (European Commission)Dr Michael Pulch, EU Ambassador to Singapore,Mr Ashley Alder, Chair of the IOSCO Board and Chief Executive of Hong Kong SFC, Mr Ryozo Himino, APRC Chairman and Vice-Minister of International Affairs, Japan FSA, Mr Paul Andrews, IOSCO Secretary General, Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,On behalf of all my colleagues at the MAS, let me extend a warm welcome to everyone at thislaunch event of the EU - Asia- Pacific Forum on Financial Regulation.It is a privilege and honour for the MAS to host this inaugural forum on financial regulationbetween the EU authorities and members of the IOSCO Asia-Pacific Regional Committee(APRC). This launch event will no doubt set the stage for the in-depth closed-door discussions tofollow over the course of today.  The impetus for this forum is a recognition that the financial markets of Europe and Asia areincreasingly inter-connected. One measure, for example, is the total portfolio assets held byinvestors from the largest five EU economies, in the Asia and Pacific region. This has grownfrom around US$240 billion in December 2001 to over US$820 billion in December 2015(according to IMF statistics). And this growth has been positive each year except for a declineduring the last global financial crisis. In the same period, total portfolio investment assets held byinvestors from the Asia and Pacific region in these same European markets have grown fromUS$420 billion to over US$930 billion.Therefore, developments in each of our jurisdiction and region can have a significant spill-overimpact on the other. Financial regulators form one important stakeholder group and platforms fordialogue and sharing such as in this forum will be helpful in promoting greater mutualunderstanding and cooperation.Importance of regulatory cooperationI am sure that everyone in this room will agree on the importance of regulatory exchanges andco-operation.Asia-Pacific jurisdictions including Singapore play host to many European financial institutionswhich are active and significant participants in our respective financial markets. Such cross-border and cross-region participation have benefitted both regions.For example, the recognition of LCH.Clearnet and the Singapore Exchange Derivatives Clearingby MAS and EU authorities, respectively, provide local market participants and EuropeanFinancial Institutions a choice of where to clear their transactions. More importantly, therecognition will allow market participants to comply with their respective jurisdiction’s centralclearing requirements when they are effected, thus avoiding duplicating or conflictingrequirements. Beyond clearing, MAS also recognises Europe-based exchanges such as ICEFutures, London Metal Exchange, and Eurex Deutschland, which allows financial institutions,123 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
traders, and finance and treasury centres based in Singapore to have access to a wide range ofrisk management instruments. With this experience, MAS has fine-tuned our approach to the recognition and regulation ofoverseas players, including European exchanges and clearing houses, in our markets. In settingour standards and the methodology to determine equivalence, we have aligned ourselves withinternational standards such as Principles of Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMI).  We havealso clarified the factors that we will take into consideration in determining whether an overseasplayer has “substantial and reasonably foreseeable effect in Singapore” and hence requiresrecognition by the MAS. However, beyond just standards and rules, regulatory cooperation can promote appreciation foreach other’s regulatory framework, and to lay the foundation for an outcomes-based approach inequivalence assessments.I am pleased to note that this has been the spirit guiding the interaction among regulators,including with our European colleagues.  For instance, in, 2014, the EC recognised the centralcounterparty (CCP) regulatory regimes of several Asia-Pacific jurisdictions – Australia, HongKong, Japan, Singapore and Korea - as equivalent on the basis of an “outcomes basedapproach”. This was also seen in September 2016 with the positive opinion issued by ESMA onthe grant of the AIFMD passport to Singapore and other Asia-Pacific jurisdictions.I am confident that this constructive engagement in which regulators across our regional blocshave worked together will continue in other equivalence assessments, such as in the areas offinancial benchmarks and organised markets or trading platforms. As we have learnt from pastexperience, greater clarity in equivalence assessments, including in relation to timing, can helpprovide greater certainty and thereby support the continued participation of European marketparticipants in overseas markets and vice versa.International standards and peer assessments as basis for equivalence assessmentAllow me to highlight one area where international standards and peer assessments haveallowed a good basis for equivalence assessment – for financial market infrastructure (FMI).Market functioning, and therefore financial stability, is dependent on the continuity and orderlyoperation of services provided by these infrastructures. The multilateral nature of FMIs also meanthat their services are often cross-border and accessed by a wide range of market participants.Since the development of the PFMI by IOSCO and the BIS Committee for Payments and MarketInfrastructures (CPMI), these standards have been used by many regulators including Singaporeas a key basis for comparability assessments. CPMI-IOSCO has also been conducting Level 2assessments of jurisdictions’ implementation of the PFMI. Assessments of the EU, Japan, USand Australia are complete, and assessments of Singapore and Hong Kong are under way. Suchpeer assessments against international standards will help to promote greater understandingand alignment amongst various jurisdictions’ frameworks.Peer assessments have also helped to identify and close gaps at the entity level. For instance,the recent Level 3 assessment by CPMI-IOSCO on the implementation of the PFMI by tenCCPs (including SGX-DC) helped to identify gaps and shortcomings which CPMI-IOSCOexpects to be addressed by the CCPs and their respective regulators by the end of the year.  Asoutstanding issues are addressed and the progress tracked, regulators should also have greaterconfidence in undertaking their equivalence assessments of CCPs that their domestic marketparticipants can access. This can then provide greater certainty to global market participants.45 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Improving market access for CCPsSingapore, as with other jurisdictions, will be commencing our clearing mandate next yearthereby enhancing the role of CCPs as a risk mitigating tool. However, a clearing mandatecannot be effectively implemented if access to CCP remains an issue for counterparties,particularly smaller players.  We share similar concerns to those that have been expressed byESMA.In this regard, it is noteworthy that ESMA has looked into possible ways to improve CCP accessand has, for example, proposed indirect clearing arrangements which strikes a balance betweenhaving an appropriate level of indirect client protection and counterparty risk. I hope today’s forumwill allow MAS and other regulators to learn from ESMA’s insights.To enable a wider range of market participants – including those based outside Singapore -  tohave direct access to CCPs in Singapore, MAS will allow our CCPs to introduce self-clearingand remote clearing memberships.  This benefits not only the participants but the CCP and thesystem as a whole; with a larger and more diversified pool of participants, the impact on the CCPdue to a default of any single particular participant would be reduced.Self-clearing can also widen CCP access on cost-effective terms and allow proprietaryderivatives trading firms, such as buy-side players, to join CCPs as members and therebyreduce their counterparty and fellow customer risks. CCPs will have the flexibility to designsuitable self-clearing models, taking into account the risks and needs of self-clearing members.We have seen recent innovations by Eurex and CME to allow certain market participants whichare not allowed to take part in the CCP risk mutualisation as a result of their mandates, to self-clear on the CCP.Remote clearing will allow offshore participants, which do not currently have a presence inSingapore, to join our CCPs, thus bringing about new, additional liquidity to local markets. Theincreased breadth and depth of the markets in turn benefits onshore members which willcontinue to be key players in our domestic markets.  At the same time, such memberships allowoffshore firms to gain familiarity with the local market and to deepen their participation.There are some understandable concerns if remote or self-clearing can undermine financialstability in domestic markets. In Singapore, our regulatory standards and expectations will notchange.  We will only allow CCPs to admit self-clearing or remote clearing members if they haveput in place adequate admission, ongoing monitoring and risk management frameworks. Beyond equivalence assessments, we will consider the formation of supervisory colleges for ourCCPs should they be deemed as internationally active.Putting recovery and resolution plans in placeAllow me to share a final set of remarks on recovery and resolution plans. Even as we continueto strengthen the resilience and accessibility of CCPs, we must continue our efforts to ensurethat recovery and resolution plans for CCPs are in place.  There have been greater focus andthought given to arrangements to deal with default risks but it should also be recognised thatother risks such as custody and investment risks can also pose a threat to a CCP's viability.Hence, in line with the CPMI-IOSCO report on Recovery of Financial Market Infrastructures, MASexpects and will place priority to ensure our CCPs have clear arrangements to enable custodyand investment losses to be allocated in a way which allows CCPs to be solvent and cancontinue to provide its critical services.  At the same time, there must be appropriate governancearrangements and incentive structures to promote prudent risk management on the part of theCCP.  Such arrangements can include providing transparency to member firms, having “Skin-In-The-Game” (SITG) contributions from the CCP, and putting in place oversight structures tooversee such safeguards. 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
  It has been said that regulators are pessimists in our DNA and always inclined to worry aboutthings going wrong – and certainly, we cannot ignore the possibility of the failure of key FMIs nomatter how remote, and this may occur in FMIs overseas. I started my speech this morning,noting the increasing connectedness between markets. This is true in the ‘life’ of a CCP - andcan be true in its ‘death’ too. The failure of an internationally active CCP, that provides criticalservices in multiple jurisdictions, will have significant cross-border impact. When a CCP fails, itsmembers are inevitably affected. Such members are likely to also have relationships with otherfinancial institutions, or may trade and clear on other trading venues and CCPs. Through thesenetwork of interdependencies, the default of a CCP can trigger destabilising effects not only inthe home market it serves directly, but outside of it.It is therefore important for authorities of jurisdictions that may be affected by a CCP’s failure toparticipate in that CCP’s resolution planning. Similar to the establishment of SupervisoryColleges to support ongoing supervisory co-operation, setting up Crisis Management Groups(CMG) for CCPs will allow the cross-border impact to be considered in resolution planning. In afailure situation, when resolution actions are time-sensitive, it may be necessary to limit the sizeof a CMG to enable efficient and effective discussions. But in normal times, resolution planningcan benefit from a broader participation of relevant authorities.  Such inclusive, ongoingcooperation and information sharing builds trust and understanding.  It will also enhance theeffectiveness of resolution implementation by pre-empting host regulators from taking actionsthat may be incompatible with the home regulator’s resolution actions, due to a lack of clarity orawareness over the home regulator’s intended actions. ConclusionIn conclusion, the issues confronting regulators today are wide ranging. This event is an excellentshowcase of how regulators can come together to share our experiences and to keep each otherapprised of developments in our respective regions. For instance, Europe’s Capital MarketsUnion project is an exciting development which we look forward to learning more about from ourEuropean colleagues. With various market integration initiatives also underway in Asia, there isroom for us to exchange views and to learn from each other.Thank you for your attention.France, Germany, Italy, Spain, UK.Australia, China, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, andThailand.Data source: IMF.MAS’ Guidelines on the Regulation of Clearing Facilities, revised , set out the circumstances under whichoverseas clearing houses are required to be regulated in Singapore, and how we approach the regulation ofsuch entities.In relation to financial risk management and recovery practices.12345 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
William C Dudley: Opportunities for economic growth in Puerto RicoRemarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal ReserveBank of New York, to representatives of Puerto Rico's business and academic communities,San Juan, Puerto Rico, 29 November 2016.*   *   *Jason Bram, Tony Davis, Andrew Haughwout and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing theseremarks.I am very pleased to be here and to have this opportunity to speak with representatives of PuertoRico’s business and academic communities.  In my remarks, I will discuss the lessons learnedfrom municipalities in the United States that have faced crises over the years―such as NewYork City―and what those outcomes might imply for Puerto Rico as it seeks to restore andsustain economic growth.  I will also touch briefly on the Puerto Rico Small Business Survey, anew survey from the New York Fed that focuses on the business performance, financing needsand borrowing experiences of firms across the Island.  As always, what I have to say reflects myown views and not those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal ReserveSystem.My meeting with you today is part of the New York Fed’s continuing efforts to understand what isgoing on at the grassroots level within our Federal Reserve district.  We plan these trips so wecan interact with a diverse group of stakeholders.  These meetings help me get a more completepicture of economic conditions on the Island and a fuller understanding of the major issues andconcerns.  This is the third time we have visited Puerto Rico in the past five years.Yesterday, I met with Governor-elect Rosselló to discuss the transition into his new role and thekey challenges for his upcoming term.  I also spent time with members of El Colaboratorio, ashared workspace organized by the Foundation for Puerto Rico.  I attended a roundtablediscussion with local businesses and spoke with former and current members of several of theNew York Fed’s advisory councils.Earlier this morning, I met with the heads of a number of financial institutions and the Universityof Puerto Rico’s interim president, Celeste Freytes.  Following this visit, I will meet with theleadership from Parallel18, an economic development initiative that attracts early-stage, high-potential startups to Puerto Rico.  Finally, I will join the leadership of the Boys and Girls Clubs ofPuerto Rico for a discussion on the organization’s initiatives and a site visit to one of the clubs tolearn about workforce development programs and youth services.As we all know, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico has been through a very rough 10 years.  Theeconomy has been in a long slump that could easily be called a depression.  Residents haveendured a terrible drought, periodic blackouts and a fiscal crisis.  I don’t need to elaborate on allof the struggles Puerto Rico continues to face.  The Island has been suffering from a viciouscycle.  As employment declines, people move to the mainland to find jobs.  Accordingly,economic activity and tax revenues decline, forcing the government to raise taxes and cutspending, which further reduces employment and prompts still more residents to move.  At thispoint, the outlook for anyone who has been living here must be bleak, and it may be hard toimagine this situation turning around anytime soon.  And yet, history tells us that a turnaround,though not inevitable, is indeed achievable. Lessons from past crisesNew York City is probably the most famous example of a municipality that experienced a majorfiscal crisis, recovered and is now thriving.  New York City’s experience is viewed, in retrospect,as a major success, and some, including myself, have pointed to it as a hopeful example of what 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
could come to pass in Puerto Rico.  But, there are important caveats to the New York City storyand its applicability to the Commonwealth.Like Puerto Rico, New York City experienced a number of years of both political and economicpain as a result of its fiscal crisis in the 1970s.  On the political side, New York City residents losta large measure of their ability to chart their own fiscal direction for several years.  Decisionsabout tax and spending policies were removed from elected city officials.  The EmergencyFinancial Control Board was empowered to review all fiscal decisions of local officials anddemand changes to the city’s budgets.  Part of the city’s tax base was dedicated to bondrepayment—essentially handing it over to the city’s creditors.  For 10 years, the city could notaccess the debt markets without support from the state.The economic pain was also very real.  More than 70,000 city government workers were cut fromthe payrolls in 1975 and 1976.  City residents faced dramatic service reductions—fire housesclosed, schools and police precincts had fewer resources, and crime continued to rise for manyyears.It is also important to note that New York isn’t the only U.S. city that has been through a majorfiscal crisis.  Cleveland, Philadelphia, Washington, D.C. and, most recently, Detroit have allstruggled to manage their budgets, and all ultimately reached a point when they were unable topay their bills.  As a result, these cities lost their fiscal autonomy to one degree or another.  In thecase of New York City, this turned out relatively well, as the short-run loss of decision-makingpower led to a strong economic rebound that eventually restored the city’s ability to finance itsown choices.So, is New York City’s experience really all that instructive for Puerto Rico?  With the advantageof hindsight, it now seems almost obvious that New York City’s fiscal crisis was only going to bea detour.  The city’s economy had many fundamental strengths, so it only needed someassistance to get back on track.  Still, it’s worth pointing out that this was by no means clear atthe outset the crisis in the mid-1970s.  Then, many commentators looked at New York City andother large cities as outmoded forms of economic activity, unlikely ever to recover.While we do not have great measures of economic activity for cities, population change is a goodindicator of how attractive a place seems to be.  By that measure, New York City at the time wasseen to have very poor prospects—the city’s population fell by over 10 percent during the 1970s. So, New York City’s eventual bright future was far from clear as its fiscal crisis was unfolding.Of course, not every city that has faced a fiscal crisis has the same track record.  Relative tocities that had similarly grim outlooks, New York City’s rebound has been much stronger.  InDetroit, there are hopeful signs, but it’s too soon to tell how things will turn out.  Both Washington,D.C. and Philadelphia experienced multiple decades of population declines leading up to theircrises. These population declines reversed in the 2000s.  Washington, D.C.’s population actuallygrew over 5 percent between 2000 and 2010, a rate even faster than that of New York City. Cleveland’s fiscal reforms, on the other hand, were less comprehensive, and the city has neverreally turned itself around.  Its population in 2010 was less than half the level of 1960.The different performances across cities reflect the complex interplay of native endowments,economic conditions and fiscal outcomes.  As in Puerto Rico, the fiscal woes of many of ourlargest cities have been closely related to long-term economic transformations—essentially,changes in the industrial specialization that occurred in those particular places.  In the case ofNew York City, the transformation was from manufacturing to services, and it took a generationto complete.  The city’s management of that transition was far from perfect, and the fiscal crisiswas the major manifestation of that failure.  The institutions set up to respond to the crisis werecrucial to ensuring that fiscal policy didn’t continue to amplify the problems associated with theeconomic transition.  For a city to turn its circumstances around, it must navigate this economictransformation, identify what will define its comparative advantages going forward, and then build 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
anew around those sources of strength.The road to recoveryA successful fiscal reform first requires a regime in which local officials recognize and acceptthe reality of the changing economic situation, and set spending budgets accordingly.  This partis fairly straightforward, because it produces the simple policy dictum that borrowing—in all itsforms—must be strictly limited.  Of course, knowing what to do and actually getting it done aredifferent things, especially when politics are involved.  As a result, the record suggests that it canbe extremely helpful to have some kind of independent fiscal monitor in place on an ongoingbasis.  It’s important that this monitor be insulated from the direct influence of politics, giving itfreedom to deliver objective analysis that may at times be very unpopular.  In Washington, D.C.,this took the form of the Office of the Chief Financial Officer; in New York City it is theIndependent Budget Office, which is modeled after the Congressional Budget Office.  Thesemonitors have proven invaluable in keeping policymakers and the public informed on budgetarymatters, and in providing apolitical expertise to assist in keeping budgets on a sustainablecourse. The second major component is a successful completion of the economic transformation, whichis a critical factor for reversing―rather than simply halting―a city’s decline, establishing avirtuous cycle of rising growth and strengthening fiscal outcomes.  New York City had the hugebenefit of its comparative advantage in finance—an industry that was poised for sustainedgrowth in the post-fiscal-crisis period of the 1980s through the 2000s.  Still, the city weathered alot of shocks during that period, including the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the financial crisis andHurricane Sandy.  It’s also worth pointing out that New York City is still prospering, even thoughemployment in its finance sector has stagnated.  This illustrates the need for cities to continuallylook for new areas of growth, such as health care, technology, and leisure and hospitalityservices.This is why PROMESA (the Puerto Rico Oversight, Management, and Economic Stability Act)emphasizes long-term growth, and why the New York Fed has been focused on identifyingimpediments to the Commonwealth’s growth.  Since 2012, we have released two major reportsand several shorter analyses—most of which appeared in our Liberty Street Economics blog—presenting ideas that, if implemented, might help to make the Island more competitive andreverse its economic decline.  These ideas have ranged from the very narrow and technical tothe very broad—from improving the quality of Commonwealth financial reporting to bolsteringgrowth through education and job training to build the Island’s human capital.Since I’ve identified managing the ongoing economic transformation as a major component of asuccessful plan for Puerto Rico, let me summarize a few themes on that front.  Most of thesefeature an important role for the Commonwealth’s government, underscoring the fundamentalimportance of getting public policy right as a means of restoring economic growth.First, it is important to reduce the cost of doing business on the Island as a way of encouragingbusiness growth and increasing the demand for labor.  We have put forward many ideas toconsider here, ranging from ones targeted at hiring—such as giving Puerto Rico more autonomyover setting its minimum wage policy—to more general ideas like streamlining regulation.  Onething that we’ve repeatedly emphasized is the need to find efficiencies in the Island’s energyindustry.  Commercial customers on the Island pay roughly 20 cents per kilowatt hour forelectricity—nearly double the mainland average.  Island residents and businesses, as you arewell aware, are also burdened with exceptionally high water utility bills.  It is also important tothink hard about the supply of labor—the willingness of people to work, and the education andskills that they have to bring to the market.  Labor supply is equally important, but less widelydiscussed than the demand side of the market.  Labor force participation is lower at all ages inPuerto Rico than on the mainland.  This is a crucial impediment to growth, and addressing it 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
requires innovative policy options.  One idea to address this problem would be to extend theEarned Income Tax Credit to Puerto Rico.  In addition, the structure of the Commonwealth’s taxsystem creates disincentives to work in the formal sector, and suggests that tax reform couldproduce a growth dividend as well as a more reliable source of revenue.  On top of the low laborforce participation is the well known and deeply concerning high level of out-migration.  In additionto the lack of labor demand, it seems likely that quality-of-life concerns such as high crime ratesare playing a role in these decisions.  This underscores the importance of basic public servicedelivery and is another example of the interplay between fiscal and economic outcomes.Another important dimension of labor supply involves the skills that workers bring to the market. Many of these skills are acquired while in school.  Our research indicates that test scores forschool-age children on the Island are low, suggesting that there is an opportunity forimprovement in the quality of public education.  One clear lesson from recent research in urbanand regional economics is that the collective skills of the people living in an area are a criticalingredient for its growth prospects.  Improving the education available to residents can pay largedividends over time.I know that this list seems long, and none of issues I have raised are easy to address. Nonetheless, I am confident that Puerto Rico has started on the road to recovery.  In the currentenvironment, it’s hard to see beyond the immediate crisis to a brighter future for Puerto Rico, butthat has been said of other places that have come back stronger than ever.  Getting the fiscalsituation in order is an important first step.  The factors leading up to the crisis took many yearsto develop, and history shows that a successful recovery from a crisis also takes time.  It isimportant to recognize that fact and to stay the course.Before I conclude, let me briefly discuss our new survey.  Earlier this month, the New York Fedreleased the Puerto Rico Small Business Survey, which focuses on the business performance,financing needs and borrowing experiences of firms across the Island.  The survey is intended tofill important knowledge gaps and flag potential economic growth opportunities for theCommonwealth.  It was designed with input from partners here in Puerto Rico, and we are verygrateful for their cooperation.Key findings reveal that firms are persevering through Puerto Rico’s economic crisis, though amajority reported declining revenues.  Managing cash flow is a top concern, ranking aboveconcerns about rising business costs.  There is significant demand for credit, with the mostcommon reason being the need to meet operating expenses.  For about half of all small firms,credit needs were under $25,000.  Lastly, about 80 percent of firms do not sell online or exporttheir wares or services.  Firms see this as a growth opportunity, ranking programs in support ofincreasing sales—to the federal government, via online commerce and through exports—as theirtop training need.  We hope that the survey will provide useful insights into a key economicsector and help inform policy to support Puerto Rico’s recovery.Thank you for your kind attention.  I would be happy to take a few questions. 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
1  BANK OF UGANDA   Remarks  By   Louis Kasekende (PhD.),  Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda ………………………. At the Supervisory College of Standard Chartered Bank, Africa Region  ………………………. Kampala; November 10, 2016   
2  SPEECH BY THE DEPUTY GOVERNOR AT THE SUPERVISORY COLLEGE OF STANDARD CHARTERED BANK, AFRICA REGION HELD AT THE SPEKE RESORT HOTEL MUNYONYO ON THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 2016   Executive Director Supervision, Bank of Uganda The Prudential Regulation Authority Officials, The Host Supervisors of Standard Chartered Bank from the African Region, Directors and Senior Management of Standard Chartered Bank from the African region, Staff of the Bank of Uganda Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,   Bank of Uganda is greatly honoured to have been given the opportunity to host this supervisory college for Standard Chartered Bank, Africa Region in conjunction with the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA). I warmly welcome you all to Uganda, the Pearl of Africa.  I trust that during your short stay here you will truly experience the warmth and hospitality of the Ugandan people.  The decision regarding the venue for this college came to fruition as a result of a deliberate and keen interest by the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) to deepen their understanding on the role played by Standard Chartered Bank in the African economies and risks associated with the businesses. To this end, Bank of Uganda (BOU) graciously accepted to host 
3  the first college when the Prudential Regulation Authority proposed the idea of convening a supervisory college for subsidiaries of Standard Chartered Bank in Africa.  I wish to highlight that Standard Chartered Bank Uganda (SCBU) has been operating in Uganda for over 100 years, having opened for business in 1912. The bank currently has eleven branches and 28 Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) and is considered a Domestic Systemically Important Bank (D-SIB). As at June 30, 2016, the bank commanded a market share of 11.58 percent, 11.42 percent and 12.00 percent in terms of total assets, total deposits and total loans, respectively.   Standard Chartered Bank Uganda has greatly contributed to Uganda’s economy, both financially and in technological innovations in the Ugandan banking sector. It is ranked amongst Uganda’s top twenty tax payers and has won a number of awards including Employer of the Year 2013, Best in Corporate Social Responsibility 2014 and Best Consumer Internet Bank 2013, amongst others.   As a leader in technological innovations in the banking industry, Standard Charted Bank Uganda was the first bank to introduce ATMs in the country, VISA Electron debit cards, toll free phone banking and other innovations. It was also one of the first banks to be licensed to trade government securities as a primary dealer and the first to offer derivative products in Uganda.    
4  With these achievements in mind over the years and given the recent amendments to the Financial Institutions Act, 2004, which allowed banks to engage in Islamic banking, Agent banking and Bancassurance; enormous potential for innovation, growth and financial inclusion in Uganda’s formal financial sector remains.  In the African Region, Standard Chartered Bank has a strong foot print and its existence in the region raises important aspects of cross border banking relationships between home and host regulators.  One important aspect I wish to highlight is the resolution of cross border banking entities.  I want to draw your attention to the recent closure of a Kenyan bank, which had a subsidiary in Uganda. The closure highlighted a few challenges in the winding up of parent banks while the subsidiary remains operational. Consequently, to ensure uninterrupted business continuity of the subsidiary at all times, Bank of Uganda issued a directive to all commercial banks to install in-country Primary Data Centers and Disaster Recovery Sites. We trust that SCBU is fast tracking the implementation of the Data Center and Disaster Recovery Site and that the Prudential Regulation Authority will strongly encourage Standard Chartered Bank Plc. to ensure that its subsidiary fully complies with this directive.  Turning to the purpose of today’s agenda, Supervisory Colleges provide avenues for enhancing information sharing among supervisors, facilitate common understanding of risks in financial groups, promote a shared agenda for addressing risks and vulnerabilities, contribute to improved crisis 
5  preparedness and provide a platform for communicating key supervisory messages among college members.  Addressing emerging vulnerabilities such as unintended consequences of implementing global standards and rules like Anti-Money Laundering and Anti-Terrorism financing mechanisms will require concerted information sharing that such supervisory colleges can support.  However, these colleges are not a substitute for effective national supervision nor should they undermine the legal and prudential responsibilities of the respective supervisors.  Supervisory Colleges should, instead, provide a framework to enhance effective supervision of international banking groups on a consolidated and solo basis and inform decision making in this regard. The Bank of Uganda, on its part, trusts that the deliberations at this particular college will achieve the afore-mentioned benefits and facilitate further understanding of the role that Standard Chartered Bank plays in the different African economies.   With regard to the regional regulators present here today, it is my ardent hope that we shall all benefit from information sharing about our experiences in our respective jurisdictions. I believe that the Prudential Regulatory Authority will in turn provide feedback about its expectations of the Standard Chartered Bank Group vis-à-vis its subsidiaries in the African region.  Finally, let me take this opportunity, once again, to thank the Home regulator, the Prudential Regulation Authority, for its recognition of the importance of the Standard Chartered Bank’s presence in Africa.  
6  I trust that this supervisory college will strengthen cooperation, collaboration and communication between the Prudential Regulatory Authority and the supervisors of the bank in Africa.   With these few remarks, it is now my honour to declare the Supervisory College for Standard Chartered Bank, Africa, 2016 officially open.   Louis Kasekende (PhD) DEPUTY GOVERNOR  
